
                               1 of 998 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2017 World Market Intelligence Private Limited,
                              All Rights Reserved


                            WMI - Business Analysis

                  * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *
            World Market Intelligence company reports are based on a
             core set of research techniques which ensure the best
            possible level of quality and accuracy of data. The key
             sources used include: Company Websites Company Annual
            Reports SEC Filings Press Releases Proprietary Databases
          Notes Financial information of the company is taken from the
           most recently published annual reports or SEC filings The
           financial and operational data reported for the company is
           as per the industry defined standards Revenue converted to
          US$ at average annual conversion rate as of fiscal year end.

                                January 27, 2017

                     Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

                              8200 Jones Branch Dr
                               Mclean 22102-3107
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

COMPANY OVERVIEW


   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) is a US based financial
services company. The company primarily operates in the US housing mortgage
market to meet the liquidity requirements of the US residential mortgage market.
The company focuses on purchasing residential mortgages and other
mortgage-related securities in the secondary mortgage market and transforming
them into mortgage-related securities. Freddie Mac finances purchases of its
mortgage-related securities and mortgage loans, and manages its interest-rate
and other market risks by issuing a variety of debt instruments and entering
into derivative contracts in the capital markets. Freddie Mac is headquartered
in McLean, Virginia, the US.


BUSINESS DESCRIPTION:



Freddie Mac is a financial services company based in the US. The company was
established as a Government Sponsored Enterprise with the objective to expand
the secondary housing mortgage market in the US. The company provides credit
guarantee for residential mortgages originated by mortgage lenders and invests
in mortgage loans and mortgage-related securities across the US. Freddie Mac's
principal customers are the lenders in primary mortgage market including
commercial banks, mortgage bankers, savings institutions and credit unions. The
company offers mortgage backed security products and debt products such as gold
Pcs, arm Pcs, multifamily Pcs, giant Pcs, reference REMIC securities, reference
bills securities, discount notes, medium term notes and Freddie notes.
Furthermore, the company provides a guarantee of the payment of principal and
interest on all securities. In addition, it purchases and holds mortgage loans
and mortgage-related securities in its retained portfolio for investment
purposes.

The company classifies its business operations into three reportable divisions:
Investments, Multifamily and Single-Family Guarantee.

The company's Investments division includes investment, funding and treasury
activities. The division manages mortgage-related investments portfolio,
treasury functions and interest rate risks for the company. The product managed
under investment division includes non-agency mortgage-related securities,
single-family unsecuritized loans and non mortgage related assets. Its customers
for debt securities include money managers, depository institutions, central
banks, insurance companies, and pension funds. In FY2015, the investments
division reported earnings of US$3,771 million, accounting for 59.1% of the
company's total revenue.

Under the Multifamily division, it is focused on the investments and guarantee
activities in multifamily mortgage loans and securities. It offers liquidity to
the multifamily market and supports workforce housing by buying and securitizing
loans secured by properties with five or above units. It also focuses on
managing multifamily mortgage credit risk. It issues guarantee and
securitization products such as K certificates, other securitization products
and other mortgage-related guarantees. It offers post-construction financing to
apartment project operators. In FY2015, the multifamily division reported
earnings of US$827 million, accounting for 13% of the company's total revenue.

The Single Family Guarantee division is focused on single-family credit
guarantee activities. The division purchases, guarantees and securitizes
single-family mortgage loans originated by lenders. It also manages r
single-family mortgage credit risk. Its customers include lenders in the primary
mortgage market that originate mortgages for home owners such as mortgage
banking companies, commercial banks, savings banks, community banks, credit
unions, Housing Finance Agencies (HFA), and savings and loan associations. In
FY2015, the Single Family division reported earnings of US$1,778 million,
accounting for 27.9% of the company's total revenue.



* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *












LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2017


                               2 of 998 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2017 Hoover's Inc., All Rights Reserved

                  Hoover's Company Records - In-depth Records

                                 March 29, 2017

                     FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORPORATION

                              8200 Jones Branch Dr
                            Mc Lean,  VA 22102-3107
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: 703-903-2000
FAX: 703-903-2447
URL: www.freddiemac.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
TICKER: FMCC
HOOVER ID: 13944

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
LEGAL STATUS: Public

EMPLOYEES:  6,004
ONE YEAR EMPLOYEE GROWTH:  9.9%

FORTUNE 1000 (June 2016) RANKING:  43
FORTUNE 500 (June 2016) RANKING:  43

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *

OFFICER                 TITLE             AGE     SALARY      BONUS TOTAL_COMP
                                                                      ENSATION
Pamela (Pam) Padgett    Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Single Family
                        Underwriting and
                        Quality Control
James J (Jamie) Johnson Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        quality Control
Mark A DeLong           Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Operational Risk
                        Oversight
Michael Hutchins        EVP Investments     -          -          -          -
                        and Capital
                        Markets
Glenn Errigo            Vice President      -          -          -          -
Donald H. (Don) Layton  CEO                65          -          -          -
Christopher S. Lynch    Chairman           58          -          -          -
Robert (Bob) Mailloux   Senior Vice         -          -          -          -
                        President
                        Corporate Contro
Anil Hinduja            EVP and Chief       -          -          -          -
                        Enterprise Risk
                        Officer
Jeanmarie Puglisi       Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Call Centers
Sally Baker             Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Sourcing
James Bowden            Vice President      -          -          -          -
James (Jamie) Bowden    Vice President      -          -          -          -
David B. (Dave) Lowman  EVP                55          -          -          -
                        Single-Family
                        Business
Michael (Mel) Culhane   Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        of Tax
                        Accounting and
                        Compliance
Robert (Rob) Lux        EVP and CIO         -          -          -          -
David M. Brickman       EVP Multifamily     -          -          -          -
                        Business


DIRECTOR                    TITLE                AGE
Christopher S. Lynch        Chairman              58

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *


   These siblings know there's no place like home. Government-sponsored
enterprises (GSEs) Freddie Mac (officially Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation) and Fannie Mae were established to buy residential mortgages and
boost the housing market. They do so by purchasing mortgages from lenders and
packaging them for resale, thereby mitigating risk and allowing lenders to
provide mortgages to those who may not otherwise qualify. The agency also
provides assistance for affordable rental housing. Together, Fannie and Freddie
guarantee some 70% of all new home loans in the US. Due to losses related to the
subprime mortgage crisis, the government seized Fannie and Freddie in 2008. It
now plans to wind the GSEs down. Conservatorship Status Ironically, the
companies contributed to the financial crisis in their mission to provide
housing funds to more citizens. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were unable to
recover from their exposure to mortgages that had gone sour. To this end, the
Federal Reserve stepped in with an initial round of loans. Eventually, the
government placed the companies in conservatorship, which is a legal status
similar to bankruptcy, rather than risk the possibility they might fail. The
government assumed a nearly 80% stake in the troubled companies in a $111
billion bailout (and counting, with a commitment of up to $400 billion).

   Operations

   The company has financed 1.8 million single-family purchase borrowers and 1.6
million multi-family rental housing units. Freddie Mac operates through three
segments: Single-family Guarantee, Investments, and Multifamily.

   The Single-family Guarantee segment purchases single-family mortgage loans
originated by seller/servicers in the primary mortgage market. It leverages the
mortgage securitization process to package the mortgage loans into guaranteed
mortgage-related securities. The organization guarantees the payment of
principal and interest on the mortgage-related security in exchange for
management and guarantee fees.

   Freddie Mac's Investments segment invests in mortgage-related securities and
single-family performing mortgage loans, which are funded by other debt
issuances and hedged using derivatives. Additionally, the segment provides
funding and hedging management services to the Single-family Guarantee and
Multifamily segments. In general, the Investments segment is not a substantial
buyer or seller of mortgage assets.

   The Multifamily segment purchases held-for-sale multifamily loans for
aggregation and then securitization through multifamily K Certificates, which
are considered Other Guarantee Transactions. In general, the segment guarantees
only the most senior tranches of the securities. As a result, a significant
portion of Freddie Mac's expected credit risk associated with these loans is
sold in subordinated tranches to third-party investors. This model leverages
securitization to substantially reduce credit risk while providing liquidity to
the multifamily market.

   Geographic Reach

   Based in Virginia, Freddie Mac operates regional offices in Atlanta, Chicago,
Dallas, Los Angeles, and New York.

   Sales and Marketing

   Freddie Mac serves a variety of lenders in the primary mortgage market that
originate mortgages for homeowners. These lenders include mortgage banking
companies, commercial banks, savings banks, community banks, credit unions,
HFAs, and savings and loan associations.

   Mortgage lender Wells Fargo , accounted for 12% (the largest share) of
Freddie Mac's 2015 single-family mortgage purchase volume, while the top 10
single-family sellers collectively generated some 50% of the firm's
single-family mortgage purchase volume.

   The company's single-family mortgage loans are serviced by several large
mortgage servicers, including Wells Fargo Bank and JPMorgan Chase Bank, which
serviced more than 20% and 10% of single-family mortgage loans in 2015,
respectively.

   Additionally, Freddie Mac's top four multifamily sellers -- CBRE Capital
Markets , Berkadia Commercial Mortgage, Holiday Fenoglio Fowler, and Walker &
Dunlop -- each accounted for between 11% and 15% of its 2015 multifamily
purchase volume. Together the financial institutions brought in about 50% of
Freddie Mac's multifamily purchase volume, while the company's top 10
multi-family sellers represented nearly 78% of multi-family new business volume.

   Financial Performance

   The rebounding housing market has helped both Freddie and Fannie tremendously
since their low point in 2008, though both GSEs have seen shrinking revenue over
the past few years as they've been wound down.

   Freddie Mac's revenue fell 8% to $63.5 billion during 2015, mostly as it
collected less interest income as more of its higher-yielding mortgage assets
were liquidated, as was expected under the organization's long-term charter and
conservatorship plan.

   Revenue decline in 2015 caused Freddie Mac's net income to plunge 17% to $6.4
billion. The group's operating cash levels plummeted sharply to $934 million for
the year after adjusting its earnings for non-cash items such as debt related
amortization and net proceeds from sold loans held-for-sale.

   Strategy

   Freddie Mac's Charter Mission outlines a three to five year strategy through
2018 or 2020 under the core assumption that the conservatorship status continues
without any significant changes during the period.

   Thus far, Freddie has remained a central element in the government's efforts
to make housing affordable. Freddie Mac has a number of strategic objectives by
which it operates. It aims to reduce taxpayer exposure to losses by managing its
investment portfolio, primarily investments related to mortgages. It also works
to provide lenders with liquidity when financing is scarce, thereby helping
support homeowners and renters. Additionally, under the direction of the Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) as part of its conservatorship status, the GSE is
intent on strengthening its own position as a business enterprise for whatever
its still-undetermined future might hold.

   Another one of the agency's main responsibilities is to manage single-family
delinquent loans, which includes selling loans and removing seriously delinquent
loans from its Participation Certificate (PC) pools. In mid-2015, to strengthen
its investment portfolio, Freddie Mac executed its largest ever sale of
seriously delinquent loans. Via an investor auction consisting of three separate
pools of mortgage loans (including modification, other alternatives to
foreclosure, and in foreclosure), the organization sold nearly 5,400 loans that
had been delinquent for three years, on average, with a total unpaid principle
balance of $985 million. The winning bidder on all the three mortgage pools was
GCAT Management Services 2015-13 LLC.

   Company Background

   In 2011, the Obama Administration delivered a plan to Congress to reform the
housing finance market. The plan included a recommendation to minimize Fannie
Mae's and Freddie Mac's roles in the market and ultimately wind down the
companies. The future of the entities still remains unclear, however, and they
operate under significant levels of uncertainty.

   The companies are overseen by the Federal Housing Finance Administration
(FHFA), which was created in 2008 in the aftermath of the housing bust. The FHFA
has more authority than its predecessor agencies, the Federal Housing Finance
Board and the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight . The
administration also oversees the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks.


HISTORY:

   Ah, the '60s -- free love, great tunes, and a war nobody wanted to pay for
with taxes. By the '70s, inflation was rising and real income was starting to
fall. To divert a construction industry recession, Congress created a new entity
to buy home mortgages and boost the flow of money into the housing market.

   Fannie Mae had been buying mortgages since 1938, but focused on Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) and Veterans Administration loans. In 1970 Congress
created Freddie Mac and enlarged Fannie Mae's field of action to include
conventional mortgages. Still, rising interest rates in the 1970s were brutal to
the US real estate market.

   In the early 1980s dealers devised a way to securitize the company's loans --
seen as somewhat frumpy investments -- by packaging them into more alluring,
bond-like investments, made even sexier by the implicit government guarantee.
When three major government securities dealers collapsed in 1985, ownership of
some Freddie Mac securities was in doubt, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York quickly automated registration of government securities.

   In 1984 Freddie Mac issued shares to members of the Federal Home Loan Bank
(the overseer of US savings and loans). By 1989 the shares had been converted to
common stock and were traded on the NYSE . Freddie Mac's board expanded from
three political appointees to 18 members.

   Nationwide real estate defaults (rampant in the wake of the late 1980s crash)
kindled concern about Freddie Mac's reserve levels and whether it might need to
tap its US Treasury line of credit. In response, Congress in 1992 created the
Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight to regulate Freddie Mac and
Fannie Mae. Initial examinations sounded no alarms. A 1996 Congressional Budget
Office report questioned whether the government should continue its implicit
guarantees of the pair's debt securities.

   In 1997 Freddie Mac officially adopted its longtime nickname. The next year,
it launched a system to cut loan approval time from weeks to minutes (it agreed
to develop a similar version for the FHA). The streamlining was crucial to pacts
in which mortgage lenders (including one of the US's largest, Wells Fargo )
promised to sell Freddie Mac their loan originations. In 1999 Freddie Mac hired
former House Speaker Newt Gingrich as a consultant.

   Freddie Mac made a major Internet push in 2000 with its first online taxable
bond offering. A wired venture involving Freddie Mac, Microsoft , and such big
lenders as Chase Manhattan (now part of JPMorgan Chase & Co. ), Bank of America
, and Wells Fargo drew fire from small banks that said it would push them out of
the online lending business.

   In 2001 Freddie Mac bought Tuttle Decision Systems, a loan-pricing software
system provider. Critics responded that Freddie Mac overstepped its government
charter with such a move.

   In a move initiated by its auditor, Freddie Mac re-audited its earnings from
2000 to 2003, uncovering accounting irregularities and employee misconduct.
Further investigations, executive oustings, restructuring, and numerous lawsuits
followed. In late 2003 Freddie Mac announced the findings of its re-audit. The
company admitted to understating earnings by $4.4 billion between 2000 and 2002
and overstating profits by $989 million in 2001, all in an attempt to smooth out
results and show steady profit growth.

   In 2006 the company paid a record $3.8 million fine to settle allegations by
the Federal Election Commission that the company made illegal campaign
contributions to members of the US House Financial Services Committee. It also
agreed to pay $4.65 million to settle a lawsuit related to its employee 401(k)
plan. Freddie Mac did receive good news that year though, when the Department of
Justice dropped criminal charges against the company for misstating earnings
from 2000 to 2002.

   As the subprime mortgage crisis began heating up in 2007 and 2008, Freddie
Mac announced plans to stop purchasing risky subprime mortgages. However, the
company tried to help restore stability to the teetering mortgage market by
investing in billions of dollars in new jumbo mortgages, raising its loan limits
to more than $700,000.

   Although the government stepped in with loans to help Freddie, the company
still struggled with subprime mortgage losses. The government seized Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac in 2008 and placed them in conservatorship. Freddie Mac's
leadership was also shaken up. David Moffat resigned as CEO in 2009 and chairman
John Koskinen stepped in to serve as his interim replacement. Later that year
Charles Haldeman, Jr., the former head of Putnam Investments , was selected to
lead the company.

   The Federal Housing Finance Administration (FHFA) was created in 2008 to
oversee Fannie and Freddie, as well as the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks. The FHFA
was granted more authority than its predecessor agencies, the Federal Housing
Finance Board and the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight .

HOOVER INDUSTRIES:

     ·    Finance & Insurance Sector
          ·    Lending
               ·    MORTGAGE BANKING




* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
NAICS CODES:
522292 - Real Estate Credit
SIC CODES:
6111 - Federal & fed.-sponsored credit
MARKETS:

     ·    2015 Revenue
     ·    % of total
     ·    Interest Income
     ·    Total Mortgage Loans 92
     ·    Investments in Securities 7
     ·    Other --
     ·    Non-interest Income 1
     ·    Total 100


* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: December, 2016

(Millions U.S. Dollars)               2016              2015              2014
Revenue                          $65,665.0         $63,491.0         $69,367.0
Net Income                        $7,815.0          $6,376.0          $7,690.0
Net Profit                           11.9%             10.0%             11.1%
Employees                            6,004             5,462             5,007

     ·    One Year Sales Growth: 3.4%
     ·    One Year Income Growth: 22.6%


                                                       2016
Return on Assets                                       0.4%
Cash                                        $22,220,000,000
Shares outstanding                              650,100,000
Market Value                                        2,431.2

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EXCHANGE: OTC
CURRENT SHARES OUTSTANDING: 650,100,000
STOCK PRICE:
2016 FISCAL YEAR HIGH:  $4.40
2016 FISCAL YEAR LOW:  $1.09
2016 FISCAL YEAR CLOSE:  $3.74
EPS: $0.03
PRICE/EARNINGS HIGH:  147
PRICE/EARNINGS LOW:  36
HISTORICAL STOCK INFORMATION:
                                      2015              2014              2013
Fiscal Year High                     $3.22             $5.52             $3.75
Fiscal Year Low                      $1.62             $1.48             $0.26
Fiscal Year Close                    $1.62             $2.06             $2.90
Earnings                           ($0.01)           ($0.72)           ($1.09)

                                      2012              2011              2010
Fiscal Year High                     $0.39             $0.86             $1.58
Fiscal Year Low                      $0.21             $0.19             $0.24
Fiscal Year Close                    $0.26             $0.21             $0.30
Earnings                           ($0.64)           ($3.63)           ($6.09)

                                      2009              2008              2007
Fiscal Year High                     $2.40            $34.07            $67.93
Fiscal Year Low                      $0.36             $0.26            $24.50
Fiscal Year Close                    $1.47             $0.73            $34.07
Earnings                           ($7.89)          ($34.60)           ($5.37)
Dividends                                -             $0.50             $1.75
Book Value per Share                                                     $0.24

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2017


                               3 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK)

                            July 24, 2013 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Osborne plans to underwrite £130bn of mortgage lending

BYLINE: JOHN COLLINGRIDGE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 462 words


The Government yesterday insisted only credit-worthy borrowers will be able to
buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed more
details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130 billion of mortgage lending with state guarantees -
including banning second home buyers and people with property abroad. The first
stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give people the
chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just 5%. The scheme has been
credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up prices.

Mortgage guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.

Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover both existing and newly-built homes. Guarantees will
only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages, while those with
impaired credit ratings will be excluded, the Treasury insisted. It will include
income checks and stress testing.

Guarantees will also not be available for second home purchases, and lenders
will be required to collect a declaration stating that the borrower has no
interest a property anywhere else in the world. It will not be able to be used
in conjunction with another state scheme. Lenders will pay a fee to use the
guarantee, based on loanto-value banding.

Mr Osborne held a breakfast meeting today at Number 11 Downing Street with
executives from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major
lenders such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays. The guarantee will be
available on homes worth up to £600,000. The state will offer guarantees
totalling up to £12 billion on £130 billion of high loan-to-value mortgage
lending.

The initial equity loan stage allows people to buy a newbuild home worth up to
£600,000 with a Government loan of up to 20%, interest-free for five years.

However, the guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating
another housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government.

Former Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close
for comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages.

The Bank's deputy governor, Paul Tucker, also warned that it would be "unwise"
as a medium or long-term scheme.

"This is not a market that needs a permanent subsidy," he said recently. "They (
home loan guarantees) are devices for getting out of a hole to dig another one
for the future."

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families. Help to Buy is about getting behind those who aspire to own a
home."

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WMN


                 Copyright 2013 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                               4 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2013 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                       GlobalData - Business Description

                               December 11, 2013

                     Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

                            8200 Jones Branch Drive
                             McLean,  VA 22102-3110
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

OVERVIEW

   Federal Home Loan Mortgage (Freddie Mac) is a financial services established
as a government sponsored enterprise with the objective to expand the secondary
mortgage market in the US by increasing the liquidity with the banks for
mortgage lending. The customers of the company are the lenders in primary
mortgage market including commercial banks, mortgage bankers, savings
institutions and credit unions. The company issues mortgage-related securities
which represent undivided interest in the mortgage loans it purchase. Further,
the company provides a guarantee of the payment of principal and interest on all
securities. In addition, it also purchases and holds mortgage loans and
mortgage-related securities in its Retained Portfolio for investment purposes.
The company finances these purchases by issuing short, medium, and long term
debt and subordinated debt and equity securities. The company operates its
business through three reportable segments namely, Investments, Single-family
Guarantee, and Multifamily. Through the Investments segment, the company invests
in mortgage related securities and single family mortgages through its mortgage
related investment portfolio. The activities of this segment include the
purchase of mortgages and mortgage-related securities with less attractive
investment returns and with incremental risk in order to achieve its goals. In
addition, the company maintains cash and other investments portfolio, comprised
of non-mortgage-related securities, cash and cash equivalents, federal funds
sold and securities purchased under agreements to re-sell, to manage its
liquidity requirement. For the fiscal year ended December 2012, the segment
reported revenue of $8,212m, indicating an increase of 144% over revenue in the
previous year. The Single family Guarantee segment of the company purchases
single-family mortgages originated by its customers in the primary mortgage
market, primarily through its guarantor swap program. The company guarantees the
payment of principal and interest on single family mortgage related securities,
including those held in its retained portfolio, in lieu of guarantee fees. This
segment generates its earnings from guarantee fee revenues and the interest
earned on assets held in the Investments segment related to single-family
guarantee activities. The Multifamily segment purchases multifamily mortgages
for its retained portfolio and guarantee of payments of principal and interest
on multifamily mortgage related securities and mortgages underlying multifamily
housing revenue bonds. Additionally, this segment includes some equity
investments in various limited partnerships that sponsor low and moderate income
multifamily rental apartments, which gains from low income housing tax credits.
For the fiscal year ended December 2012, the segment reported revenue of
$2,146m, indicating an increase of 62.7% over revenue in the previous year.

   In October 2013, Freddie Mac entered into an agreement with JPMorgan Chase
concerning claims related to representations and warranties on single-family
loans sold to the company. Freddie Mac, FHFA and Fannie Mae entered into an
agreement with JPMorgan Chase to settle litigation concerning investments by
Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae in residential non-agency mortgage-related
securities. Freddie Mac will be paid approximately $3.2 billion under the two
agreements.


* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Business Description                    Corporate Strategy
Company Overview                        Company Statement
Events                                  Financial Ratios
History                                 Key Employee Biographies
Key Employees                           Key Facts
Locations and Subsidiaries              SWOT Analysis
Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013


                               5 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Daily Post (North Wales)

                            July 24, 2013 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;

Chancellor gambles on house push

BYLINE: JOHN COLLINGRIDGE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 448 words


THE Government yesterday insisted only credit-worthy borrowers will be able to
buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed more
details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130 billion of mortgage lending with state guarantees -
including banning second home buyers and people with property abroad.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just 5%. The scheme
has been credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up prices.

Mortgage guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.
Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover both existing and newly-built homes. Guarantees will
only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages, while those with
impaired credit ratings will be excluded, the Treasury insisted. It will include
income checks and stress testing.

Guarantees will also not be available for second home purchases, and lenders
will be required to collect a declaration stating that the borrower has no
interest a property anywhere else in the world. It will not be able to be used
in conjunction with another state scheme.

Lenders will pay a fee to use the guarantee, based on loan-to-value banding.

Mr Osborne held a breakfast meeting yesterday at Number 11 Downing Street with
executives from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major
lenders such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays.

The guarantee will be be available on homes worth Chancellor George Osborne up
to £600,000. The state will offer guarantees totalling up to £12 billion on £130
billion of high loan-to-value mortgage lending.

The initial equity loan stage allows people to buy a new-build home worth up to
£600,000 with a Government loan of up to 20%, interest-free for five years.

However, the guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating
another housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government.

Former Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close
for comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages.

The Bank's deputy governor, Paul Tucker, also warned that it would be "unwise"
as a medium or long-term scheme.

"This is not a market that needs a permanent subsidy," he said recently.

"They (home loan guarantees) are devices for getting out of a hole to dig
another one for the future."

We're ready to build in Wales - BUSINESS POST P1

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chancellor George Osborne

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DPW


                       Copyright 2013 Trinity Mirror plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                               6 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Daily Post (North Wales)

                            July 24, 2013 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Chancellor gambles on house push

BYLINE: JOHN COLLINGRIDGE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 448 words


THE Government yesterday insisted only credit-worthy borrowers will be able to
buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed more
details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130 billion of mortgage lending with state guarantees -
including banning second home buyers and people with property abroad.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just 5%. The scheme
has been credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up prices.

Mortgage guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.
Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover both existing and newly-built homes. Guarantees will
only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages, while those with
impaired credit ratings will be excluded, the Treasury insisted. It will include
income checks and stress testing.

Guarantees will also not be available for second home purchases, and lenders
will be required to collect a declaration stating that the borrower has no
interest a property anywhere else in the world. It will not be able to be used
in conjunction with another state scheme.

Lenders will pay a fee to use the guarantee, based on loan-to-value banding.

Mr Osborne held a breakfast meeting yesterday at Number 11 Downing Street with
executives from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major
lenders such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays.

The guarantee will be be available on homes worth Chancellor George Osborne up
to £600,000. The state will offer guarantees totalling up to £12 billion on £130
billion of high loan-to-value mortgage lending.

The initial equity loan stage allows people to buy a new-build home worth up to
£600,000 with a Government loan of up to 20%, interest-free for five years.

However, the guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating
another housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government.

Former Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close
for comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages.

The Bank's deputy governor, Paul Tucker, also warned that it would be "unwise"
as a medium or long-term scheme.

"This is not a market that needs a permanent subsidy," he said recently.

"They (home loan guarantees) are devices for getting out of a hole to dig
another one for the future."

We're ready to build in Wales - BUSINESS POST P1

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chancellor George Osborne

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DPW


                       Copyright 2013 Trinity Mirror plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                               7 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Yorkshire Post

                            July 24, 2013 Wednesday

Osborne expands Help to Buy to cover £130bn of mortgages

LENGTH: 610  words


The Government yesterday insisted only credit-worthy borrowers will be able to
buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed more
details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130bn of mortgage lending with state guarantees -
including banning second home buyers and people with property abroad.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just five per cent.
The scheme has been credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up
prices.

Mortgage guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.
Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover both existing and newly-built homes.

Guarantees will only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages,
while those with impaired credit ratings will be excluded, the Treasury
insisted. It will include income checks and stress testing. Guarantees will also
not be available for second home purchases, and lenders will be required to
collect a declaration stating that the borrower has no interest a property
anywhere else in the world. It will not be able to be used in conjunction with
another state scheme. Lenders will pay a fee to use the guarantee, based on
loan-to-value banding.

Mr Osborne held a breakfast meeting yesterday at Number 11 Downing Street with
executives from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major
lenders such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays.

The guarantee will be be available on homes worth up to £600,000. The state will
offer guarantees totalling up to £12bn on £130bn of high loan-to-value mortgage
lending.

The initial equity loan stage allows people to buy a new-build home worth up to
£600,000 with a Government loan of up to 20 per cent, interest-free for five
years.

However, the guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating
another housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government.

Former Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close
for comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages. The Bank's deputy
governor, Paul Tucker, also warned that it would be "unwise" as a medium or
long-term scheme. "This is not a market that needs a permanent subsidy," he said
recently. "They (home loan guarantees) are devices for getting out of a hole to
dig another one for the future."

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families. Help to Buy is about getting behind those who aspire to own a
home. The mortgage guarantee will support an increase in high loan-to-value
mortgages for people who can't afford large deposits, and it will also boost
housebuilding. As of today lenders have the detail they need to go away and get
ready for next January's launch."

The Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) said the guarantees must be easy to
implement and have a "clear exit strategy". The organisation, which represents
banks and building societies, added the scheme must be matched with a similar
focus on boosting the supply of new housing to avoid inflating a housing bubble.

Labour housing spokesman Jack Dromey warned that the scheme would "do little to
bring the cost of housing within the reach of low and middle-income earners".

"Unless the Government finally acts to build more affordable homes, then home
ownership for millions of first-time buyers will remain but a dream."

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NLYP


                       Copyright 2013 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                               8 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Asset Securitization Report

                                   March 2014

Make Multifamily the Starting Point for Housing Reform

BYLINE: Editorial Staff

SECTION: MBS REPORT; Pg. 8 Vol. 14 No. 3

LENGTH: 750  words


Reform of the secondary market for housing finance is a big topic now among
think tanks, industry representatives and on Capitol Hill. Most of this
discussion has centered on the single-family market. Yet Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac have long played another critical role in our housing market: providing a
secure secondary market for multifamily housing finance.

Bills have been introduced in both the House and the Senate to wind-down
enterprises over a five-year period and reduce the direct government role in the
conventional mortgage markets. Both bills mean to protect taxpayers from another
bailout, buy they have very different end games. The Senate bill, introduced by
Sens. Bob Corker, R-Tenn., and Mark Warner, D-Va., would maintain a limited
government guarantee for mortgage-backed securities, but only after private
capital has taken significant first-loss risk. The House bill, introduced by
Rep. Jeb Hensarling, R-Texas, would eliminate any role for the government other
than as a market overseer.

While it is not debatable that the current situation is untenable long-term,
disagreement over the end game could paralyze any attempt to come up with a
solution. However, this would leave the financial system open to what happened
before, and render the housing market unable to attract the private capital
needed to protect the taxpayer from further risk. It would also lead to the
permanent nationalization of the system. Therefore, change is needed now, so
where do we start? Multifamily finance reform, of course. Three key facts are
important to understand:

*The multifamily market remained healthy during the housing bust. These
businesses have consistently been profitable activities for Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac because they were designed around good underwriting and
risk-sharing.

*The financing and management of multifamily housing varies greatly from the
model used for single-family housing, and calls for different solutions.

*During the crisis, the government-backed share of single family mortgage
originations peaked above 90% and remains above 80%, according to a presentation
by Beekman Advisors to the Cleveland Fed. The multifamily share is now only 40%,
down from the peak of 80%, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association.

Because the multifamily financial markets have performed well for many years, it
is our key goal that they not be disrupted during the restructuring period.
Accordingly, our proposal would do the following:

* Spin off the Fannie and Freddie multifamily operations in phases, ending with
privately owned entities.

* Continue the existing successful risk-sharing multifamily programs as the
successors to Fannie Mae's Delegated Underwriting and Servicing and Freddie Mac
securitizations, where up to 15% of the first loss by pool is taken by private
capital. The programs should continue to focus on affordable housing.

* Place adequate private capital at risk before a catastrophic guarantee
provided by the government could be accessed.

* Maintain a catastrophic government guarantee for qualified multifamily
securities, but make it explicit and paid for with appropriate guarantee fees.

* A government guarantee should promote counter-cyclicality by increasing fees
or reducing commitments if prices get out of line with historical trends.

* The successor entities would issue securitized pools of multifamily mortgages,
but they would not be permitted to retain a large portfolio in pursuit of
additional profits.

* Allow additional securitizers, including a mutual model that could ensure that
smaller lenders have access to credit, which could possibly expand the role of
the Federal Home Loan Banks.

* Ensure that the entities serving the multifamily secondary market offer
geographical coverage, affordability levels and size of developments.

* Fund support for affordable housing with a portion of the fees paid for
securitization and guarantee.

* Assess a surcharge on high-end developments seeking a loan with the
catastrophic government guarantee.

* Give the Federal Housing Finance Agency the powers to be a strong regulator to
oversee multifamily operations.

We understand several members from both parties of the Senate Banking Committee
are working on a bill that accomplishes many of these goals. It is important to
reform our housing finance system and better to do it sooner rather than later.

Shekar Narasimhan is a managing partner at Beekman Advisors. James B. Lockhart
is vice chairman of WL Ross & Co. and former director of the FHFA.

URL: http://www.structuredfinancenews.com/

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: ASR


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               9 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                October 26, 2009

California's VA VolumeIs Continuing to Soar

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 34 No. 6

LENGTH: 307  words


WASHINGTON-During the housing boom, California was nowhere near the top 10 in
originations of single-family loans guaranteed by the Department of Veterans
Affairs.

But that is changing due to an increase in VA loan limits that Congress approved
in the summer of 2008.

Lenders originated 7,700 VA loans in California in fiscal year 2008 and 21,600
VA loans in FY 2009 that just ended Sept. 30.

The state of California now ranks third in terms of VA loan volume behind
Virginia and Texas.

Thanks to Congress, VA can guarantee up to 25% of a $1 million home loan in
high-cost areas of California.

This is boosting loan volume since veterans can get 100% financing to purchase a
home and refinance with little equity.

In FY 2009, VA guaranteed $68.2 billion in single-family loans, compared to
$36.1 billion in the previous fiscal year.

Refinancings drove most of the increase with VA guaranteeing 144,800
transactions. A year ago it backed just 37,300 refis. Purchase mortgage
transactions rose 27% to 180,900 loans in FY 2009.

Despite these impressive volumes, VA officials seem most pleased with the
performance of the loan portfolio.

"VA is performing extremely very well," said Mark Bologna, the director of the
VA home loan guarantee program.

"We outperform every other product on the market including prime loans," he told
ON.

The VA seriously delinquent rate is 4.69%, compared to 5.44% for prime loans,
according to the latest delinquency report by the Mortgage Bankers Association.

VA officials contend one of the reasons for this performance is the agency did
not bend to industry pressure during the housing boom to allow loan officers and
mortgage brokers to select appraisers.

VA approves, monitors and selects appraisers to do property evaluations and it
has resulted in "good solid values," Mr. Bologna said. "It has proven to be a
good decision."

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              10 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 11, 2013

It's Time to Adopt a Unified Voice for Housing: FHLB-NY

BYLINE: Alfred A. Dellibovi

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12 Vol. 37 No. 24

LENGTH: 566  words


In January, one of my colleagues at the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York
received the rare honor of being able to perform at the 57th Presidential
Inauguration as a member of the award-winning Brooklyn Tabernacle Choir.

Each member of a choir brings his or her own strengths to the song, but a choir
only works when all of its members sing the same song in one voice. This unity
is what gives a song its power. It is time for those of us committed to
responsible and sustainable housing finance policies to speak in one voice. I
believe "Housing America's Future: New Directions of National Policy"-the report
issued by the Bipartisan Policy Center's Housing Commission on Feb. 25-provides
us with the notes we need to give our voice power.

Earlier this year, at the American Securitization Forum's annual trade show,
Michael Stegman, counselor to the secretary of the Treasury, stated that "a more
unified voice within the investor and securitization community could help
accelerate our collective pace down the path of comprehensive housing finance
reform."

In outlining a series of goals for housing finance reform, Stegman noted that
Treasury would "seek to enhance the conditions for private capital to serve a
greater role in taking on mortgage credit risk." This belief is at the heart of
the Housing Commission's report: The current government role in the mortgage
market must be decreased and the private sector role must be increased if any
housing recovery is to not only be achievable, but sustainable, as well.

Through Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Housing Administration, the
government supports more than 90% of single-family mortgages. As part of the
needed rebalancing within the mortgage market, the report proposes, over a
multiyear period, the winding down and ultimate elimination of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac. As the report states, "the business model of these
government-sponsored enterprises-publicly traded companies with implied
government guarantees and other advantages-has failed and should not be
repeated."

The report proposes replacing Fannie and Freddie with an independent, wholly
owned, government corporation-the public guarantor. This new guarantor would not
buy or sell mortgages or sell mortgage-backed securities. Rather, it would
guarantee investors the timely payment of principal and interest on these
securities, and would serve only as a catastrophic government guarantee. Under
this new model, private capital would once again be the primary source of
funding in the mortgage market, a system that benefits consumers, taxpayers and
the overall economy.

Let's remember that during the past four decades, the contribution of housing to
the national GDP has averaged between 17% and 19%. Even now, despite its
challenges, housing still accounts for approximately 15% of GDP. But this
diminished contribution is a major reason why the effects of the financial
crisis have lingered for so long, why recovery has been so slow and why the
Federal Reserve has kept interest rates low. The Housing Commission strongly
believes that, when done right, homeownership can produce powerful economic,
social and civic benefits that serve the individual homeowner, the larger
community and the nation.

Alfred DelliBovi is president/CEO of the Federal Home Loan Bank, New York. In
December 2011, he was named to the Bipartisan Policy Center's Housing
Commission.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              11 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                October 16, 1995

$ 22MM Committed In Section 184 Loans

SECTION: AFFORDABLE HOUSING; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 395 words

DATELINE: Washington


During its first full year of operation, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development's loan guarantee program for Native American tribal lands provided
new home loan guarantees to 74 Indian families and also guaranteed loans to
Indian Housing Authorities that are being used to build 403 units of new
housing.

And last week, an important new deal was announced in which Norwest Mortgage and
Norwest Bank of Arizona will use the HUD 184 to finance 294 single-family homes
on the Navajo reservation.

The homes will cost between $ 55,000 and $ 131,000 and will be targeted to
mod-high borrowers.  Total cost of the development, in St. Michaels, AZ, will be
$ 22 million.

The Department of Housing and Urban Development estimates that the cumulative
effect of the business done in fiscal 1995 will be to create 1,000 new
homeownership opportunities on Indian nations.

Traditionally, lenders have been reluctant to make home purchase loans on tribal
land because of loan security concerns.  Typically, the land is owned by Indians
in trust and the land cannot be foreclosed upon.

Twenty banks and mortgage companies made Section 184 loans in fiscal 1995, which
ended at the end of September.  HUD obligated the entire $ 22.5 million in loan
guarantee authority that was available in fiscal 1995.

Despite wide-ranging budget cuts in HUD programs, Congress is likely to increase
the lending authority under the Section 184 Indian home loan guarantee program.
Both the House and Senate appropriations bills would increase HUD loan authority
under the program from $ 22 million in 1995 to $ 36.5 million in fiscal 1996,
which just began.

Officials at HUD say the likely growth in the program reflects confidence in
Congress that the program has been successful so far.  Increased interest from
lenders and Indian nations also is creating pressure to increase lending
authority.  Francis Gros Louis, director of Indian housing programs at HUD, said
that more than 150 mortgage lenders have expressed an interest in making the HUD
guaranteed loans.

"We have been contacted by banks and mortgage companies all over the country.
We are going to be reaching out to them," Mr. Gros Louis said.

Congress has yet to pass the full appropriations bill, and the threat of a veto
from President Clinton over disputes unrelated to Indian housing hangs over the
bill.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, HUD 184 Loan Program Budget Authority, Source: HUD; Picture,
Bruce A. Morrison, chairman of the Federal Housing Finance Board, talks with an
attendee at the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati's recent affordable housing
and community investment conference, attended by more than 350 people.  At is
FHLB president Charles L. Thiemann.

                         Copyright 1995 Faulkner & Gray


                              12 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                            October 21, 2014 Tuesday

HUD Chief Chides Lenders for 'Leaving Money on the Table'

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 179 No. 162

LENGTH: 548  words


Too-tight credit has caused lenders to forego millions of mortgages and helped
drive homeownership rates for minorities and millennials to record lows, Housing
and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro said.

Speaking to the Mortgage Bankers Association's annual convention in Las Vegas
Monday, Castro challenged lenders to do their part to boost access to credit.

"Where do you want to be?" he asked them. "On the front lines? Or do you want to
leave money on the table?"

Castro cited a March report from the Urban Institute that found 1.2 million more
mortgages would have been made in 2012 alone if lenders had used credit
standards from 2001, before the subprime mortgage boom.

As a result of tight credit, homeownership rates for minorities are at their
lowest this century, and rates for those under 35 are the lowest they have ever
been, he said.

While credit was overly loose during the boom years, "the pendulum has swung too
far in the other direction," he said. At the same time, he said, communities of
color will constitute three quarters of household growth formation over the next
decade.

Castro said the government also has a role in boosting lending, and acknowledged
lenders' frustration over regulatory uncertainty, especially in regards to the
Federal Housing Administration, which has traditionally been the route for
first-time, minority and low-mod income borrowers to get mortgages.

He touted HUD's new Blueprint for Access, which he said is streamlining FHA
compliance by overhauling and simplifying its single-family housing policy
handbook. A part of the blueprint is a supplemental performance metric, which
"focuses on lender performance in the same credit score range FHA is targeting"
and will be considered as a compensating factor when comparing lenders' default
rates. A third blueprint tool is a loan defect taxonomy, which streamlines 99
defect codes down to nine.

"These steps should bolster your confidence in originating more loans with FHA,"
he told the lenders.

Borrowers are getting new tools to access FHA credit as well, he said. The
agency's HAWK (Homeowners Armed With Knowledge) program will allow borrowers who
receive homeownership counseling to get reduced mortgage insurance premiums
which could save them at least $5,000 over the life of the loan.

The former mayor of San Antonio, who took over at HUD about three months ago,
also touted a Ginnie Mae pilot program with the Federal Home Loan Bank of
Chicago to help smaller institutions get the Ginnie full faith and credit
guarantee on FHA, Department of Veterans Affairs, and Rural Housing Service home
loans. He said he expects an expansion of this program in the first quarter of
2015.

Ginnie Mae also will help lenders feel more comfortable with making loans to
veterans. Currently, VA guarantees only 25% of the loan amount. "That leaves a
lot of lenders exposed," he said. But Ginnie will allow lenders to get
additional insurance above the VA guarantee level.

"Reopening the doors of homeownership in America is one of the top priorities at
my job at HUD" Castro said.

He added that not every sector of the real estate finance business was as gloomy
as he painted single-family mortgages to be. Multifamily lending has increased,
for instance.

"Homeownership must complement this," he said.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              13 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                October 20, 2014

HUD Chief Chides Lenders for 'Leaving Money on the Table'

BYLINE: Mark Fogarty

SECTION: REGULATION; NATIONAL MORTGAGE NEWS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 548  words


Too-tight credit has caused lenders to forego millions of mortgages and helped
drive homeownership rates for minorities and millennials to record lows, Housing
and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro said.

Speaking to the Mortgage Bankers Association's annual convention in Las Vegas
Monday, Castro challenged lenders to do their part to boost access to credit.

"Where do you want to be?" he asked them. "On the front lines? Or do you want to
leave money on the table?"

Castro cited a March report from the Urban Institute that found 1.2 million more
mortgages would have been made in 2012 alone if lenders had used credit
standards from 2001, before the subprime mortgage boom.

As a result of tight credit, homeownership rates for minorities are at their
lowest this century, and rates for those under 35 are the lowest they have ever
been, he said.

While credit was overly loose during the boom years, "the pendulum has swung too
far in the other direction," he said. At the same time, he said, communities of
color will constitute three quarters of household growth formation over the next
decade.

Castro said the government also has a role in boosting lending, and acknowledged
lenders' frustration over regulatory uncertainty, especially in regards to the
Federal Housing Administration, which has traditionally been the route for
first-time, minority and low-mod income borrowers to get mortgages.

He touted HUD's new Blueprint for Access, which he said is streamlining FHA
compliance by overhauling and simplifying its single-family housing policy
handbook. A part of the blueprint is a supplemental performance metric, which
"focuses on lender performance in the same credit score range FHA is targeting"
and will be considered as a compensating factor when comparing lenders' default
rates. A third blueprint tool is a loan defect taxonomy, which streamlines 99
defect codes down to nine.

"These steps should bolster your confidence in originating more loans with FHA,"
he told the lenders.

Borrowers are getting new tools to access FHA credit as well, he said. The
agency's HAWK (Homeowners Armed With Knowledge) program will allow borrowers who
receive homeownership counseling to get reduced mortgage insurance premiums
which could save them at least $5,000 over the life of the loan.

The former mayor of San Antonio, who took over at HUD about three months ago,
also touted a Ginnie Mae pilot program with the Federal Home Loan Bank of
Chicago to help smaller institutions get the Ginnie full faith and credit
guarantee on FHA, Department of Veterans Affairs, and Rural Housing Service home
loans. He said he expects an expansion of this program in the first quarter of
2015.

Ginnie Mae also will help lenders feel more comfortable with making loans to
veterans. Currently, VA guarantees only 25% of the loan amount. "That leaves a
lot of lenders exposed," he said. But Ginnie will allow lenders to get
additional insurance above the VA guarantee level.

"Reopening the doors of homeownership in America is one of the top priorities at
my job at HUD" Castro said.

He added that not every sector of the real estate finance business was as gloomy
as he painted single-family mortgages to be. Multifamily lending has increased,
for instance.

"Homeownership must complement this," he said.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              14 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                October 20, 2014

HUD Chief Chides Lenders for 'Leaving Money on the Table'

BYLINE: Mark Fogarty

SECTION: REGULATION; NATIONAL MORTGAGE NEWS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 548  words


Too-tight credit has caused lenders to forego millions of mortgages and helped
drive homeownership rates for minorities and millennials to record lows, Housing
and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro said.

Speaking to the Mortgage Bankers Association's annual convention in Las Vegas
Monday, Castro challenged lenders to do their part to boost access to credit.

"Where do you want to be?" he asked them. "On the front lines? Or do you want to
leave money on the table?"

Castro cited a March report from the Urban Institute that found 1.2 million more
mortgages would have been made in 2012 alone if lenders had used credit
standards from 2001, before the subprime mortgage boom.

As a result of tight credit, homeownership rates for minorities are at their
lowest this century, and rates for those under 35 are the lowest they have ever
been, he said.

While credit was overly loose during the boom years, "the pendulum has swung too
far in the other direction," he said. At the same time, he said, communities of
color will constitute three quarters of household growth formation over the next
decade.

Castro said the government also has a role in boosting lending, and acknowledged
lenders' frustration over regulatory uncertainty, especially in regards to the
Federal Housing Administration, which has traditionally been the route for
first-time, minority and low-mod income borrowers to get mortgages.

He touted HUD's new Blueprint for Access, which he said is streamlining FHA
compliance by overhauling and simplifying its single-family housing policy
handbook. A part of the blueprint is a supplemental performance metric, which
"focuses on lender performance in the same credit score range FHA is targeting"
and will be considered as a compensating factor when comparing lenders' default
rates. A third blueprint tool is a loan defect taxonomy, which streamlines 99
defect codes down to nine.

"These steps should bolster your confidence in originating more loans with FHA,"
he told the lenders.

Borrowers are getting new tools to access FHA credit as well, he said. The
agency's HAWK (Homeowners Armed With Knowledge) program will allow borrowers who
receive homeownership counseling to get reduced mortgage insurance premiums
which could save them at least $5,000 over the life of the loan.

The former mayor of San Antonio, who took over at HUD about three months ago,
also touted a Ginnie Mae pilot program with the Federal Home Loan Bank of
Chicago to help smaller institutions get the Ginnie full faith and credit
guarantee on FHA, Department of Veterans Affairs, and Rural Housing Service home
loans. He said he expects an expansion of this program in the first quarter of
2015.

Ginnie Mae also will help lenders feel more comfortable with making loans to
veterans. Currently, VA guarantees only 25% of the loan amount. "That leaves a
lot of lenders exposed," he said. But Ginnie will allow lenders to get
additional insurance above the VA guarantee level.

"Reopening the doors of homeownership in America is one of the top priorities at
my job at HUD" Castro said.

He added that not every sector of the real estate finance business was as gloomy
as he painted single-family mortgages to be. Multifamily lending has increased,
for instance.

"Homeownership must complement this," he said.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              15 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Origination News

                                 November 2014

HUD Chief Chides Lenders for 'Leaving Money on the Table'

BYLINE: Mark Fogarty

SECTION: NEWS; ORIGINATION NEWS; Pg. 8 Vol. 24 No. 1

LENGTH: 548  words


Too-tight credit has caused lenders to forego millions of mortgages and helped
drive homeownership rates for minorities and millennials to record lows, Housing
and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro said.

Speaking to the Mortgage Bankers Association's Annual Convention in Las Vegas
last month, Castro challenged lenders to do their part to boost access to
credit.

"Where do you want to be?" he asked them. "On the front lines? Or do you want to
leave money on the table?"

Castro cited a March report from the Urban Institute that found 1.2 million more
mortgages would have been made in 2012 alone if lenders had used credit
standards from 2001, before the subprime mortgage boom.

As a result of tight credit, homeownership rates for minorities are at their
lowest this century, and rates for those under 35 are the lowest they have ever
been, he said.

While credit was overly loose during the boom years, "the pendulum has swung too
far in the other direction," he said. At the same time, he said, communities of
color will constitute three quarters of household growth formation over the next
decade.

Castro said the government also has a role in boosting lending, and acknowledged
lenders' frustration over regulatory uncertainty, especially in regards to the
Federal Housing Administration, which has traditionally been the route for
first-time, minority and low-mod income borrowers to get mortgages.

He touted HUD's new Blueprint for Access, which he said is streamlining FHA
compliance by overhauling and simplifying its single-family housing policy
handbook. A part of the blueprint is a supplemental performance metric, which
"focuses on lender performance in the same credit score range FHA is targeting"
and will be considered as a compensating factor when comparing lenders' default
rates. A third blueprint tool is a loan defect taxonomy, which streamlines 99
defect codes down to nine.

"These steps should bolster your confidence in originating more loans with FHA,"
he told the lenders.

Borrowers are getting new tools to access FHA credit as well, he said. The
agency's HAWK (Homeowners Armed With Knowledge) program will allow borrowers who
receive homeownership counseling to get reduced mortgage insurance premiums
which could save them at least $5,000 over the life of the loan.

The former mayor of San Antonio, who took over at HUD about three months ago,
also touted a Ginnie Mae pilot program with the Federal Home Loan Bank of
Chicago to help smaller institutions get the Ginnie full faith and credit
guarantee on FHA, Department of Veterans Affairs, and Rural Housing Service home
loans. He said he expects an expansion of this program in the first quarter of
2015.

Ginnie Mae also will help lenders feel more comfortable with making loans to
veterans. Currently, VA guarantees only 25% of the loan amount. "That leaves a
lot of lenders exposed," he said. But Ginnie will allow lenders to get
additional insurance above the VA guarantee level.

"Reopening the doors of homeownership in America is one of the top priorities at
my job at HUD" Castro said.

He added that not every sector of the real estate finance business was as gloomy
as he painted single-family mortgages to be. Multifamily lending has increased,
for instance.

"Homeownership must complement this," he said.

URL: http://www.originationnews.com/

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: ON


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              16 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                October 27, 2014

HUD Chief Chides Lenders for 'Leaving Money on the Table'

BYLINE: Mark Fogarty

SECTION: EDITOR AT LARGE; NATIONAL MORTGAGE NEWS; Pg. 4 Vol. 39 No. 7

LENGTH: 548  words


Too-tight credit has caused lenders to forego millions of mortgages and helped
drive homeownership rates for minorities and millennials to record lows, Housing
and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro said.

Speaking to the Mortgage Bankers Association's Annual Convention in Las Vegas
last week, Castro challenged lenders to do their part to boost access to credit.

"Where do you want to be?" he asked them. "On the front lines? Or do you want to
leave money on the table?"

Castro cited a March report from the Urban Institute that found 1.2 million more
mortgages would have been made in 2012 alone if lenders had used credit
standards from 2001, before the subprime mortgage boom.

As a result of tight credit, homeownership rates for minorities are at their
lowest this century, and rates for those under 35 are the lowest they have ever
been, he said.

While credit was overly loose during the boom years, "the pendulum has swung too
far in the other direction," he said. At the same time, he said, communities of
color will constitute three quarters of household growth formation over the next
decade.

Castro said the government also has a role in boosting lending, and acknowledged
lenders' frustration over regulatory uncertainty, especially in regards to the
Federal Housing Administration, which has traditionally been the route for
first-time, minority and low-mod income borrowers to get mortgages.

He touted HUD's new Blueprint for Access, which he said is streamlining FHA
compliance by overhauling and simplifying its single-family housing policy
handbook. A part of the blueprint is a supplemental performance metric, which
"focuses on lender performance in the same credit score range FHA is targeting"
and will be considered as a compensating factor when comparing lenders' default
rates. A third blueprint tool is a loan defect taxonomy, which streamlines 99
defect codes down to nine.

"These steps should bolster your confidence in originating more loans with FHA,"
he told the lenders.

Borrowers are getting new tools to access FHA credit as well, he said. The
agency's HAWK (Homeowners Armed With Knowledge) program will allow borrowers who
receive homeownership counseling to get reduced mortgage insurance premiums
which could save them at least $5,000 over the life of the loan.

The former mayor of San Antonio, who took over at HUD about three months ago,
also touted a Ginnie Mae pilot program with the Federal Home Loan Bank of
Chicago to help smaller institutions get the Ginnie full faith and credit
guarantee on FHA, Department of Veterans Affairs, and Rural Housing Service home
loans. He said he expects an expansion of this program in the first quarter of
2015.

Ginnie Mae also will help lenders feel more comfortable with making loans to
veterans. Currently, VA guarantees only 25% of the loan amount. "That leaves a
lot of lenders exposed," he said. But Ginnie will allow lenders to get
additional insurance above the VA guarantee level.

"Reopening the doors of homeownership in America is one of the top priorities at
my job at HUD" Castro said.

He added that not every sector of the real estate finance business was as gloomy
as he painted single-family mortgages to be. Multifamily lending has increased,
for instance.

"Homeownership must complement this," he said.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              17 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 24, 1995

FHA, VA '94 Volume Up

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Despite the falloff last year in the origination and secondary markets, one
sector of the mortgage lending industry held its own in 1994.  Loans backed by
the Federal government showed a surprising increase in volume during 1994,
according to the annual survey of mortgage lending activity compiled by HUD.

The Federal Housing Administration insured $ 95 billion in single-family home
loans in calendar 1994, up 14% from a year earlier.  The FHA's market share of
all mortgage originations increased from 8% in 1993 to 12% in 1994, according to
the HUD report.

The Department of Veterans Affairs insured $ 49 billion of home loans through
its home loan guarantee program.  In calendar 1993, the VA guaranteed just under
$ 42 billion.

However, statistics in the government programs often come in about two months
after actual loan closings, and this may have pushed some activity from the busy
end of 1993 into the 1994 HUD numbers, helping to boost 1994 totals.

But both the VA and the FHA programs have also benefited from an active
affordable housing market and program changes designed to make the programs more
attractive to lenders and homebuyers.  In addition, the FHA saw a reduction in
the premium homebuyers pay to obtain FHA insurance.

Residential mortgage originations totaled $ 773 billion in 1994, HUD found, a
24% drop from the trillion dollar record in 1993.

Meanwhile, the major secondary market agencies saw a 37% decline in loan
purchases for their mortgage-backed securities programs, according to figures
released by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Federal Housing Commissioner Nicolas Retsinas, who administers the FHA programs,
said that he suspects a variety of factors contributed to the increase in FHA
lending last year, including a time lag in the reporting of endorsements for FHA
insurance, management reforms that reduced paperwork for lenders, and the
decrease in FHA premiums.

"I don't think you are going to find any one smoking gun," he said.

Keith Pedigo, director of loan guarantee services for the Department of Veterans
Affairs home loan program, said that housing market conditions last year favored
first-time buyers and affordable housing, two areas frequently served by the
government loan guarantee programs.

The VA also has a larger pool of eligible participants than it used to have.
Congress extended eligibility to the National Guard and Reserve in 1992 and
opened the VA program to adjustable rate loans and negotiated interest rates,
which replaced the mandatory use of a VA established interest rate.

"Those three provisions of that law have all had a positive impact on the
program," Mr. Pedigo said.

The secondary market agencies were particularly affected by the decline in
overall originations last year.

The mortgage-backed securities programs of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.,
the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Government National Mortgage
Association purchased $ 353.3 billion of loans last year, accounting for 47% of
residential loan purchases.  Their volume of MBS loan purchases was down 37%
from the 1993 record volume.

The dip in loan sales was most apparent late in the year, when adjustable rate
loans were becoming more popular.  In December of last year, the GNMA and the
secondary market of the government-sponsored enterprises accounted for only 38%
of residential mortgage loan purchases.  Mortgage companies accounted for 20%
and commercial banks for 15%.

Private mortgage conduits also were hit by the contraction of origination
activity last year.  Private MBS conduits purchased $ 61.8 billion of mortgage
loans in 1994, down 30% from 1993.

While higher interest rates put a damper on single-family originations last
year, multifamily lending, which is less interest rate sensitive, continued
apace.  HUD reported $ 31.1 billion of multifamily mortgage originations, down
just 1% from the 1993 total.

Commercial banks continued to dominate the market for multifamily loans,
accounting for 48% of originations.  S&Ls and Mutual Savings Banks accounted for
20% and 7% respectively.

LOAD-DATE: May 05, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1995 Faulkner & Gray


                              18 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Origination News

                                 November 2009

VA Traction Seen in Calif.

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10 Vol. 19 No. 2

LENGTH: 244  words


WASHINGTON-During the housing boom, California was nowhere near the top 10 in
originations of single-family loans guaranteed by the Department of Veterans
Affairs.

But that is changing due to an increase in VA loan limits that Congress approved
in the summer of 2008.

Lenders originated 7,700 VA loans in California in fiscal year 2008 and 21,600
VA loans in FY 2009 that just ended Sept. 30. The state of California now ranks
third in terms of VA loan volume behind Virginia and Texas.

Thanks to Congress, VA can guarantee up to 25% of a $1 million home loan in
high-cost areas of California. This is boosting loan volume since veterans can
get 100% financing to purchase a home and refinance with little equity.

In FY 2009, VA guaranteed $68.2 billion in single-family loans, compared to
$36.1 billion in the previous fiscal year.

Refinancings drove most of the increase with VA guaranteeing 144,800
transactions. A year ago it backed just 37,300 refis. Purchase mortgage
transactions rose 27% to 180,900 loans in FY 2009. Despite these impressive
volumes, VA officials seem most pleased with the performance of the loan
portfolio.

"VA is performing extremely very well," said Mark Bologna, the director of the
VA home loan guarantee program. "We outperform every other product on the market
including prime loans," he told ON. The VA seriously delinquent rate is 4.69%
vs. 5.44% for prime loans, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association's
latest delinquency report.

URL: http://www.originationnews.com/

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: ON


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              19 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                       July 23, 2013 Tuesday 1:52 PM GMT

Housing stimulus details developed

SECTION: PA NEWS FEEDS

LENGTH: 824 words


The Government has insisted that only credit-worthy borrowers will be able to
buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed more
details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130 billion of mortgage lending with state guarantees -
including banning second home buyers and people with property abroad.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just 5%. The scheme
has been credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up prices.
Mortgage guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.
Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover both existing and newly-built homes.

Guarantees will only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages,
while those with impaired credit ratings will be excluded, the Treasury
insisted. It will include income checks and stress testing. Guarantees will also
not be available for second home purchases, and lenders will be required to
collect a declaration stating that the borrower has no interest a property
anywhere else in the world. It will not be able to be used in conjunction with
another state scheme. Lenders will pay a fee to use the guarantee, based on
loan-to-value banding.

Mr Osborne held a breakfast meeting at Number 11 Downing Street with executives
from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major lenders
such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays. The guarantee will be be available on
homes worth up to £600,000. The state will offer guarantees totalling up to £12
billion on £130 billion of high loan-to-value mortgage lending. The initial
equity loan stage allows people to buy a new-build home worth up to £600,000
with a Government loan of up to 20%, interest-free for five years. However, the
guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating another
housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government.

Former Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close
for comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages, while the Bank's deputy
governor, Paul Tucker, also warned that it would be "unwise" as a medium or
long-term scheme, saying recently "This is not a market that needs a permanent
subsidy. They (home loan guarantees) are devices for getting out of a hole to
dig another one for the future."

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families. Help to Buy is about getting behind those who aspire to own a
home. The mortgage guarantee will support an increase in high loan-to-value
mortgages for people who can't afford large deposits, and it will also boost
housebuilding. As of today lenders have the detail they need to go away and get
ready for next January's launch."

The Council of Mortgage Lenders said the guarantees must be easy to implement
and have a "clear exit strategy". CML director general Paul Smee said: "Lenders,
whether they choose to participate in the guarantee scheme or stay outside, will
continue to do their utmost to meet households' needs for mortgages, but always
in a way that is responsible."

Graeme Leach, chief economist at the Institute of Directors, said: "The housing
market needs help to supply, not help to buy, and the extension of this scheme
is very dangerous. Government guarantees will not increase the supply of homes,
but they will drive up prices at a time when it seems likely that house prices
are already over-valued. When the scheme is withdrawn, any rise in prices that
has taken place will be undermined, with potentially disastrous results. There
is a real risk that the housing market will become dependent on the underwriting
by Government, making it very difficult politically to shut the scheme down.
This should be of great concern. The world must have gone mad for us to now be
discussing endless taxpayer guarantees for mortgages."

Labour housing spokesman Jack Dromey said: "Any help for first-time buyers
struggling to get on the property ladder is to be welcomed. But there is now
widespread criticism that this scheme will do little to bring the cost of
housing within the reach of low and middle-income earners. Unless the Government
finally acts to build more affordable homes, then home ownership for millions of
first-time buyers will remain but a dream. If the £10 billion infrastructure
boost recommended by the IMF was spent on housing, we could build 400,000
affordable homes and support 600,000 jobs. That's the way to get people back to
work, sort out the housing crisis and strengthen our economy for the long term."

https://www.gov.uk/affordable-home-ownership-schemes/help-to-buy-equity-loans(He
lp to Buy)

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2013 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              20 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2017 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
               Standard & Poor's Corporate Descriptions plus News

                               February 25, 2017

                        Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.

                            8200 Jones Branch Drive
                               McLean,  VA 22102
                                      USA


OFFICE- 8200 Jones Branch Drive, McLean, VA, USA 22102, Telephone: 703-903-2000,
Fax: 703-903-2759, http://www.freddiemac.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: 703-903-2000

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
TICKER: FMCKJ
CUSIP: 313400

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: 1970
PLACE OF INCORPORATION: USA
ORGANIZATION TYPE: US Government Agency
EMPLOYEES: 5,462

CHARTERED July 24, 1970, by Congress.

* * * * * * * * * * CORPORATE STRUCTURE * * * * * * * * * *
SUBSIDIARIES:

     ·    Home Ownership Funding Corporation I
     ·    Home Ownership Funding Corporation II
     ·    JB 8000, Inc.
     ·    West*Mac Associates Limited Partnership


* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
OFFICERS:

     ·    Christopher S. Lynch, Chairman
     ·    Donald H. Layton, Chief Executive Officer
     ·    James G. MacKey, Exec VP & Chief Financial Officer
     ·    William H. McDavid, General Counsel, Exec VP & Secretary
     ·    Jerry Weiss, Exec VP & Chief Administrative Officer
     ·    Robert Lux, Exec VP & Chief Information Officer
     ·    David B. Lowman, Exec VP
     ·    David M. Brickman, Exec VP
     ·    Anil D. Hinduja, Exec VP
     ·    Robert D. Mailloux, Controller & SR VP
     ·    Timothy F. Kenny, SR VP
     ·    David McDonald, SR VP
     ·    Mark A. Delong, SR VP
     ·    Jorge A. Reis, SR VP
     ·    Deborah Jenkins, SR VP
     ·    James Bowden, SR VP
     ·    Mark D. Hanson, SR VP
     ·    Carol A. Wambeke, SR VP
     ·    Robin Phillips, Investor Relations Contact


DIRECTORS:

     ·    Raphael W. Bostic
     ·    Carolyn Hogan Byrd
     ·    Lance F. Drummond
     ·    Thomas M. Goldstein
     ·    Richard C. Hartnack
     ·    Steven W. Kohlhagen
     ·    Donald H. Layton
     ·    Christopher S. Lynch
     ·    Sara Mathew
     ·    Saiyid T. Naqvi
     ·    Nicolas P. Retsinas
     ·    Eugene B. Shanks, Jr.
     ·    Anthony A. Williams


* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

Revision Date: July 25, 2016

   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation operates in the secondary mortgage
market in the United States. The company purchases residential mortgage loans
originated by lenders, as well as invests in mortgage loans and mortgage-related
securities. It operates in three segments: Single-Family Guarantee, Multifamily,
and Investments. The Single-Family Guarantee segment purchases, securitizes, and
guarantees single-family loans originated by its seller/servicers and manages
single-family mortgage credit risk. This segment serves lenders, including
mortgage banking companies, commercial banks, community banks, credit unions,
other non-depository financial institutions, housing finance agencies (HFAs),
and thrift institutions. The Multifamily segment engages in investment,
securitization, and guarantee activities in multifamily loans and securities;
issuance of multifamily K Certificates; issuing and guarantying other
securitization products; and provision of other mortgage-related guarantees, as
well as post-construction financing to apartment project operators. The
Investments segment invests principally in mortgage-related securities and
single-family performing loans. It serves state and local governments, insurance
companies, money managers, central banks, depository institutions, and pension
funds. Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation was founded in 1970 and is based
in McLean, Virginia. PARTNERSHIP- West*Mac Associates Limited Partnership (75%
owned). BACKLOG, : Thous. $
2015.................0 2014.................0 2013.................0 EMPLOYEES-
December 31, 2015, 5,462.
 CAPITAL EXPENDITURES, Thous. $
2015.................0 2014.................0 2013.................0

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC CODES:
61 - Nondepository credit institutions
6111 - Federal & fed.-sponsored credit agencies

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * * DEBT: $1,970,427,000,000
CAPITALIZATION (December 31, 2015)

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
Annual Report- Inc. Acct., Yrs. End. Dec. 31; Mil. $~
                                  2015           2014           2013
REVENUES..............................
Other Interest Income...............70             32             51
Mortgage Loans..................62,226         63,605         64,883
Investments in Securities........4,794          5,843          7,768
Portion of Other-than-temporary
 Impairment Recognized
 in Aoci..........................(51)           (78)          (747)
Total Other-than-temporary
 Impairment of Available-for-sale
 Securities......................(241)          (860)          (763)
Other Gain/loss on Investment
 Securities Recognized
 in Earnings.......................508          1,494            301
Other Income/loss................(879)          8,044          6,650
Derivative Gain/loss...........(2,696)        (8,291)          2,632
EXPENSES..............................
Salaries and Employee Benefits...(975)          (914)          (833)
Temporary Payroll Tax
 Cut Continuation ACT
 of 2011 Expense.................(967)          (775)          (533)
Occupancy Expense.................(56)           (58)           (54)
Provision For Loan Losses........2,665           (58)          2,465
Other Administrative Expenses....(399)          (382)          (375)
Professional Services............(497)          (527)          (543)
Expense Related to Derivatives...(228)          (301)          (455)
Interest Expense..............(51,916)       (54,916)       (55,779)
Gain/loss on
 Extinguishment
 of Debt.........................(240)          (422)            446
Other Income/expense...........(1,506)          (238)            109
Reo Operations Income/expense....(338)          (196)            140
Earnings before Taxes............9,274         11,002         25,363
TAXES AND OTHER EXPENSES..............
Provision for Income Tax.......(2,898)        (3,312)         23,305
Net Income (Loss)................6,376          7,690         48,668
CHARGES ON NET INCOME.................
Dividends on Preferred Stock...(6,399)       (10,026)       (52,199)
Net Income Available
 to Common Shareholders...........(23)        (2,336)        (3,531)
SUPPLEMENTARY INFO....................
Share earns. basic & diluted....(0.01)         (0.72)         (1.09)
  Bal. Sheet Dec. 31: Mil. $~
   Assets-                                       2015           2014
ASSETS...............................................
Cash and Cash Equivalents.......................5,595         10,928
Investment in Securities At Fair Value........114,215        136,987
Securities Purchased
 Under Agreements
 to Resell.....................................63,644         51,903
Derivative Assets, at Fair Value..................395            822
Mortgage Loans Held for Sale...................24,992         12,368
Mortgage Loans Held for Investment..........1,729,201      1,688,212
Accrued Interest Receivable.....................6,074          6,034
Restricted Cash................................14,533          8,535
Deferred Tax Asset-net.........................18,205         19,498
Other Assets....................................7,471          7,694
Real Estate Owned-net...........................1,725          2,558
Total Assets................................1,986,050      1,945,539
LIABILITIES..........................................
Accrued Interest Payable........................6,183          6,325
Derivative Liabilities, At Fair Value...........1,254          1,963
Debt (Net)..................................1,970,427      1,929,542
Preferred Stock Redeemable.....................72,336         72,336
Preferred Stock Redeemable.....................14,109         14,109
Other Liabilities...............................5,246          5,058
SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY.................................
Senior preferred stock, at redemption value....72,336         72,336
Preferred stock, at redemption value...........14,109         14,109
Common stock......................................Nil            Nil
Treasury Stock - Common.......................(3,885)        (3,885)
Retained Earnings............................(80,773)       (81,639)
Available-for-sale Securities...................1,740          2,546
Defined-benefit Plans..............................34           (13)
Cash Flow Hedge Relationships...................(621)          (803)
Total Shareholders Equity.......................2,940          2,651
Total Liabilities & Shareholders Equity.....1,986,050      1,945,539

RECENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS-

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EXCHANGE: OTC (Over The Counter)
STOCK INDEX: SP 500
NUMBER OF SHAREHOLDERS: 1,803
STOCK PRICE:

                          STOCK DATA~
COMMON VOTING POWER-  Holders of Vtg. Com. elect 13 of 18 directors,
and remaining 5 directors are appointed each year by the President
of the U.S.
$1.68 (6.72%) NON-CUMULATIVE REDEEM. PFD.  $1 par: DIVIDENDS- 6.72%
Non-Cum. Redeem. Pfd., ranking equally with other Non-Cum. Pfds.,
has preference over Vtg. Com. as to non-cumulative divds. of $1.68
per annum, payable quarterly Mar. 31, June 30, Sept. 30 & Dec. 31.
LIQUIDATION of assets, whether voluntary or involuntary, entitles
holders, ranking equally with other Non-Cum. Pfds., to preference
over Vtg. Com. as to $25 plus an amount equal to the dividend for
the then-current quarterly dividend period accrued through and
including the date of such liquidation payment. REDEEMABLE AT CO.'S
OPTION, beginning Sept. 30, 1998, in whole or in part on 30 days'
notice at $25 plus an amount equal to the dividend for the
then-current quarterly dividend period accrued through and including
the date of such redemption. VOTING POWER- None.~
  VARIABLE RATE NON-CUMULATIVE PFD. $1 par: DIVIDENDS- Variable Rate
Non-Cum. Pfd., ranking equally with other Non-Cum. Pfds., has
preference over Vtg. Com. as to non-cumulative divds. payable
quarterly each Mar. 31, June 30, Sept. 30 & Dec. 31. Dividends will
accrue at a variable per annum rate (not greater than 9% per annum)
equal to (i) the sum of LIBOR (as defined), determined quarterly,
and 1%, divided by (ii) 1.377. LIQUIDATION of assets, whether
voluntary or involuntary, entitles holders, ranking equally with
other Non-Cum. Pfds., to preference over Vtg. Com. to $50 plus an
amount equal to the dividend for the then-current quarterly dividend
period accrued through and including the date of such liquidation
payment. REDEEMABLE AT CO.'S OPTION, beginning June 30, 2001, in
whole or in part on 30 days' notice at $50 plus an amount equal to
the dividend for the then-current quarterly dividend period accrued
through and including the date of such redemption. VOTING POWER-
None.~
  $3.0625 (6.125%) NON-CUMULATIVE PFD. $1 par: DIVIDENDS- 6.125%
Non-Cum. Pfd., ranking equally with other Non-Cum. Pfds., has
preference over Vtg. Com. as to non-cumulative divds. of $3.0625 per
annum, payable quarterly Mar. 31, June 30, Sept. 30 & Dec. 31. If,
prior to May 1, 1998, certain amendments to the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended, are enacted that reduce the percentage of
the dividends-received deduction below 70%, the amount of dividends
payable in respect of the Pfd. will be adjusted to offset the effect
of such reduction. However, no adjustment will be made to the extent
that the percentage of the dividends-received deduction is reduced
below 50%. LIQUIDATION of assets, whether voluntary or involuntary,
entitles holders, ranking equally with other Non-Cum. Pfds., to
preference over Vtg. Com. to $50 plus an amount equal to the
dividend for the then-current quarterly dividend period accrued
through and including the date of such liquidation payment.
REDEEMABLE AT CO.'S OPTION, beginning Dec. 31, 2001, in whole or in
part on 30 days' notice at $50 plus an amount equal to the dividend
for the then-current quarterly dividend period accrued through and
including the date of such redemption. VOTING POWER- None.~
  $3.07 (6.14%) NON-CUMULATIVE PFD. $1 par: DIVIDENDS- 6.14%
Non-Cum. Pfd., ranking equally with other Non-Cum. Pfds., has
preference over Vtg. Com. as to non-cumulative divds. of $3.07 per
annum, payable quarterly Mar. 31, June 30, Sept. 30 & Dec. 31. If,
prior to Dec. 3, 1998, certain amendments to the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended, are enacted that reduce the percentage of
the dividends-received deduction below 70%, the amount of dividends
payable in respect of the Pfd. will be adjusted to offset the effect
of such reduction. However, no adjustment will be made to the extent
that the percentage of the dividends-received deduction is reduced
below 50%. LIQUIDATION of assets, whether voluntary or involuntary,
entitles holders, ranking equally with Non-Cum. Pfds., to preference
over Vtg. Com. to $50 plus an amount equal to the dividend for the
then-current quarterly dividend period accrued through and including
the date of such liquidation payment. REDEEMABLE AT CO.'S OPTION,
beginning June 30, 2002, in whole or in part on 30 days' notice at
$50 plus an amount equal to the dividend for the then-current
quarterly dividend period accrued through and including the date of
such redemption. VOTING POWER- None.~
  $2.50 (5%) NON-CUMULATIVE PFD. $1 par: DIVIDENDS- 5% Non-Cum.
Pfd., ranking equally with other Non-Cum. Pfds., has preference over
Vtg. Com. as to non-cumulative divds. of $2.50 per annum, payable
quarterly Mar. 31, June 30, Sept. 30 & Dec. 31. If, prior to Sept.
23, 1999, certain amendments to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, are enacted that reduce the percentage of the
dividends-received deduction below 70%, the amount of dividends
payable in respect of the Pfd. will be adjusted to offset the effect
of such reduction. However, no adjustment will be made to the extent
that the percentage of the dividends-received deduction is reduced
below 50%. LIQUIDATION of assets, whether voluntary or involuntary,
entitles holders, ranking equally with Non-Cum. Pfds., to preference
over Vtg. Com. to $50 plus an amount equal to the dividend for the
then-current quarterly dividend period accrued through and including
the date of such liquidation payment. REDEEMABLE AT COMPANY'S
OPTION, beginning Mar. 31, 2003, in whole or in part on 30 days'
notice at $50 plus an amount equal to the dividend for the
then-current quarterly dividend period accrued through and including
the date of such redemption. VOTING POWER- None.
STOCKHOLDERS- February 4, 2016, 1,803.
RECENT DIVIDENDS: Common $0.21 par or no par: 2006, $1.91; 2007,
$1.75; 2008, $0.50; 2009, None; 2010, None; 2011, None; 2012, None;
2013, None; 2014, None; 2015, None.

STOCK OUTSTANDING-                       Auth. Shs.  Outstg. Shs.
Common no par............................4,000,000,000  @650,045,962
Preferred $1 par...........................464,170,000  *464,170,000
10% Sr. Preferred $1.00 par..................1,000,000     1,000,000
  @Excl. 75,817,924 in treas.
  *Consists of 5,000,000 1996 Variable-rate; 3,000,000 5.81%;
8,000,000 5%; 4,400,000 1998 Variable-rate; 8,000,000 5.1% (1998
issue); 4,000,000 5.3%; 3,000,000 5.1% (1999 issue); 5,000,000
5.79%; 5,750,000 1999 Variable-rate; 6,500,000 2001 Variable-rate;
4,600,000 2001 Variable-rate; 3,450,000 5.81% (2001 issue);
3,450,000 6.0%; 4,020,000 2001 Variable-rate; 6,000,000 5.7%;
6,000,000 5.81% (2002 issue); 15,000,000 2006 Variable-rate;
5,000,000 6.42%; 20,000,000 5.9%; 44,000,000 5.57%; 20,000,000
5.66%; 20,000,000 6.02%; 20,000,000 6.55%; and 240,000,000 2007
Fixed-to-floating Rate shares.


BOND INFORMATION:
                          BOND DESCRIPTIONS~

   Fed'l Home Loan Mtg ZERO COUPON DEBS.; Due November 24, 2014.~
   Outstanding............................................1,214,000,000
     NOTE: Issued in minimum denom $500. ~
     ORIGINALLY ISSUED June 30, 1998.~
   ~
     BOND FORM - Book-Entry.~
     SECURITY - A direct unsecured obligation.~
     TRADED - NYSE~
   Fed'l Home Loan Mtg ZERO COUPON SUBORD. CAPITAL DEBS.; Due November
   29, 2019.~
                    (S&P Rating AA-; at July 25, 2016)~
   Outstanding..............................................489,000,000
     ORIGINALLY ISSUED November 29, 1984.~
   ~
     BOND FORM - Book-Entry.~
     SECURITY - A direct unsecured obligation, subordinated to senior
   debt, as defined.~
     TRADED - NYSE~
   Fed'l Home Loan Mtg ZERO COUPON DEBS.; Due December 11, 2025.~
                    (S&P Rating AA+; at July 25, 2016)~
   Outstanding............................................1,214,000,000
     NOTE: Issued in minimum denom $500. ~
     ORIGINALLY ISSUED June 30, 1998.~
   ~
     BOND FORM - Book-Entry.~
     SECURITY - A direct unsecured obligation.~
     TRADED - NYSE~


* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITORS- PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS
TRANSFER AGENT & REGISTRAR- Computershare Investor Services LLC


NEWS TABLE OF CONTENTS-
DATE        TITLE
---------   --------------------------------------------------------
17 Feb 17   February 16, 2017, Federal Home Loan Mortgage
            Corporation Reports Earnings Results for the Fourth
            Quarter and Year Ended December 31, 2016
03 Aug 16   August 2, 2016, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
            Announces Unaudited Consolidated Earnings Results for
            the Second Quarter Ended June 30, 2016
03 Aug 16   August 2, 2016, Freddie Mac to Pay Dividend to the U.S.
            Treasury Next Month
19 Feb 16   February 18, 2016, Federal Home Loan Mortgage
            Corporation Reports Consolidated Earnings Results for
            the Fourth Quarter and Full Year Ended December 31, 2015


CROSS REFERENCE: Freddie Mac

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2017


                              21 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Huntsville Item (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 15, 2010 Thursday

USDA Rural Development to host housing fair

BYLINE: Mary Rainwater, The Huntsville Item, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 526 words


July 15--RIVERSIDE -- Those who thought they might never fulfill the dream of
owning their own home may still have that opportunity thanks to American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) and a housing program offered through the
USDA Rural Development office.

The USDA Rural Development Sub-Area Office in Huntsville, which provides
services to Walker County, will be hosting a Housing Fair from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Saturday, July 17, at the Riverside City Hall, located at 2352 FM 980 in
Riverside.

During the event, representatives from USDA Rural Development will be available
to provide information on how to obtain 100 percent financing with no down
payment to purchase an existing home or newly constructed home in eligible rural
areas.

Information will also be available on loans and grants for eligible very
low-income individuals and families for home repair projects

The office announced their allocation for direct single family loans and due to
an increased level of funding as a result of the ARRA, the allocation has more
than $63 million available for direct single family loans.

"USDA Rural Development is proud to assist rural Texans in meeting their housing
needs, which is critical to the long term sustainability of our communities,"
State Director Paco Valentin said in a recent statement. "We urge Texans to seek
information about our housing programs and submit applications while this
funding is still available."

In 2009, USDA Rural Development financed more than $63.4 million in repairs for
more than 5,000 rural homeowners, and provided homeownership loans to more than
140,000 rural Americans.

Under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), which President Obama
signed into law in February of 2009, USDA provided $10.8 billion in loans and
loan guarantees to more than 87,000 home buyers.

Although all available guarantee funds have been committed to loans this fiscal
year, USDA continues to provide home loan funds through its direct home loan
program.

USDA, through its Rural Development mission area, administers and manages more
than 40 housing, business and community infrastructure, and facility programs
through a network of 6,100 employees located in the nation's capital and 500
state and local offices.

These programs are designed to improve the economic stability of rural
communities, businesses, residents, farmers and ranchers and improve the quality
of life in rural America. Rural Development has an existing portfolio of more
than $134 billion in loans and loan guarantees.

For further information about USDA Rural Development's housing programs in
Texas, visit http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/tx/ or contact the Huntsville Sub-Area
Office at (936) 291-1901, extension 4.

To see more of The Huntsville Item or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.itemonline.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Huntsville Item, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100715-IH-USDA-Rural-Development-to-host-housing-fair-20100715

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IH


                       Copyright 2010 The Huntsville Item


                              22 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                       July 23, 2013 Tuesday 11:12 AM GMT

Osborne to detail home loans plans

SECTION: PA NEWS FEEDS

LENGTH: 464 words


George Osborne is meeting major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to discuss an
extension to the Government's flagship housing stimulus programme.

The Chancellor will reveal more details of plans to underwrite £130 billion of
mortgage lending with state guarantees through the Help to Buy scheme.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just 5%. The scheme
has been credited with spurring a surge in home sales and driving up prices.

Mortgage guarantees, due to launch in January, will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a loan. The scheme
aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk for lenders.

Mr Osborne is holding a breakfast meeting at Number 11 Downing Street with
executives from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major
lenders such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays to discuss the scheme.

The initial equity loan stage allows people to buy a new-build home worth up to
£600,000 with a Government loan of up to 20%, interest-free for five years. The
next stage will be extended to existing homes as well as newly-built properties,
and also available on homes worth up to £600,000. It will see the state offer
guarantees totalling up to £12 billion on £130 billion of high loan-to-value
mortgage lending.

Guarantees will only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages, the
Chancellor is expected to announce, while those with impaired credit ratings
will be excluded. It will also not be available to buy a second home, nor will
it be able to be used in conjunction with another state scheme.

However, the guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating
another housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government. Former
Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close for
comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages.

The Bank's deputy governor, Paul Tucker, also warned that it would be "unwise"
as a medium or long-term scheme, saying: "This is not a market that needs a
permanent subsidy," he said recently. "They (home loan guarantees) are devices
for getting out of a hole to dig another one for the future."

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families. Help to Buy is about getting behind those who aspire to own a
home. The mortgage guarantee will support an increase in high loan-to-value
mortgages for people who can't afford large deposits, and it will also boost
housebuilding. As of today lenders have the detail they need to go away and get
ready for next January's launch."

https://www.gov.uk/affordable-home-ownership-schemes/help-to-buy-equity-loans(He
lp to Buy)

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2013 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              23 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                December 6, 1993

FHLB Has Guide to Native American Lending

SECTION: AFFORDABLE HOUSING; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE


Lenders that have been wary of lending to Native Americans, Alaska Natives and
Native Hawaiians because of Federal laws that restrict the use of trust lands as
mortgage collateral now have a guide that catalogs resources available to
support development or rehabilitation on trust lands.

The guide, published by the Federal Home Loan Bank of Seattle, presents an
overview of financing a mortgage on Native lands and summarizes the programs
available to help increase the supply of affordable housing.

One program is the Department of Housing and Urban Development's Loan Guarantee
Program.

This program, authorized by Congress for 1992 and 1993 under the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1992, allows HUD to guarantee up to 100% of the
unpaid principal and interest on a mortgage made on trust land by a private
lender to a native American family or Indian Housing Authority.

The loan can be used to finance construction, purchase or rehabilitation of
single-family homes located on trust land or land located in a Native American
or Alaska Native area.

To be eligible for the loan, a borrower must be Native American or Alaska Native
and the loan may be secured by any collateral that is authorized by existing
Federal law or applicable state or tribal law.

Housing financed under the program must be defined by HUD and the loan term may
not exceed 30 years.

Other HUD programs include Low Income Rental Housing, HOME, Mutual Help
Homeownership Opportunity Program, Indian Community Development Block Grant
Program, Comprehensive Improvement Assistance Program, Comprehensive Grant
Program and the HOPE program (Homeownership and Opportunity for People
Everywhere).

HUD's Office of Native American Programs can provide more detailed information
on these available programs and functions as a resource for tribal lending.

Other agencies offering programs include the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Farmers
Home Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Federal Home Loan
Banks.

The Alaska Housing Finance Corporation also provides some special programs in
Alaska.

The Rural Owner-Occupied Loan Program provides financing to qualified borrowers
for construction, rehab or purchase of rural, owner-occupied, single-family
detached or duplex housing units.

The program provides direct and indirect loans.  Direct loans are mortgage loans
made directly by the Rural Housing Loan Program to the borrower; indirect loans
include the purchase of mortgage loans made by participating lending
institutions.

Borrowers must be at least 18 years old and residents of Alaska.  One of the
units must be occupied by the borrower as his principal place of residence and
the property must be in a small community.

In Hawaii, the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands administers a program under the
Hawaiian Home Commission Act of 1920 that finances repair, new home or
replacement home construction on Hawaiian Home lands.

HUD and the Farmers Home Administration provide programs that insure mortgages
in case of a default and facilitate the repair and replacement of homes for
low-income Hawaiians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              24 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Housebuilders' shares leap after shot in the arm for home loans;
HOUSING MARKET Government promises to support mortgages worth £130bn for
families struggling to raise a deposit

BYLINE: Emma Rowley; Graham Ruddick

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 603 words


HOMEBUILDERS' shares soared after the Chancellor committed billions of pounds of
government backing to get the housing market moving.

The Help to Buy scheme, which follows in the footsteps of Margaret Thatcher's
Right to Buy programme, was lauded by building firms, which said the Chancellor
had "turbo-charged" existing initiatives to stimulate the housing market.

The Government is proposing to provide enough guarantees to support £130bn of
mortgages for families struggling to raise a deposit, and will commit a further
£3.5bn to shared equity loans to buy new-build homes.

The proposals sent shares in Barratt Developments up 7pc, Taylor Wimpey 6pc
higher, and Persimmon climbed 4pc as the market anticipated a boost to home
sales.

Pete Redfern, chief executive of Taylor Wimpey, said: "The measures announced
are great news for those moving on to the housing ladder and for those moving up
it, and will help homebuilders get Britain building. They will help current
owners and add a welcome vibrancy to both the new and second-hand market over
the next three years."

However, the mortgage schemes represent a "significant risk" to the Government,
analysts warned, with comparisons made to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in the US,
bodies which had to be rescued in the run-up to the financial crisis after
offering a similar programme.

Fathom Consulting said the plans amounted to "sub-prime lending". It added: "By
calling it sub-prime, we are not making a moral value judgment. We are simply
pointing out that this measure is aimed directly at making credit available to
borrowers that the banks would not otherwise lend to in the absence of a
significant down-payment.

"Suffice to say that had we been asked to design a policy that would guarantee
maximum damage to the UK's long-term growth prospects and its fragile credit
rating, this would be it." Under the plans, a state-backed mortgage guarantee
scheme, previously available only on new-build homes, will be extended to any
home, Mr Osborne announced.

The nation's balance sheet will be used to back higher loan-to-value mortgages,
to help people who can afford a mortgage - but not a large deposit - to buy
homes. The Chancellor said he would offer £12bn of government guarantees, which
would support £130bn of mortgage lending, under a three-year scheme to run from
the start of 2014.

While the revamped and expanded scheme will no longer be exclusive to
housebuilders - which currently use it under the name NewBuy - they will benefit
from the new set-up, as they will no longer have to guarantee part of the
mortgage loan themselves.

The other flagship move was to commit £3.5bn of capital spending over the next
three years to shared equity loans to buy new-build homes, ramping up the
FirstBuy scheme.

Previously, the scheme was only available to first-time buyers and families with
incomes under £60,000 a year. It will soon be available to any buyer of a
newbuild home, provided the property's price is under £600,000. The loans will
be interest-free for the first five years and repaid when the home is sold.

Mr Osborne told the Commons: "Because it's a financial transaction, with the
taxpayer making an investment and getting a return, it won't hit our deficit."

Chintan Joshi, banking analyst at Nomura, said: "There has been a good amount of
discussion about 'mortgage prisoners' and interest-only mortgage holders who
cannot refinance to cheaper rates as they cannot move banks. These schemes
should be helpful for such mortgage holders."

'Had we been asked to design a policy to damage long-term UK growth prospects,
this would be it'

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Raising the roof: shares in housebuilders rose after the Budget, but
some analysts said the Chancellor's mortgage guarantee scheme amounted to
sub-prime lending
PETER SCHOLEY / ALAMY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              25 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

Housebuilders' shares leap after shot in the arm for home loans;
HOUSING MARKET Government promises to support mortgages worth £130bn for
families struggling to raise a deposit

BYLINE: Emma Rowley; Graham Ruddick

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 618 words


HOMEBUILDERS' shares soared after the Chancellor committed billions of pounds of
government backing to get the housing market moving.

The Help to Buy scheme, which follows in the footsteps of Margaret Thatcher's
Right to Buy programme, was lauded by building firms, which said the Chancellor
had "turbo-charged" existing initiatives to stimulate the housing market.

The Government is proposing to provide enough guarantees to support £130bn of
mortgages for families struggling to raise a deposit, and will commit a further
£3.5bn to shared equity loans to buy newbuild homes. However, it was revealed
last night that the guarantee scheme can also be used by buyers of second homes.

The proposals sent shares in Barratt Developments up 7pc, Taylor Wimpey 6pc
higher, and Persimmon rose 4pc as the market anticipated a boost to home sales.

Pete Redfern, chief executive of Taylor Wimpey, said: "The measures announced
are great news for those moving on to the housing ladder and for those moving up
it, and will help homebuilders get Britain building. They will help current
owners and add a welcome vibrancy to both the new and second-hand market over
the next three years."

However, the mortgage schemes represent a "significant risk" to the Government,
analysts warned, with comparisons made to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in the US,
bodies which had to be rescued in the run-up to the financial crisis after
offering a similar programme.

Fathom Consulting said the plans amounted to "sub-prime lending". It added: "By
calling it sub-prime, we are not making a moral value judgment. We are simply
pointing out that this measure is aimed directly at making credit available to
borrowers that the banks would not otherwise lend to in the absence of a
significant down-payment.

"Suffice to say that had we been asked to design a policy that would guarantee
maximum damage to the UK's long-term growth prospects and its fragile credit
rating, this would be it." Under the plans, a state-backed mortgage guarantee
scheme, previously available only on new-build homes, will be extended to any
home, Mr Osborne announced.

The nation's balance sheet will be used to back higher loan-to-value mortgages,
to help people who can afford a mortgage - but not a large deposit - to buy
homes. The Chancellor said he would offer £12bn of government guarantees, which
would support £130bn of mortgage lending, under a three-year scheme to run from
2014.

While the revamped and expanded scheme will no longer be exclusive to
housebuilders - which currently use it under the name NewBuy - they will benefit
from the new set-up, as they will no longer have to guarantee part of the
mortgage loan themselves.

The other flagship move was to commit £3.5bn of capital spending over the next
three years to shared equity loans to buy new-build homes, ramping up the
FirstBuy scheme.

Previously, the scheme was only available to first-time buyers and families with
incomes under £60,000 a year. It will soon be available to any buyer of a
newbuild home, provided the property's price is under £600,000. The loans will
be interest-free for the first five years and repaid when the home is sold.

Mr Osborne told the Commons: "Because it's a financial transaction, with the
taxpayer making an investment and getting a return, it won't hit our deficit."

Chintan Joshi, banking analyst at Nomura, said: "There has been a good amount of
discussion about 'mortgage prisoners' and interest-only mortgage holders who
cannot refinance to cheaper rates as they cannot move banks. These schemes
should be helpful for such mortgage holders."

'Had we been asked to design a policy to damage long-term UK growth prospects,
this would be it'

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Raising the roof: shares in housebuilders rose after the Budget, but
some analysts said the Chancellor's mortgage guarantee scheme amounted to
sub-prime lending
PETER SCHOLEY / ALAMY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              26 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            April 26, 2008 Saturday

SECTION: DAKOTA WIRE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 486 words


FARGO (AP) - An expanded federal program is offering options for American
Indians, housing officials say.

The federal Department of Housing and Urban Development joined Fargo's Native
American Commission in a forum Thursday at City Hall to teach lenders and real
estate agents about the loan program and to identify barriers that American
Indians and other minorities may face in getting home mortgages.

"Sometimes it's like we're talking past each other instead of talking to each
other, and we're trying to understand that," said Evelyn Meininger, HUD's
regional fair housing director.

Sharon White Bear recalled the humiliation of being denied a home loan because
her credit score was too low when she moved to Fargo.

"They said, 'Well, because of this number, you know, we wouldn't be able to help
you,' and basically we were done," said White Bear, a surgical technician and
Arikara tribal member from the Fort Berthold Reservation.

"So I got up and I left feeling pretty low that day," she said, breaking into
tears.

Seven years later, White Bear is still living in the same two-bedroom apartment,
but now another loan option is available for her and other American Indians
living off reservations.

The Indian Home Loan Guarantee Program, also known as Section 184, offers a low
down payment, no mortgage insurance requirement and flexible underwriting. HUD
guarantees the loan in case the borrower defaults.

Jaclynn Davis Wallette, a Belcourt native and enrolled member of the Turtle
Mountain Band of Chippewa, recalled that when she and her husband moved to Fargo
eight years ago, they decided not to fill out an optional section of their
mortgage application.

"I just remember how difficult it was to not put that check mark beside 'Native
American' on the application, because it's really who we are," said Wallette,
who serves with White Bear on Fargo's Native American Commission.

Congress created the Indian Home Loan program in 1992. It had been available
only to American Indians living on reservations, but it was expanded a year ago
in North Dakota to those living off reservations.

"It is a very good deal from an investor's standpoint," said Dave Flohr, the
single family programs director with the North Dakota Housing Finance Agency.

The state has worked with three lenders on the program, primarily in western
North Dakota, originating about 20 loans in six counties at an average amount of
$72,000, Flohr said.

Jane Cody, a mortgage loan officer with Cornerstone Bank in Fargo, said she
attended Thursday's forum to get training on Section 184 lending so the bank can
start offering it.

"I wasn't aware of the fact that this program was available, and I've been in
the business a long time," she said.

Sam Robertson, chairman of the Native American Commission, said a follow-up
forum will be held a year from now to gauge progress toward Indian home
ownership.

Home loan program discussed for American Indians

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2008 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              27 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               americanbanker.com

                             March 11, 2014 Tuesday

Former VA Mortgage Chief Joins D.C. Consulting Firm;
Department of Veterans Affairs, Collingwood Group, Keith Pedigo

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: REGULATION & REFORM Vol. 1 No. 37

LENGTH: 193  words


A former director of the Department of Veterans Affairs home loan guarantee
program has joined Collingwood Group, a Washington consulting firm.

Keith Pedigo served as the VA loan director for 21 years until he was promoted
in 2008 to a higher position within the department.

Before the leaving loan guarantee program, Pedigo revamped and updated VA's
servicing operations so VA staff could monitor servicers' performance
electronically. VA loans have a very low delinquency rate compared to Federal
Housing Administration-insured loans.

VA originations hit an all-time high in fiscal year 2013 as the agency
guaranteed 629,300 single-family loans.

Former FHA commissioner Brian Montgomery founded Collingwood Group, which offers
advisory services for lenders that do business with FHA, VA, Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.

Pedigo says Collingwood is "unique in the financial services industry and in the
area of government contracts in particular. Companies frequently talk about
promoting small and diverse businesses in government contracting, but I am most
impressed with Collingwood's efforts in support of the small, diverse, and
veteran owned business community."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_BLOG_PEOPLE


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              28 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            December 3, 2012 Monday

FEE INCREASE WILL DING THE 'LITTLE GUY'

BYLINE: JOHN HIELSCHER,

SECTION: D; ARCHIVES; Pg. D08

LENGTH: 723 words


Federal housing agency plans increase in guarantee fees because state is slow in
processing mortgages

HOMEBUYERS IN FLORIDA MAY wind up paying more for loans because the state is
slow in processing mortgages.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency has targeted Florida and four other states to
hike the guarantee fees that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac charge for single-family
mortgages.

The increase would not be substantial -- in Florida, an estimated $56 per year
on a 30-year, $200,000 mortgage -- but it could affect homebuyers who can least
afford it, some local experts say.

"It hurts the little guy," said Sarasota mortgage banker Joe Adamaitis. "The
guys who live and work here in Florida are the ones that ultimately pay the
larger price for this kind of increase."

The FHFA says the higher guarantee fees, commonly known as "g-fees," will help
recover some of excess costs Fannie and Freddie incur when mortgages default in
those states.

Fannie and Freddie, both under FHFA conservatorship, charge g-fees on home loans
that are based on the type of mortgage and the borrower's credit profile.

States like Florida are burdening those government-sponsored enterprises because
their slower foreclosure processing leads to higher costs, the FHFA contends.

Foreclosures take an average 666 days to process in Florida, the fourth-highest
level in the country and much longer than the 396-day national average,
according to FHFA data. The per-day carrying costs to handle non-performing
loans and properties in Florida is 111 percent of the national average.

"Borrowers in states with lower default-related carrying costs are effectively
subsidizing borrowers in states with higher costs," the FHFA said in its
proposal.

As proposed, a fee of 0.20 percent of the loan amount would be charged upfront
for home loans from Florida that were acquired by Fannie or Freddie. Borrowers
in Illinois would be charged 0.15 percent, in Connecticut and New Jersey 0.20
percent and 0.30 percent in New York.

Adamaitis, branch manager of Academy Mortgage Corp. in Sarasota and president of
the Gulf Coast Chapter of the Mortgage Bankers Association of Florida, says the
state is being unfairly penalized.

"This is all based on the fact that Florida cannot foreclose fast enough and the
costs to carry that property. It's a cost of doing business, and the lenders
won't absorb it themselves, so the borrowers are going to pay.

"Anytime you increase the cost to borrowers, it's going to hurt," Adamaitis
said.

The impact may not be felt as strongly here, he said, because many homebuyers
have more money to put down, especially those who are preparing to move to
Florida for retirement.

"Somebody coming from up north, and their interest rate is 3.5 percent there and
3.75 percent here, it's not going to stop them if they are looking for a second
home because they want to be here," he said.

Florida Chief Financial Officer Jeff Atwater blasted the proposal, saying
taxpayers have already spent nearly $190 billion bailing out Fannie and Freddie,
with only a fraction paid back. He says the plan should be withdrawn.

"This proposed fee is nothing more than a back-door housing tax that unfairly
penalizes future homeowners and strains an already fragile housing market,"
Atwater said.

"It is unconscionable to think that more of taxpayers' hard-earned dollars will
be added to their coffers through higher fees," he said.

The pending fee hike would come on top of a nationwide 10 basis-point increase
in g-fees started Dec. 1 by Fannie and Freddie for the next 10 years to fund a
two-month extension of the payroll tax cut, unemployment benefits and Medicare
reimbursements.

The Florida Realtors trade group said it stands with its national counterpart in
opposing the use of g-fees for anything other than their intended purpose.

"While we certainly understand and appreciate the need to bring financial relief
to the middle class, what amounts to effectively imposing a tax on housing isn't
the answer, particularly given the instability of the housing sector," said John
Sebree, senior vice president of public policy at Florida Realtors.

"It makes little sense to tax mortgage originations or the refinances of
middle-class Americans to generate the desired revenue to cover the cost of a
10-month payroll tax extension aimed at providing relief to the middle-class,"
he said.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Joe Adamaitis, branch manager of Academy Mortgage Corp. in Sarasota and
president of the Gulf Coast Chapter of the Mortgage Bankers Association of
Florida, says a change in federal guarantee fees would penalize Florida
unfairly. "The guys who live and work here in Florida are the ones that
ultimately pay the larger price for this kind of increase," he said. STAFF PHOTO
/ DAN WAGNER

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              29 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               MortgageDaily.com

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             August 1, 2016 Monday

G-Fee Disparity Between Large-Small Lenders Eliminated

BYLINE: Mortgage Daily

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 240 words


Aug. 01--A disparity that had once existed between larger and smaller sellers on
guarantee fees charged by the government-sponsored enterprises has been
eliminated.

In general, G-Fees charged by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac during 2015 were little
changed compared to the G-Fees in place as of one year previous.

G-Fees remained similar to 2014 even though the GSEs were directed by their
regulator in April 2015 to eliminate adverse market charges in place since 2008.

That was according to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Single-Family Guarantee Fees in
2015 from the Federal Housing Finance Agency -- which is required under the
Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 to deliver an annual G-Fee report to
Congress.

"Guarantee fees are intended to cover the costs the enterprises incur for
guaranteeing the payment of principal and interest on single-family loans they
acquire from mortgage lenders," the regulator and conservator of the pair of
secondary lenders said. "These costs include projected credit losses from
borrower defaults over the life of the loans, administrative costs, and a return
on capital."

FHFA noted that it directed Fannie and Freddie in late 2012 to remove pricing
concessions for the largest lenders.

As a result, G-Fees charged to the largest and smallest lenders had no material
differences as of 2015.

___ (c)2016 Mortgage Daily Visit Mortgage Daily at www.mortgagedaily.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160801-1MG-G-Fee-Disparity-Between-Large-Small-Lenders-Eliminated-0801-2016080
1

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1MG


                                 Copyright 2016


                              30 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2017 Sheila Greco Associates, LLC
                             SGA Executive Tracker

                        LAST UPDATED: February 14, 2017

                                  Freddie Mac

                            8200 Jones Branch Drive
                             McLean,  VA 22102-3110
                                      USA

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
URL: www.freddiemac.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
TICKER: FMCC
FORTUNE: 43

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EMPLOYEES: 5,959

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *


     ·    Becketti, Sean , Vice President
     ·    Bhatnagar, Bobby , Senior Director
     ·    Bliss, Heather , Audit Manager
     ·    Bojji, Ananda , Director
     ·    Bostic, Raphael , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Brickman, David , Executive Vice President
     ·    Burdette, Kristin , Manager
     ·    Buskirk, William , Vice President
     ·    Byrd, Carolyn , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Callaghan, Kunkun , Vice President
     ·    Censky, Mike , Vice President
     ·    Chiari, Melissa , Director
     ·    Copeland, Jennifer , Senior Consultant
     ·    Corley, Donna , Senior Vice President
     ·    Dabrowski, Halina , Manager
     ·    Danzig, Annie , Director
     ·    Das, Debabrata , Senior Director
     ·    Dawson, Michael , Vice President
     ·    Drummond, Lance , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Fearing, Dru , Vice President
     ·    Foody-Malus, Kathleen , Vice President
     ·    Forde, Sean , Vice President
     ·    Goldstein, Thomas , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Guo, Justin , Director
     ·    Guth, Phil , Vice President
     ·    Hanson, Mark , Senior Vice President
     ·    Harrison, Bruce , Vice President
     ·    Hartnack, Robert , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Henry, Carla , Director
     ·    Hinduja, Anil , Executive Vice President
     ·    Hoffman, Tammy , Vice President
     ·    Hutchins, Michael , Executive Vice President
     ·    Jenkins, Deborah , Senior Vice President
     ·    Johnson, Brian , Senior Director
     ·    Jolly, Chris , Vice President
     ·    Jones, Diana , Manager
     ·    Kenny, Timothy , Senior Vice President
     ·    Kimble, Bob , Vice President
     ·    Kohlhagen, Steven , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Layton, Donald , Chief Executive Officer
     ·    Li, Jun , Director
     ·    Lipson, Michael , Senior Vice President
     ·    Lowman, David , Executive Vice President
     ·    Lux, Rob , Executive Vice President
     ·    Lynch, Christopher , Non-Executive Chairman
     ·    Mackey, James , Executive Vice President
     ·    Makam, Murali , Director
     ·    Markowitz, Jeff , Vice President
     ·    Mathew, Sara , Non-Executive Director
     ·    McAluney Espada, Michele , Director
     ·    McDavid, William , Executive Vice President
     ·    McHale, Sharon , Vice President
     ·    Miller, Ty , Vice President
     ·    Milner, Les , Director
     ·    Miott, Rory , Director
     ·    Mullings, Paul , Senior Vice President
     ·    Myara, Alicia , Senior Vice President
     ·    Naqvi, Saiyed , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Nuxoll, Daniel , Senior Director
     ·    Oriade, Caleb , Director
     ·    Palmer, Kevin , Vice President
     ·    Parsons, Barry , Associate General Counsel
     ·    Pence, Mary Ann , Director
     ·    Petito, Alexander , Vice President
     ·    Pettit, Mark , Vice President
     ·    Post, Mitchell , Vice President
     ·    Prabhu, Nina , Senior Consultant
     ·    Resnick, Mitchell , Vice President
     ·    Retsinas, Nicolas , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Robinson, Dwight , Senior Vice President
     ·    Scheinkman, Daniel , Vice President
     ·    Shanks, Eugene , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Sharma, Kulwant , Director
     ·    Sims, Leslie , Director
     ·    Skehan, Teresa , Director
     ·    Steele, Kelly , Vice President
     ·    Stengler, Charles , Director
     ·    Steward, Boyd , Director
     ·    Stokes, Sharon , Manager
     ·    Stone, Lisa , Vice President
     ·    Stuber, Tom , Vice President
     ·    Sullivan, Eve Dotson , Senior Director
     ·    Synder, Tim , Vice President
     ·    Tarr, Noreen , Director
     ·    Thalingam, Amir , Senior Director
     ·    Thomas, Henry , Director
     ·    Wambeke, Carol , Senior Vice President
     ·    Wandler, Chad , Director
     ·    Weiss, Jerry , Executive Vice President
     ·    Williams, Anthony , Non-Executive Director
     ·    Ziselman, Steven , Practice Leader


* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
INDUSTRY TYPE: Mortgage Investment

   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation operates in the secondary mortgage
market in the United States. The company purchases residential mortgage loans
originated by lenders, as well as invests in mortgage loans and mortgage-related
securities. It operates in three segments: Single-Family Guarantee, Multifamily,
and Investments. The Single-Family Guarantee segment purchases, securitizes, and
guarantees single-family loans originated by its seller/servicers; and manages
single-family mortgage credit risk. This segment serves lenders, including
mortgage banking companies, commercial banks, community banks, credit unions,
other non-depository financial institutions, housing finance agencies (HFAs),
and savings institutions.

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC CODES:
61 - Nondepository Institutions

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *

SALES:  USD 65,655 millions

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017


                              31 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                November 1, 1993

Govt. Programs See Volume Surge

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Federal mortgage guarantee programs reported a surge in volume during fiscal
1993, which ended Sept. 30.

The Federal Housing Administration, the Veterans Affairs Home Loan Program and
the Government National Mortgage Association all saw a significant increase in
demand during the past year of low interest rates.

The FHA insured 944,000 mortgages totaling $ 69 billion in fiscal 1993 through
its single-family housing program.  In fiscal 1992, the FHA insured 660,000
loans totaling $ 47 billion in principal balance.

In addition to lower interest rates, changes made in 1992 to the FHA
single-family program probably contributed to the 47% increase in the FHA's
dollar volume.  The changes eased closing cost requirements and made it easier
to use the streamlined refinancing program.

According to preliminary HUD estimates, refinancings probably exceeded 40% of
FHA volume in fiscal 1993, which would be nearly double the fiscal 1992
refinancing volume.

An increase in the FHA mortgage limit implemented by Congress late last year
apparently has caused a gradual increase in the average FHA loan size.  In
August, the average loan amount was $ 67,000 about $ 4,000 higher than the
average loan amount during earlier months of the year.

Adjustable-rate mortgages accounted for about 10% of the FHA's volume.
Fifteen-year mortgages, which have been popular among refinance borrowers, may
account for 10-15% of the FHA's volume for fiscal 1993, a HUD official said.

The VA Home Loan Program also reached near record originations in fiscal 1993 as
first-time home buyers rushed to take advantage of record low interest rates.

The VA Home Loan Program provided a guarantee for 383,000 loans with a dollar
volume of $ 34.6 billion in fiscal 1993.  The average loan size was $ 90,370.
The VA volume was just short of the program's record, which was set in 1987.

The VA guaranteed mortgages with a balance of $ 34.8 billion in 1987.  In fiscal
1992, the VA guaranteed 266,000 residential mortgage loans with a total
principal balance of $ 23 billion.

Refinancings were a also big factor in the surge of VA business.

Refinancings increased 144% from the fiscal 1992 level.

The VA program reported that 161,000, or 42% of fiscal 1993 originations, were
for refinancings.

The VA program may also have benefited from some program changes.  Congress
extended eligibility for the program to members of the Reserve and National
Guard effective in October of 1992.  Members of the Guard and Reserve accounted
for 1.6% of VA guaranteed loans.

Keith Pedigo, director of loan guaranty services at the VA, said that as the
fiscal year progressed, the number of loans being made to Guard and Reserve
members increased month by month as more people became familiar with the
benefit.

Adjustable rate mortgages accounted for about 4% of VA originations in the 11
months since the VA gained authority to offer a guarantee on ARMs.

Most FHA and VA guaranteed loans are securitized through the Government National
Mortgage Association.

The GNMA guaranteed $ 109 billion of mortgage-backed securities in fiscal 1993,
up from $ 87 billion in fiscal 1992.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, GNMA-MBS Issuance 1986-1993, 12-month earnings as of Sept. 30.
Dollars given in billions.  Source: HUD

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              32 of 998 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2017 Thomson Financial, All Rights Reserved
                            Reuters Knowledge Direct

                                 March 27, 2017

                        Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp

                              8200 Jones Branch Dr
                            MC LEAN,  VA 22102-3107
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: Main Phone: 1-703-9032000
FAX: 1-703-9032759
URL: Home Page: http://www.freddiemac.com
E-MAIL: investor_inquiry@freddiemac.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
TICKER: FMCC, FMCKM
CUSIP: 313400301, 313400673
IRS No.: 520904874
CIK: 0001026214
ISIN: US3134003017US3134006739
SEDOL: 2334150B3DDBP8
Reuters Instrument Code: FMCC.PK, FMCKM.PK
Display RIC: FMCC.PK, FMCKM.PK

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
PLACE OF INCORPORATION: District of Columbia
LEGAL STATUS: Equity Issue
OPERATING STATUS: Active
EMPLOYEES: 5,959

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *



OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS
NAME            CURRENT TITLE (DATE)      OFFICER      DIRECTOR     AGE   SEX
                                          SINCE        SINCE
Mr. Donald      Chief Executive Officer,  2012         2012         65    M
Layton          Director (2012)
Mr. James       Chief Financial Officer,  2013                      48    M
Mackey          Executive Vice President
                (2013)
Mr. Jerry Weiss Executive Vice President, 2003                      57    M
                Chief Administrative
                Officer (2011)
Mr. Robert Lux  Executive Vice President, 2010                      52    M
                Chief Information Officer
                (2015)
Mr. William     Executive Vice President, 2012                      69    M
McDavid         General Counsel,
                Corporate Secretary
                (2012)
Mr. Anil        Executive Vice President  2015                      52    M
Hinduja         - Chief Enterprise Risk
                Officer (2015)
Mr. Michael     Executive Vice President  2013                      60    M
Hutchins        - Investments and Capital
                Markets (2015)
Mr. David       Executive Vice President  2013                      58    M
Lowman          - Single family Business
                (2013)
Mr. David       Senior Vice President -   2011                      50    M
Brickman        Multifamily (2011)
Mr. Christopher Non-Executive Independent              2008         58    M
Lynch           Chairman of the Board
                (2011)
Mr. Raphael     Independent Director                   2015         49    M
Bostic          (2015)
Ms. Carolyn     Independent Director                   2008         68    F
Byrd            (2008)
Mr. Lance       Independent Director                   2015         61    M
Drummond        (2015)
Mr. Thomas      Independent Director                   2014         57    M
Goldstein       (2014)

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation is a government-sponsored enterprise
(GSE). The Company is engaged in purchasing residential mortgage loans
originated by lenders. The Company also invests in mortgage loans and
mortgage-related securities. The Company's segments include Single-family
Guarantee, Multifamily, Investments and All Other. The Single-family Guarantee
segment includes the purchase, securitization and guarantee of single-family
loans and the management of single-family credit risk. The Multifamily segment
includes the purchase, securitization and guarantee of multifamily loans and
securities; its investments in these loans and securities, and the management of
multifamily mortgage credit risk and mortgage market spread risk. The
Investments segment manages its mortgage-related investments portfolio
(excluding Multifamily segment investments, single-family seriously delinquent
loans, and the credit risk of single-family performing loans), treasury function
and interest-rate risk. It packages the mortgage loans into mortgage-related
securities, which are guaranteed by the Company and are sold in the global
capital markets.

Single-Family Guarantee

   The Company purchases loans that lenders originate and then pool those loans
into mortgage-related securities that are sold in the capital markets. The
Company's primary single-family mortgage securitization and guarantee process
involves its issuance of single-class participation certificates (PCs), which
are pass-through securities that represent undivided beneficial interests in
trusts that hold pools of loans. It issues PCs in guarantor swap transactions,
in which the Company's customers provide it with loans in exchange for PCs. It
also issues PCs in transactions, in which it purchases performing loans
(securitization pipeline) and securitize them for retention in its
mortgage-related investments portfolio or for sale to third parties.

   The Company's resecuritization products represent beneficial interests in
pools of PCs and certain other types of mortgage assets. It creates these
securities by using PCs or its previously issued resecuritization products as
the underlying collateral. It issues various types of resecuritization products,
such as Giant PCs, Stripped Giant PCs, Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduits
(REMICs) and Other securitization products. It provides a guarantee on mortgage
assets held by third parties, in exchange for management and guarantee fees,
without securitizing those assets. Its credit risk transfer transactions are
designed to transfer a portion of the expected credit losses and a significant
portion of credit losses in a stressed economic environment on groups of
previously acquired loans to third-party investors.

   In structured agency credit risk (STACR) debt notes transaction, the Company
creates a reference pool of loans from its single-family book and an associated
securitization structure with notional credit risk positions, such as first
loss, mezzanine and senior positions. It issues STACR debt notes related to
certain of the notional credit risk positions to third-party investors and
retain the remaining credit risk. In Agency Credit Insurance Structure (ACIS)
insurance policies transaction, it purchases insurance policies (underwritten by
a group of insurers and reinsurers) that provide credit protection for certain
specified credit events that occur and are allocated to the non-issued notional
credit risk positions of a STACR debt note transaction. In Whole loan securities
transaction and Senior subordinate securitization structures, the Company issues
guaranteed senior securities and unguaranteed subordinated securities backed by
single-family loans. In Seller indemnification agreement transaction, it enters
into an agreement upon loan acquisition with a seller under which the seller
will absorb a portion of losses on the related single-family loans in exchange
for a fee or a reduction in its guarantee fee. In Deep mortgage insurance credit
risk transfer, the Company purchases a credit enhancement from affiliates of
mortgage insurance companies. It also uses other types of credit enhancements,
such as primary mortgage insurance, to mitigate its credit risk exposure. The
Company's customers in the Single-family Guarantee segment are financial
institutions that originate, sell and perform the ongoing servicing of loans for
new or existing homeowners. These companies include mortgage banking companies,
commercial banks, community banks, credit unions, other non-depository financial
institutions and savings institutions.

   Multifamily

   The Company's Multifamily segment provides liquidity to the multifamily
market and supports a supply of workforce housing by purchasing and securitizing
loans secured by properties with five or more units. In its Multifamily segment,
the Company issues various types of securitization, guarantee, and credit risk
transfer products. Its primary securitization and credit risk transfer products
include K Certificates and SB Certificates. The Company is engaged in purchasing
of multifamily loans for aggregation and securitization through the issuance of
multifamily K Certificates, which allows it to transfer the expected and stress
credit losses of the loans to third-party investors. It also purchases small
balance multifamily loans for aggregation and securitization through the
issuance of multifamily SB Certificates. It also issues other securitization
products, including PCs, K Certificates without subordination, Q Certificates
and M Certificates.

   The Company guarantees mortgage-related assets held by third parties in
exchange for guarantee fee income without securitizing these assets. Its other
credit risk transfer products include Structured Credit Risk (SCR) debt notes.
Its investing activities include mortgage loans, agency mortgage-related
securities, non-agency mortgage-related securities, swaptions on credit indices
and commercial mortgage-backed security (CMBS). It provides post-construction
financing to apartment project operators.

   Investments

   The Investments segment manages products, such as agency mortgage-related
securities, non-agency mortgage-related securities, single-family unsecuritized
loans, and other investments and cash portfolio. Its activities with respect to
agency mortgage-related securities product include purchases and sales, dollar
roll transactions and structuring activities. Its single-family unsecuritized
loans are classified into over three categories, including loans acquired
through its cash loan purchase program that are awaiting securitization;
reperforming loans and performing modified loans, and delinquent loans that it
has removed from PC pools. Its other investments and cash portfolio consists of
the Liquidity and Contingency Operating Portfolio; cash and other investments
held by consolidated trusts; collateral pledged by derivative and other
counterparties; investments in unsecured agency debt, and advances to lenders.
The Company's treasury function manages the funding needs of the Company,
including the Investments segment, primarily through the issuance of unsecured
other debt. The type and term of debt issued is based on a range of factors and
is designed to meet ongoing cash needs, and to comply with its Liquidity
Management Framework. It uses various types of products, such as securities sold
under agreements to repurchase; discount notes and reference bills, medium-term
notes and reference notes securities as part of its funding and liquidity
management activities. Under collateralized short-term borrowings, the Company
sells securities to a counterparty with an agreement to repurchase those
securities at a future date.

   The Company issues short-term instruments with maturities of one year or
less. These products are sold on a discounted basis, paying principal only at
maturity. Reference Bills are auctioned to dealers on a regular schedule, while
discount notes are issued in response to investor demand and its cash needs. It
issues a range of fixed-rate and variable-rate medium-term notes, including
callable and non-callable securities, and zero-coupon securities, with various
maturities. Reference Notes securities are non-callable fixed-rate securities,
which it issues with original maturities greater than or equal to two years. Its
unsecured other debt securities and structured mortgage-related securities are
initially purchased by dealers and redistributed to their customers. The
customers for these securities include state and local governments, insurance
companies, money managers, central banks, depository institutions and pension
funds.

   The Company competes with Federal National Mortgage Association, Government
National Mortgage Association, Federal Farm Credit Banks, Federal Housing
Administration, the United States Department of Veterans Affairs and Federal
Home Loan Banks.

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
PRIMARY NAICS:
522293 - International Trade Financing
SECONDARY NAICS:
522291 - Consumer Lending
522292 - Real Estate Credit
522298 - All Other Non-Depository Credit Intermediation
52599 - Other Financial Vehicles
PRIMARY SIC:
6111 - Federal & Fed.-Sponsored Credit
SECONDARY SIC:
6082 - Foreign Trade/international Banks
6141 - Personal Credit Institutions
6162 - Mortgage Bankers/correspondents
6159 - Misc Business Credit Institutions
6726 - Investment Offices, Nec
COMPETITORS:

     ·    Federal National Mortgage Assctn Fnni Me
     ·    American Express Company
     ·    Visa Inc
     ·    Mastercard Inc
     ·    Discover Financial Services


* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: December 31, 2016

MOST RECENT EXCHANGE RATE:  1.0
CHART OF ACCOUNTS:  Industry
ACCOUNTING STANDARD:  U.S. GAAP
LATEST AVAILABLE ANNUAL:  20170327

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Cash & Equivalents                  12,369,000       5,595,000      10,928,000
Cash and Short Term                 12,369,000       5,595,000      10,928,000
Investments
Receivables - Other                  6,135,000       6,074,000       6,034,000
Total Receivables, Net               6,135,000       6,074,000       6,034,000
LT Investments - Other             163,095,000     177,859,000     188,890,000
Long Term Investments              163,095,000     177,859,000     188,890,000
Defered Income Tax - Long Term      15,818,000      18,205,000      19,498,000
Asset
Restricted Cash - Long Term          9,851,000      14,533,000       8,535,000
Other Long Term Assets, Total       25,669,000      32,738,000      28,033,000
Other Assets                     1,816,108,000   1,763,626,000   1,709,096,000
Other Assets, Total              1,816,108,000   1,763,626,000   1,709,096,000
Total Assets                     2,023,376,000   1,985,892,000   1,945,539,000



LIABILITIES ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Accrued Expenses                     6,015,000       6,183,000       6,325,000
Current Port. of LT                 71,451,000     113,569,000     134,619,000
Debt/Capital Leases
Long Term Debt                   1,930,553,000   1,856,700,000   1,794,923,000
Total Long Term Debt             1,930,553,000   1,856,700,000   1,794,923,000
Total Debt                       2,002,004,000   1,970,269,000   1,929,542,000
Other Liabilities                   10,282,000       6,500,000       7,021,000
Other Liabilities, Total            10,282,000       6,500,000       7,021,000
Total Liabilities                2,018,301,000   1,982,952,000   1,942,888,000



EQUITY ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Redeemable Preferred Stock          86,445,000      86,445,000      86,445,000
Redeemable Preferred Stock,         86,445,000      86,445,000      86,445,000
Total
Retained Earnings (Accumulated    (77,941,000)    (80,773,000)    (81,639,000)
Deficit)
Treasury Stock - Common            (3,885,000)     (3,885,000)     (3,885,000)
Unrealized Gain (Loss)                 915,000       1,740,000       2,546,000
Minimum Pension Liability               21,000          34,000        (13,000)
Adjustment
Other Comprehensive Income           (480,000)       (621,000)       (803,000)
Other Equity, Total                  (459,000)       (587,000)       (816,000)
Total Equity                         5,075,000       2,940,000       2,651,000
Total Liabilities &              2,023,376,000   1,985,892,000   1,945,539,000
Shareholders' Equity
Shares Outs - Common Stock             650,047         650,046         650,044
Primary Issue
Total Common Shares                    650,047         650,046         650,044
Outstanding



SUPPLEMENTAL ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Treas Shares - Common Stock                 76              76              76
Prmry Issue



FOOTNOTE
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Full-Time Employees                      5,959           5,416           4,957
Part-Time Employees                         45              46              50
Number of Common Shareholders            1,740           1,803           1,818
Non-Curr Derivative Liab.              795,000       1,254,000       1,963,000
Hedging, Suppl



RATIOS
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Net Debt Incl. Pref.Stock &      2,076,080,000   2,051,119,000   2,005,059,000
Min.Interest('000 USD)
Tangible Book Value, Common       (81,370,000)    (83,505,000)    (83,794,000)
Equity('000 USD)
Tangible Book Value per Share,            -125            -128            -129
Common Eq (USD)



FOOTNOTE DEBT ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Total Long Term Debt,                1,887,388       1,817,477       1,759,684
Supplemental
Long Term Debt Maturing within          92,831          58,765          58,841
1 Year
Long Term Debt Maturing in              71,392          91,544          72,503
Year 2
Long Term Debt Maturing in              46,436          48,189          77,482
Year 3
Long Term Debt Maturing in              13,274          31,352          30,850
Year 4
Long Term Debt Maturing in              20,372          26,697          30,671
Year 5
Long Term Debt Maturing in 2-3         117,828         139,733         149,985
Years
Long Term Debt Maturing in 4-5          33,646          58,049          61,521
Years
Long Term Debt Matur. in Year        1,643,083       1,560,930       1,489,337
6 & Beyond
Total Operating Leases,                     39              35              29
Supplemental
Operating Lease Payments Due                11              11               9
in Year 1
Operating Lease Payments Due                 9               8               7
in Year 2
Operating Lease Payments Due                 9               6               4
in Year 3
Operating Lease Payments Due                 6               5               3
in Year 4
Operating Lease Payments Due                 3               3               3
in Year 5
Operating Lease Pymts. Due in               18              14              11
2-3 Years
Operating Lease Pymts. Due in                9               8               6
4-5 Years
Oper. Lse. Pymts. Due in Year                1               2               3
6 & Beyond

* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Net Sales                           59,328,000      60,655,000      62,411,000
Revenue                             59,328,000      60,655,000      62,411,000
Total Revenue                       59,328,000      60,655,000      62,411,000
Cost of Revenue                     44,949,000      45,709,000      48,148,000
Cost of Revenue, Total              44,949,000      45,709,000      48,148,000
Gross Profit                        14,379,000      14,946,000      14,263,000
Selling/General/Administrative       1,016,000         952,000         967,000
Expense
Labor & Related Expense                989,000         975,000         914,000
Selling/General/Admin.               2,005,000       1,927,000       1,881,000
Expenses, Total
Impairment-Assets Held for             269,000       (216,000)       (556,000)
Sale
Unusual Expense (Income)               269,000       (216,000)       (134,000)
Other Operating Expense              (204,000)     (1,159,000)         296,000
Other, Net                           1,439,000       1,305,000         971,000
Other Operating Expenses,            1,235,000         146,000       1,267,000
Total
Total Operating Expense             48,458,000      47,566,000      51,162,000
Operating Income                    10,870,000      13,089,000      11,249,000
Investment Income -                  (948,000)     (5,030,000)     (7,357,000)
Non-Operating
Interest/Invest Income -             (948,000)     (5,030,000)     (7,357,000)
Non-Operating
Interest                             (948,000)     (5,030,000)     (7,357,000)
Inc.(Exp.),Net-Non-Op., Total
Other Non-Operating Income           1,717,000       1,215,000       7,110,000
(Expense)
Other, Net                           1,717,000       1,215,000       7,110,000
Net Income Before Taxes             11,639,000       9,274,000      11,002,000
Provision for Income Taxes           3,824,000       2,898,000       3,312,000
Net Income After Taxes               7,815,000       6,376,000       7,690,000
Net Income Before Extra. Items       7,815,000       6,376,000       7,690,000
Preferred Dividends                (7,718,000)     (6,399,000)    (10,026,000)
Income Available to Com Excl            97,000        (23,000)     (2,336,000)
ExtraOrd
Basic Weighted Average Shares        3,234,000       3,235,000       3,236,000
Basic EPS Excluding                          0               0             (1)
Extraordinary Items
Diluted Weighted Average             3,234,000       3,235,000       3,236,000
Shares
Diluted EPS Excluding ExtraOrd               0               0             (1)
Items



EXTRAORDINARY ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Net Income                           7,815,000       6,376,000       7,690,000
Income Available to Com Incl            97,000        (23,000)     (2,336,000)
ExtraOrd



NORMALIZED ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Total Special Items                    269,000       (216,000)       (134,000)
Normalized Income Before Taxes      11,908,000       9,058,000      10,868,000
Effect of Special Items on              88,380        (67,497)        (40,339)
Income Taxes
Inc Tax Ex Impact of Sp Items        3,912,380       2,830,503       3,271,661
Normalized Income After Taxes        7,995,620       6,227,497       7,596,339
Normalized Inc. Avail to Com.          277,620       (171,503)     (2,429,661)
Basic Normalized EPS                         0               0             (1)
Diluted Normalized EPS                       0               0             (1)



RATIOS
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Gross Margin                                24              25              23
Operating Margin                            18              22              18
Pretax Margin                               20              15              18
Effective Tax Rate                          33              31              30
Net Profit Margin                            0               0              -4
Normalized EBIT('000 USD)           11,139,000      12,873,000      11,115,000



FOOTNOTE TAX ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Current Tax - Domestic               1,037,000       1,243,000       1,028,000
Current Tax - Total                  1,037,000       1,243,000       1,028,000
Deferred Tax - Domestic              2,787,000       1,655,000       2,284,000
Deferred Tax - Total                 2,787,000       1,655,000       2,284,000
Income Tax - Total                   3,824,000       2,898,000       3,312,000



SUPPLEMENTAL ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Basic EPS Including                          0               0             (1)
Extraordinary Items
Diluted Net Income                          97            (23)         (2,336)
Diluted EPS Including ExtraOrd               0               0             (1)
Items



FOOTNOTE
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Interest Expense, Supplemental      50,595,000      51,916,000      54,916,000
Interest Expense (Financial         44,949,000      45,709,000      48,148,000
Oper), Suppl
Labor & Related Expense Suppl.         989,000         975,000         914,000

* * * * * * * * * * CASHFLOW STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Net Income/Starting Line             7,815,000       6,376,000       7,690,000
Deferred Taxes                       2,787,000       1,655,000       2,284,000
Unusual Items                          211,000         240,000         422,000
Other Non-Cash Items               (4,638,000)     (4,022,000)       1,708,000
Non-Cash Items                     (4,427,000)     (3,782,000)       2,130,000
Accrued Expenses                     (113,000)        (83,000)       (324,000)
Taxes Payable                      (1,230,000)       1,022,000         268,000
Other Operating Cash Flow               27,000     (6,122,000)     (3,163,000)
Changes in Working Capital         (1,316,000)     (5,183,000)     (3,219,000)
Cash from Operating Activities       4,859,000       (934,000)       8,885,000
Sale/Maturity of Investment        142,414,000      73,658,000      88,881,000
Investment, Net                    185,570,000     171,442,000     180,558,000
Purchase of Investments          (132,351,000)    (47,432,000)    (67,767,000)
Other Investing Cash Flow         (26,405,000)    (18,722,000)       3,596,000
Other Investing Cash Flow          169,228,000     178,946,000     205,268,000
Items, Total
Cash from Investing Activities     169,228,000     178,946,000     205,268,000
Total Cash Dividends Paid          (4,983,000)     (5,510,000)    (19,610,000)
Short Term Debt, Net                   (6,000)         (5,000)         (7,000)
Long Term Debt Issued              913,344,000     784,652,000     576,741,000
Long Term Debt Reduction       (1,075,668,000)   (962,482,000)   (771,630,000)
Long Term Debt, Net              (162,324,000)   (177,830,000)   (194,889,000)
Issuance (Retirement) of Debt,   (162,330,000)   (177,835,000)   (194,896,000)
Net
Cash from Financing Activities   (167,313,000)   (183,345,000)   (214,506,000)
Net Change in Cash                   6,774,000     (5,333,000)       (353,000)
Net Cash - Beginning Balance         5,595,000      10,928,000      11,281,000
Net Cash - Ending Balance           12,369,000       5,595,000      10,928,000
Cash Interest Paid                  60,862,000      61,120,000      62,257,000
Cash Taxes Paid                      2,324,000       1,095,000         760,000

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *
COMPANY SPECIFIC:


Balance Sheet
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Cash Flow
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Descriptive
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Efficiency Ratios
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Financial Strength
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Growth Rates
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Income Statement
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Management Effectiveness
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Per Share Ratios
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Price Related
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Profitability Ratios
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00



Share Related Items
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,023,376,000
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    2,023,376,000
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      2,004,634,000
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                    (81,370,000)
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (81,370,000)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                   (83,505,000)
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        5,075,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      12,369,000
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                      12,369,000
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                      2,018,301,000
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                    2,018,301,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                   1,930,553,000
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                  1,930,553,000
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      6,135,000
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          6,135,000
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          5,075,000
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        5,075,000
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                   2,002,004,000
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       2,002,004,000
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                     4,983,000
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                     (124,000)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                     (2,504,000)
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         (124,000)
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                         160.84
%, FY
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                         1,502
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        31
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     71
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .03
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                     1,374,066,000
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         3,262,505,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                     1,311,462,000
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                             9.72
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                 9.60
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                   9.72
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                        10,431,300.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             9,860,208.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               9,956,033.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent fiscal year                          1,168.86
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              1,207.86
Debt Service to EPS - trailing 12 month                                4,157.44
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               11.75
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                                4.63
Interest coverage - trailing 12 month                                     22.97
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                  95.41
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                      95.41
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                              38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter                                  38,040.45
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                      63,153.06
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                           96.19
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                               96.19
Reinvestment Rate - most recent fiscal year                              100.00
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Reinvestment Rate - trailing 12 month                                    100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         98.94
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             98.94
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             99.75
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                            99.75
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                     39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter                         39,448.36
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                      67,015.95
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                           .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .54
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                   .54
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                        1.89
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                    1.89
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            -10.97
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                           1,856.29
EPS Change % - year over year                                            521.80
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                               521.94
EPS growth rate, 10 year                                                 -36.92
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          24.25
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           -2.49
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         -11.00
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                    1,857.90
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                 521.74
Net Income Change % - year over year                                     521.74
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                         -4.42
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                            .23
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                            -2.19
Revenue Change %, year over year                                          -2.19
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                               3.69
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               -9.85
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               -9.78
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                         -3.40
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -33.54
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                    44,949,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                        10,764,000
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                     44,949,000
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                        7,815,000
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                      4,847,000
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                       7,815,000
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        7,995,620
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                      11,639,000
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                     7,363,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                      11,639,000
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                       11,908,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                            11,139,000
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                 2,393,000
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                  11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                           11,139,000
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                        12,873,000
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                2,393,000
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 11,139,000
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                     50,595,000
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                    12,072,000
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      50,595,000
Net Income available to common - most recent                             97,000
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            372,000
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                             97,000
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                       277,620
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                       7,815,000
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                         59,328,000
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             14,649,000
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         60,655,000
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                               59,328,000
Tax rate - 5 year average                                                -22.19
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year                                        32.86
Tax rate - most recent fiscal year -1                                     31.25
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                            34.17
Tax rate - trailing 12 month                                              32.86
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                       3,824,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           2,516,000
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             3,824,000
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                      7,815,000
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                                    79
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          7,973,039
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                   .82
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                               .39
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                              .96
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                                .32
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                                .39
Return on investment - 5 year average                                       .88
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                              .41
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                 1.00
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                    .41
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                               7,807
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                             7,807
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           19,028
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          19,028
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            3,444
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                               30
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                              115
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                             (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                                    30
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                              30
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                             115
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                                   (7)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                              30
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                               86
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                            (38)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (1,992)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                            (7)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                          (3,072)
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            (774)
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                         5,530
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                               (38)
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                         2,969,868
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                        2,969,868
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            18,345
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,169
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,530
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             18,345
P/E Basic excluding extraordinary items - TTM                            124.67
P/E excluding extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                         124.67
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                           12.50
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                  124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                   124.71
P/E excluding extraordinary items, most recent                            82.66
fiscal year
P/E including extraordinary items - TTM                                   82.63
P/E Normalized, most recent fiscal year                                   28.88
Price to sales - most recent fiscal year                                    .03
Price to sales - most recent quarter                                        .03
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .09
Price to sales - trailing 12 month                                          .03
Price to Tangible Book - most fiscal year                                   .32
Price to Tangible Book - most recent quarter                                .32
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .48
Price to Equity - most recent interim period                                .48
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             20.45
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    18.78
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          18.78
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 24.24
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 24.64
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             24.25
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        26.52
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          24.24
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        25.46
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                          13.17
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          10.51
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 33.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                             10.51
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                   13.17
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                             18.32
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             21.58
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         19.04
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                     8.19
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                      18.32
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                19.62
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                15.29
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            20.83
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       50.26
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                         19.62
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             3.38
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            3.99
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                              3.38
Float                                                                    650.04
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                      1,611,484
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                          3,234.75
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                         3,234.00
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                       3,234.00
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                      3,234.00
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                         650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                             650.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                           650.05
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             650.05
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                      3,234.75
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                         3,234.00
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                        3,234.00
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                           100.00

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
SECURITY TYPE: Ordinary Shares
EXCHANGE: Over The Counter
TOTAL SHARES OUTSTANDING: 650,053,863
NUMBER OF SHAREHOLDERS: 1,740
LISTING TYPE:  Ordinary Shares

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP


COUNTRY AND REGIONAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION


('000 USD)
                                                  12/31/201 12/31/201 12/31/201
                                                  6         5         4
Investments                    Income Tax - Total 1,873,000 1,715,000 1,945,000
Investments                    Income After Tax   2,170,000 1,778,000 4,520,000

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017


                              33 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 July 12, 1993

Measure Increases Some Mortgage Credit Levels

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A supplemental appropriations bill recently signed by President Clinton
increases the credit limits for several mortgage guarantee programs.

Without an increase, both the Federal Housing Administration and the Government
National Mortgage Association may be forced to suspend business before the end
of the government's fiscal year.  The fiscal year runs until September 30.

The FHA received permission to insure $ 43 billion in additional one-to-four
family mortgages above its previous credit limitation, brining the FHA's total
credit limit for this year to $ 100 billion.

Likewise, the Government National Mortgage Association received permission to
issue an additional $ 30 billion in guarantee on mortgage-backed securities this
year.  The GNMA guarantees securities backed by government-insured loans.

Prior to the supplemental appropriations, the FHA and the GNMA had been subject
to credit limits of $ 57 billion and $ 78 billion, respectively.

During the first eight months of fiscal 1993, the FHA had endorsed $ 40 billion
of mortgages for insurance and the GNMA had issued $ 60 billion in
mortgage-backed securities commitments.

A HUD official said the FHA would have risked running out of credit authority in
August without the supplemental legislation.

The legislation was needed because both the FHA and the GNMA were doing business
at a pace that was not anticipated when the credit limits were established last
year.

The increase in FHA activity was generated by financing activity this year and
lower FHA closing costs that went into effect last October.

The appropriations bill also gave the Federal Housing Administration authority
to insure an additional $ 500 million of loans under its General Insurance and
Special Risk Insurance funds, which largely cover multifamily housing and mobile
homes.

The heavily subsidized funds have been the subject of controversy because of
high losses and the conference committee cut the extra GI/SRI credit authority
to half the amount recommended by the Senate.

To offset the anticipated credit subsidy on the GI/SRI accounts, the legislation
transferred money from "flexible subsidy" accounts to support the two insurance
funds.

"The conferees have reluctantly agreed to these offset only to guarantee that
the GI and SRI funds do not run out of funds in 1993," the conference report
accompanying the bill stated.

Neither the GNMA or the FHA single-family programs require a credit subsidy
because premiums are anticipated to be sufficient to cover losses.

The Farmers Home Administration's guarantee rural home loan program, which had
suspended operation because of a shortage of guarantee authority, also received
permission to issue additional loan guarantees.

The supplemental appropriations act gave the FmHA an additional $ 250 million in
loan guarantee authority for the rural housing program.

Previously, the FmHA credit limitation had been $ 330 million for unsubsidized,
guaranteed rural housing loans.

An earlier proposal to infuse new credit authority into the rural housing
program died when the President's economic stimulus bill was defeated in April.
The program has essentially been halted as a result.

The new funds probably will benefit only loan applications that are already in
the pipeline, an FmHA spokesman said.

The FmHA's guaranteed farm ownership and farm operating loan programs do not
appear to need additional credit authority.

The farm operating program has used only about half of its $ 1.5 billion credit
limitation.  The farm-ownership loan guarantee program has about $ 100 million
of its $ 488 million credit limitation remaining.

Because the Veterans Home Looan Program is considered a benefit, it is not
subject to a credit limitation.

Like the FHA, however, the VA is doing a brisk business.  During the first eight
months of fiscal 1993, the VA guaranteed 228,000 home loans, compared to 171,000
during the same period a year earlier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              34 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 20, 1992

Critics Say Guaranteed Lending Has Hurt Rural Mortgages

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: FARM AND RURAL MORTGAGES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


While the Farmers Home Administration rural home loan guarantee program is
receiving high marks, critics say the shift from direct lending to guaranteed
lending has reduced government support for rural housing.

The Bush Administration has proposed $ 300 million in unsubsidized rural
mortgage guarantees for next year and $ 400 million in interest-assisted rural
mortgage guarantees.

Congress appropriated $ 330 million for unsubsidized guaranteed lending in
fiscal 1992.  No interest-assisted loan guarantee authority was approved.

During fiscal 1991, a start-up year, FmHA used almost all of the $ 20 million
appropriated for subsidized single-family rural mortgage guarantees.

However, only 12% of the $ 70 million appropriated for unsubsidized mortgages
was used.

The Administration believes lenders have become more knowledgeable about the
guaranteed loan program and participation is growing.

The average home mortgage in the guarantee program is $ 52.910.

The farm agency estimates that more than 13,000 rural homebuyers would be
assisted next year under the Administration's proposed budget.

But rural housing advocates say more needs to be done to close a credit gap in
rural America.

The National Rural Housing Coalition said that rural financial institutions have
been hard hit by the S&L crisis and the recession, creating a shortage of
mortgage finance.

On average, rural homebuyers pay higher than metropolitan buyers, according to
the Coalition.

Moreover, rural mortgage terms average 21 years as opposed to 29 years for
metropolitan are mortgages.  Monthly payments are 15% higher as a result.

The Coalition says the shift from FmHA direct lending to guaranteed lending has
not been entirely smooth.

"The lack of interest on the part of local financial institutions has made it
difficult for the agency to fully use the authority provided," Art Collins, vice
president of the Coalition, told a congressional panel.

The Coalition urged Congress to increase emphasis on direct FmHA rural housing
loans.

Other interest groups believe the income threshhold should be raised to allow
more participation in the rural home loan guarantee program.

The National Association of Realtors said the income limit, currently at 100% of
an area median income, reduces use of the program and concentrates risk.

Raising the limit would reduce the government's risk exposure, NAR believes.

Stephen Ashley, chairman of Sibley Mortgage Corp., also told a congressional
panel that the income limit should be raised to 115% of the area median.

"The Section 502 Guaranteed Program has much promise.  Interest in the program
has spawned significant cooperation among FmHA, secondary mortgage market
agencies and lenders." Mr. Ashley said in written testimony.

He also said that increasing the volume of guarantee authority would stimulate
more lender interest.

Low-income housing advocates say FmHA's direct loan and rental assistance
programs also should be enhanced to help meet affordable housing needs in rural
America.

Rural areas had 22% of the U.S. population in 1990 but accounted for 27% of
persons below the poverty line, according to the Housing Assistance Council.

About 4.3 million rural households live in substandard housing or pay more than
30% of their income in housing costs, according to the National Housing Task
Force.

"The increasing lack of mortgage credit in rural areas in an impediment to
growth," said Earnest Beresh, vice president of the Housing Assistance Council.

Between 1983 and 1989, the number of thrifts in rural areas fell by 20%,
according to the HAC.

Increasing secondary market purchases of rural mortgages and expanding the
Community Reinvestment Act guidelines to target rural lending would help ease
the credit shortage, Mr. Beresh said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              35 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 22, 1993

Espy Seeks Better FmHA Administration

SECTION: FARM AND RURAL MORTGAGES; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 210 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy told a congressional panel recently that he
hopes to improve management of Farmers Home Administration loan programs and
reduce losses.

The USDA operates single-family housing loan programs, a housing preservation
grant program and a multifamily rental housing program with rental assistance.

Since the 1960s, the Farmers Home Administration has made more than two million
single-family home loans for more than $ 46 million.

"The effort to provide decent housing for all rural Americans was severely
disrupted by the slack economy of recent years.

"As a result, demand was building up rather than being ameliorated," Secretary
Espy said.

The rural home loan guarantee program, now in its second year of nationwide
operation, has proven to be an effective public-private partnership, he added.

The cost to the government is only about 10% of the cost of making direct loans
on a per-loan basis, he said.

"In some states, we were finding some lenders can reach a number of low-income
borrowers through the guaranteed program," Secretary Espy said.

Last year, Congress extended eligibility for the program to home buyers with
incomes up to 115% of the area median.  Previously, eligibility had been capped
at 100%.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              36 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

New Law Restricts Future Fee Increases By Ginnie Mae; Prices Finish Lower

                           March 25, 1987, Wednesday

By Evelyn Wallace


President Reagan signed into law yesterday a measure restricting future fee
increases by the Government National Mortgage Association.

The new law does not allow Ginnie Mae to raise the fee it charges lenders to
guarantee mortgages on their single-family homes. Also, the law must be amended
if Ginnie Mae seeks to raise its guarantee fees, according to Walter T. Cassidy,
assistant general counsel to the U.S Department of Housing and Urban
Development.  Under the new law, the HUD secretary must present all requests for
increases in fees and charges, other than for single-family home loans, to
Congress 90 days before the increases would go into effect. The secretary must
also certify that the increases meet certain conditions specified in the law.

Earlier this month, Ginnie Mae rescinded an increase on its guarantee fee, which
rose on March 1 to 0.1% from 0.06%. The action was taken to placate Congress,
which was on the verge of passing a bill outlawing Ginnie Mae fee increases.

A Ginnie Mae spokesman, who asked not to be identified, said the agency would
have preferred that the law did not pass. But he added that yesterday's
legislation was "not as bad as what had originally been proposed. That would
have been a straitjacket."

Meanwhile, mortgage-backed securities prices closed unchanged to down 1/8
yesterday, despite some end-of-quarter buying by investment managers.

Traders of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. securities said some investment
managers were buying 9% and 9 1/2% participation certificates to reap current
yield without incurring the risk of prepayment carried by the higher coupons.

Most participants reported continued quiet activity, but a trader at one of Wall
Street's biggest mortgage-backed securities dealers said yesterday was one of
his busiest days in several weeks.

"It's a complete reversal" from Monday, he said, which was deadly quiet. The
trader said portfolio managers and insurance companies were among the investors
seeking to purchase Ginnie Maes yesterday, especially the 8 1/2s and 9s.

The 8% Ginnie Maes were quoted near the close at 98 1/2, down 1/8 from the close
Monday, for a yield of 8.15%, 92 basis points above the Treasury 7 1/4s of
November 1996.

The 8% Freddie Mac PCs were quoted at 97 3/8, unchanged from the previous close,
to yield 8.25%, 102 basis points above comparable Treasuries. The 8% Federal
National Mortgage Association pass-throughs were quoted at 97 5/8, also
unchanged from the previous close, to return 8.26%, 103 basis points above
Treasuries.

In related news, Freddie Mac yesterday sold a $188 million pool of 8 1/2%
30-year PCs to securities dealers, in what the firm called a "special one-time
only" auction.

Audra Capas, a Freddie Mac spokesman, said Freddie Mac was holding in inventory
the mortgages underlying the securities and said securitizing and selling them
was "in line with our corporate financing plan."

The PCs drew an average price of 100 1/4, slightly higher than the price of
generic 8 1/2 PCs. One trader said the reason for their higher price is that the
weighted average coupon of the mortgages in the pool is 10.75%, according to a
preliminary estimate. Freddie Mac's 8 1/2% PCs typically carry a weighted
average coupon of about 9 3/4%, a trader said. The corporation is permitted a
250 basis point difference between the weighted average coupon and the PC coupon
rate.

The high coupon rate on the mortgages making up the pool auctioned yesterday
will cause it to prepay at a faster pace than other 8 1/2% PCs, giving it a
shorter life and lower volatility. This particular pool of Freddie Mac 8 1/2s
consequently has a lower price and yield risk than do other 8 1/2s, making it
more valuable to investors.

Traders also said it appeared that one dealer purchased the entire pool of
securities, after making a "bullet bid," or signifying that his bid was for the
entire pool instead of for just a portion of it. The buyer will likely use the
PCs to back a collateralized mortgage obligation or a stripped mortgage-backed
security deal, traders said.

SECTION: MORTGAGE SECURITIES; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 687 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1987 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              37 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                              May 4, 2012, Friday

Freddie asks for $19M in aid after 1Q loss

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P3D

LENGTH: 738 words


WASHINGTON - Government-controlled mortgage giant Freddie Mac is requesting $19
million in additional federal aid after posting a loss for the first quarter of
this year.

The requested amount is less than the $146 million that Freddie received from
the government for the fourth quarter of 2011. The company received $7.6 billion
for all of 2011 and $13 billion for all of 2010.

McLean, Va.-based Freddie Mac said Thursday that its net loss attributable to
common stockholders was $1.2 billion, or 38 cents a share, in the January-March
period. That compares with a net loss of $929 million, or 29 cents a share, in
the first quarter of 2011.

The government rescued Freddie and larger sibling Fannie Mae in September 2008
after massive losses on risky mortgages threatened to topple them. Taxpayers
have spent roughly $170 billion to rescue Fannie and Freddie, the costliest
bailout of the 2008 financial crisis. It could cost about $200 billion more to
support the companies through 2014 after subtracting dividend payments,
according to the government.

The first-quarter net loss takes into account $1.8 billion in dividend payments
that Freddie made to the government, its primary shareholder. Fannie and Freddie
are required to pay 10 percent dividends on the government money they receive.

In some past quarters, Freddie hasn't asked for any government aid. But the $19
million it is requesting for the first quarter is the smallest request it has
ever made. Freddie has paid more to the government in dividends than it has
taken in aid in the last five quarters, the company said.

- The Associated Press

About a third of the company's holdings are home loans issued between 2005 and
2008, which accounted for 88 percent of its losses in the first quarter. Freddie
said those loans are becoming a smaller proportion of its portfolio, and that
over time that should have a positive impact on its finances.

Freddie and Washington-based Fannie own or guarantee about half of all U.S.
mortgages, or nearly 31 million home loans, which are worth more than $5
trillion. Along with other federal agencies, they backed nearly 90 percent of
new mortgages over the past year.

Freddie CEO Charles E. Haldeman Jr. noted that an effort is underway to
streamline the company.

"We have also stayed focused on maintaining the flow of funds to the market and
preventing foreclosures," Haldeman said in a statement. "In the first quarter,
we helped over 577,000 families own or rent their home, adding more quality
loans to our portfolio."

The housing market has slowly begun to improve, but has a long way to go before
it's healthy. Many homeowners are still defaulting on their mortgages.
Unemployment remains high at 8.2 percent.

Fannie and Freddie buy home loans from banks and other lenders, package them
into bonds with a guarantee against default, and then sell them to investors
around the world. When property values drop, more homeowners default, either
because they are unable to afford the payments or because they owe more than the
property is worth. Because of the guarantees, Fannie and Freddie must cover the
losses.

Pressure continues on the government to eliminate Fannie and Freddie and reduce
taxpayers' exposure to risk. The Treasury Department put forward a plan last
year to slowly dissolve the companies, though that process could take years.
Abolishing Fannie and Freddie would transform how homes are bought and redefine
who can afford them.

Word came Monday that a top Freddie executive is leaving the company about a
year after he was promoted to oversee its single-family mortgage business.
Anthony Renzi resigned to accept a job with another financial company. Renzi's
departure as executive vice president of single-family business and operations
and technology takes effect this month.

The move is the latest in a series of departures of top executives from Freddie
and Fannie. Freddie CEO Haldeman and Fannie CEO Michael J. Williams both plan to
step down this year.

The government said recently it will cap pay for Freddie and Fannie chief
executives at $500,000 per year and eliminate annual bonuses for all employees.
Those changes came after Congress pressured the government to stop big payouts
at the bailed-out companies.

The federal agency that oversees Freddie and Fannie also said it would cut pay
for about 50 other executives at the two companies. Those employees are still
eligible to earn salaries above the cap.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 Charleston Newspapers


                              38 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Credit Union Journal

                                 March 5, 2012

WASHINGTON WATCH

BYLINE: Editorial Staff

SECTION: MISCELLANEOUS; Pg. 8 Vol. 16 No. 10

LENGTH: 967  words


CUS BID TO SAVE GOVERNMENT

MORTGAGE GUARANTEE

WASHINGTON-NAFCU told leaders of the Senate Banking Committee last week that the
CU industry, which is emerging as one of the most important players in the
mortgage market, is opposed to any mortgage reforms that would include
elimination of the federal guarantee on loans sold on the secondary market
currently through Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

NAFCU told leaders of the Senate Banking Committee at the start of hearings on
reform of the mortgage market that CUs are concerned about any reform proposal
that lacks a government guarantee now provided by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, as
well as Ginnie Mae, the Federal Housing Administration, the Federal Home Loan
Bank system and other government-sponsored enterprises.

NAFCU's concerns come after the Obama administration issued its own reform
proposal last week that endorsed a phase-out of Fannie and Freddie and the
privatization of the secondary market roles the two government-supported
entities perform. The plans, which have growing bipartisan support in Congress,
would incentivize private entities, like the big banks, to take a growing role
in the secondary market, which amounts to the buying of mortgages from retail
lenders like credit unions and banks, and packaging them as mortgage-backed
securities for sale on Wall Street.

CUs told the Democratic and Republican leaders of the Senate Banking Committee
that they are worried about a scenario where the nation's biggest mortgage
lenders who already compete with credit unions and community banks to originate
home loans gain control over the secondary market as well.

"It is unclear how a private market would attract investors as the housing
market struggles to recover from the worst recession since the Great
Depression," Brad Thaler, senior lobbyist for NAFCU, said in a letter to the
Senate leaders. "Furthermore, privatization could freeze out community based
lenders by leaving the secondary market dominated and controlled by a handful of
large banks. Undoubtedly, this is the worst-case scenario for credit unions and
their members."

NAFCU's concerns were aired as officials with the Obama administration were
explaining its latest reform proposal to the Senate banking panel. The proposal
would increase fees charged by Fannie and Freddie for guarantees on the
mortgages they buy and for other services, and would eventually eliminate the
two entities altogether.

This approach to the secondary market is also supported by Republicans in
Congress, although the two sides disagree on how fast this should occur, with
Republicans pushing for a rapid deployment.

But President Obama and congressional Democrats have stalled the reform, even as
the bailout of Fannie and Freddie has exploded in cost, an estimated $150
billion so far. They worry the impact the rapid wind down of Fannie and Freddie
would have on the market because the two giants become critical to the existence
of the mortgage market-holding an incredible 90% of all single-family mortgages.
The only sure thing is that no major reforms will be enacted before November's
elections.

CENTRAL LIQUIDITY FACILITY

SEEN IN NEED OF OVERHAUL

ALEXANDRIA, Va.-Credit unions are calling on NCUA to undertake major reforms to
its emergency lending fund, the Central Liquidity Facility, which is endangered
by the demise of its owner U.S. Central FCU.

Shortcomings of the emergency lender, owned by U.S. Central and its corporate
members but operated by NCUA, emerged during the 2007-2008 financial crisis,
even as the fund was used to funnel $10 billion to a teetering U.S. Central,
itself, and WesCorp FCU.

But CUs see the structure as a dinosaur because of the difficulty in tapping
into the fund and the growing number of liquidity resources for credit unions,
including the Federal Reserve's Discount Window and the Federal Home Loan Bank
system. In fact these two sources acted as the leading sources of liquidity
during the crisis, far eclipsing the CLF.

The demise of some of the corporates that acted as CU's first line of liquidity,
has heightened concerns within the industry.

"America First believes that if the CLF was 'modernized' onto a convenient and
reliable source of liquidity, with fewer restrictions on advances and same day
availability, credit unions would be much more willing to capitalize directly or
indirectly through their corporate," David Stacey, treasurer's office manager
for the Utah credit union giant, wrote NCUA in a recent comment letter on
proposed rule on liquidity backstops.

The CLF's $1.5 billion in capital stock is owned by U.S. Central and its
corporate "agents" of the CLF, but only half of the stock is actually funded,
while the other half is on-call in an emergency. In addition, the fund, which
was created as a government-sponsored enterprise, has a line of credit union of
some $20 billion with the U.S. Treasury in times of emergency.

But with the planned phase-out of U.S. Central, NCUA is exploring a new
structure, and some question whether the CLF is even necessary and whether the
same emergency loans could not be provided more efficiently through the NCUSIF.

Most CUs agree on the need of an emergency back-stop that is dedicated to credit
unions but worry that the current structure makes it difficult to tap into the
available CLF funds. For one thing, the CLF will only grant loans to CUs that
are not in danger of failing and can demonstrate a need of liquidity. For
another, the CLF can take five days to approve an application and another five
days to fund an emergency advance.

"The current requirements to establish direct membership with the CLF as well as
the ongoing maintenance requirements are very onerous," wrote Mark Dwyer, San
Antonio FCU CFO. "The CLF should provide liquidity access in the most timely,
efficient manner."

URL: http://www.cujournal.com/

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: CUJ


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              39 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 June 22, 1998

GSEs Buttress Mortgage Pools

BYLINE: BY BRIAN COLLINS

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 308 words

DATELINE: Washington


Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae dramatically increased their purchases of credit
enhanced mortgage pools in 1997.

The Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight reported last week that 40%
of Freddie Mac's 1997 mortgage purchases were credit-enhanced by pool insurance,
compared with 11% in 1996.

"Higher guarantee fee mortgages rolled off Freddie Mac's books through
liquidations and were replaced by lower guarantee fee mortgages," OFHEO says in
its annual report to Congress.

At Fannie Mae, 24% of mortgage purchases were credit enhanced with pool
insurance, compared with 9% in 1996.

Private mortgage insurance companies have been selling pool insurance to lenders
at very low rates, which seller/services use to get discounted guarantee fees
from the secondary market agencies.

By purchasing these credit enhanced mortgages, Freddie and Fannie sacrifice
current income for reduced credit risk down the road.

In 1997, Freddie Mac purchased $ 115.2 billion in single-family mortgages and
Fannie Mae $ 164.4 billion in single-family product.  Both government-sponsored
enterprises experienced a slight decline in purchase volume from 1996 levels.

As a result, guarantee fee income at the GSEs was flat.  Freddie Mac reported $
1.1 billion in guarantee fee income in 1997, virtually unchanged from 1996.

Fannie Mae's income from guarantee fees rose by only $ 100 million to $ 1.3
billion in 1997.

In 1997, Fannie Mae's average guarantee fee rate increased from 0.224% in 1996
to 0.227% in 1997, while Freddie Mac's fell by 0.5 basis points to 0.229%.

OFHEO's data also show that while mortgage purchases jumped in the first quarter
of 1998 (due to the refinancing boom), average guarantee fee rates fell at both
GSEs.

The first-quarter average guarantee fee rate at Fannie Mae fell to 0.219% and
Freddie Mac's fell to 0.224%.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1998 Faulkner & Gray


                              40 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Asset Securitization Report

                                 November 2014

Freddie Mac CEO Puts Focus on Single-Family Business

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 661  words


Freddie Mac is growing its single-family business and taking market share from
its fellow government-sponsored enterprise Fannie Mae.

Freddie's market share jumped to 41% so far this year, up from 35% in 2012,
according to Freddie chief executive Donald Layton.

"Our work to become a more competitive company is bearing fruit in increased
customer satisfaction and market share between the GSEs," Layton said in
releasing Freddie's third quarter results Thursday morning.

Freddie purchased $77 billion in single-family loans from lenders in the third
quarter, up from $59 billion in the second quarter and $49 billion in the first.

Layton noted that Freddie wants to enter the condominium market, which is a
source of affordable housing for first-time buyers. He also said that Freddie is
hiring more account executives to solicit business from mid-size and small
lenders.

"We have cut in half the time it takes to board new lenders," he said during a
conference call with reporters.

Freddie's multifamily business outperformed its single-family business during
the third quarter, a concern since it is just a fraction of the size of
Freddie's single-family portfolio.

Freddie reported $200 million in comprehensive income from its single-family
guarantee business in the third quarter, compared to $300 million from its
multifamily business, which financed $14 billion worth of loans.

"In the long run, single-family should be more profitable than multifamily just
by its size," Layton said in an interview.

The single-family business continues to under-perform because of Freddie's
legacy books of loans that were originated during the 2005 to 2008 period.

These legacy loans compromise 14% of Freddie's $1.7 trillion single-family
guarantee portfolio, but represent 83% of credit losses during the first nine
months of this year.

Freddie's newer post-2008 books of business makes up 58% of the single-family
portfolio yet represents just 2% of credit losses.

The enterprise maintains a $22.5 billion allowance for loan losses against its
single family portfolio, compared to $81 million for its multifamily portfolio.

As older loans with lower guarantee fees run off and are replaced with new
loans, "the single-family business will become more profitable," Layton said.

The multifamily is also more profitable because Freddie has more flexibility in
setting guarantee fees.

Freddie currently charges a 57.2 basis point guarantee fee on its single-family
loans, which have a 2% serious delinquency rate. The multifamily portfolio has a
3 basis point delinquency rate, allowing Freddie to charge a 30.8 basis point
guarantee fee.

Pricing on the multifamily side is not "overly controlled by the government,"
Layton said, and Freddie is competing with banks in the marketplace.

The multifamily business "earns a normal return," the CEO said, whereas the
guarantee fees on single-family business are dictated by the Federal Housing
Finance Agency. FHFA Director Mel Watt is currently reviewing the single-family
G-fee structure.

Freddie's earnings are also affected by the difference in pricing between Fannie
and Freddie's mortgage-backed securities. Investors pay a premium for Fannie
MBS. To make up for this difference, Freddie pays its lenders more for their
loans. In 2013, Freddie paid an estimated $650 million to lenders to ensure they
receive nearly the same price as Fannie pays for loans.

Freddie calls this practice "market adjusted pricing" and Layton doesn't see
that drag on earnings lifting for another few more years.

"We do things to minimize them, but the ultimate solution is the FHFA's
proposals to create a single security," the CEO said.

Creating this single Fannie and Freddie security is considered a "multi-year"
project by the GSE regulator.

Overall, Freddie reported $2.8 billion in comprehensive income for the third
quarter, up from $1.9 billion from their prior quarter. Most of the GSE's
earnings come from its $413.6 billion mortgage investment portfolio.

URL: http://www.structuredfinancenews.com

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: STRUCTUREDFINANCENEWS_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              41 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               November 17, 2014

Freddie CEO Puts Focus on Boosting Single-Family Business

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14 Vol. 39 No. 10

LENGTH: 660  words


Freddie Mac is growing its single-family business and taking market share from
its fellow government-sponsored enterprise Fannie Mae.

Freddie's market share jumped to 41% so far this year, up from 35% in 2012,
according to Freddie chief executive Donald Layton.

"Our work to become a more competitive company is bearing fruit in increased
customer satisfaction and market share between the GSEs," Layton said in
releasing Freddie's third-quarter results on Nov. 6.

Freddie purchased $77 billion in single-family loans from lenders in the third
quarter, up from $59 billion in the second quarter and $49 billion in the first.

Layton noted that Freddie wants to enter the condominium market, which is a
source of affordable housing for first-time buyers. He also said that Freddie is
hiring more account executives to solicit business from mid-size and small
lenders.

"We have cut in half the time it takes to board new lenders," he said during a
conference call with reporters.

Freddie Mac's multifamily business outperformed its single-family business
during the third quarter, a concern since it is just a fraction of the size of
Freddie's single-family portfolio.

Freddie reported $200 million in comprehensive income from its single-family
guarantee business in the third quarter, compared to $300 million from its
multifamily business, which financed $14 billion worth of loans.

"In the long run, single-family should be more profitable than multifamily just
by its size," Layton said in an interview.

The single-family business continues to under-perform because of Freddie's
legacy books of loans that were originated during the 2005 to 2008 period.

These legacy loans compromise 14% of Freddie's $1.7 trillion single-family
guarantee portfolio, but represent 83% of credit losses during the first nine
months of this year.

Freddie's newer post-2008 books of business make up 58% of the single-family
portfolio yet represents just 2% of credit losses.

The enterprise maintains a $22.5 billion allowance for loan losses against its
single family portfolio, compared to $81 million for its multifamily portfolio.

As older loans with lower guarantee fees run off and are replaced with new
loans, "the single-family business will become more profitable," Layton said.

The multifamily is also more profitable because Freddie has more flexibility in
setting guarantee fees.

Freddie currently charges a 57.2 basis point guarantee fee on its single-family
loans, which have a 2% serious delinquency rate. The multifamily portfolio has a
3 basis point delinquency rate, allowing Freddie to charge a 30.8 basis point
guarantee fee.

Pricing on the multifamily side is not "overly controlled by the government,"
Layton said, and Freddie is competing with banks in the marketplace.

The multifamily business "earns a normal return," the CEO said, whereas the
guarantee fees on single-family business are dictated by the Federal Housing
Finance Agency. FHFA Director Mel Watt is currently reviewing the single-family
G-fee structure.

Freddie's earnings are also affected by the difference in pricing between Fannie
and Freddie's mortgage-backed securities. Investors pay a premium for Fannie
MBS. To make up for this difference, Freddie pays its lenders more for their
loans. In 2013, Freddie paid an estimated $650 million to lenders to ensure they
receive nearly the same price as Fannie pays for loans.

Freddie calls this practice "market adjusted pricing" and Layton doesn't see
that drag on earnings lifting for another few more years.

"We do things to minimize them, but the ultimate solution is the FHFA's
proposals to create a single security," the CEO said.

Creating this single Fannie and Freddie security is considered a "multiyear"
project by the GSE regulator.

Overall, Freddie reported $2.8 billion in comprehensive income for the third
quarter, up from $1.9 billion from their prior quarter. Most of the GSE's
earnings come from its $413.6 billion mortgage investment portfolio.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              42 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                November 6, 2014

Freddie CEO Puts the Focus on Boosting Single-Family Business

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: SECONDARY; NATIONAL MORTGAGE NEWS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 663  words


WASHINGTON - Freddie Mac is growing its single-family business and taking market
share from its fellow government-sponsored enterprise Fannie Mae.

Freddie's market share jumped to 41% so far this year, up from 35% in 2012,
according to Freddie chief executive Donald Layton.

"Our work to become a more competitive company is bearing fruit in increased
customer satisfaction and market share between the GSEs," Layton said in
releasing Freddie's third quarter results Thursday morning.

Freddie purchased $77 billion in single-family loans from lenders in the third
quarter, up from $59 billion in the second quarter and $49 billion in the first.

Layton noted that Freddie wants to enter the condominium market, which is a
source of affordable housing for first-time buyers. He also said that Freddie is
hiring more account executives to solicit business from mid-size and small
lenders.

"We have cut in half the time it takes to board new lenders," he said during a
conference call with reporters.

Freddie's multifamily business outperformed its single-family business during
the third quarter, a concern since it is just a fraction of the size of
Freddie's single-family portfolio.

Freddie reported $200 million in comprehensive income from its single-family
guarantee business in the third quarter, compared to $300 million from its
multifamily business, which financed $14 billion worth of loans.

"In the long run, single-family should be more profitable than multifamily just
by its size," Layton said in an interview.

The single-family business continues to under-perform because of Freddie's
legacy books of loans that were originated during the 2005 to 2008 period.

These legacy loans compromise 14% of Freddie's $1.7 trillion single-family
guarantee portfolio, but represent 83% of credit losses during the first nine
months of this year.

Freddie's newer post-2008 books of business makes up 58% of the single-family
portfolio yet represents just 2% of credit losses.

The enterprise maintains a $22.5 billion allowance for loan losses against its
single family portfolio, compared to $81 million for its multifamily portfolio.

As older loans with lower guarantee fees run off and are replaced with new
loans, "the single-family business will become more profitable," Layton said.

The multifamily is also more profitable because Freddie has more flexibility in
setting guarantee fees.

Freddie currently charges a 57.2 basis point guarantee fee on its single-family
loans, which have a 2% serious delinquency rate. The multifamily portfolio has a
3 basis point delinquency rate, allowing Freddie to charge a 30.8 basis point
guarantee fee.

Pricing on the multifamily side is not "overly controlled by the government,"
Layton said, and Freddie is competing with banks in the marketplace.

The multifamily business "earns a normal return," the CEO said, whereas the
guarantee fees on single-family business are dictated by the Federal Housing
Finance Agency. FHFA Director Mel Watt is currently reviewing the single-family
G-fee structure.

Freddie's earnings are also affected by the difference in pricing between Fannie
and Freddie's mortgage-backed securities. Investors pay a premium for Fannie
MBS. To make up for this difference, Freddie pays its lenders more for their
loans. In 2013, Freddie paid an estimated $650 million to lenders to ensure they
receive nearly the same price as Fannie pays for loans.

Freddie calls this practice "market adjusted pricing" and Layton doesn't see
that drag on earnings lifting for another few more years.

"We do things to minimize them, but the ultimate solution is the FHFA's
proposals to create a single security," the CEO said.

Creating this single Fannie and Freddie security is considered a "multi-year"
project by the GSE regulator.

Overall, Freddie reported $2.8 billion in comprehensive income for the third
quarter, up from $1.9 billion from their prior quarter. Most of the GSE's
earnings come from its $413.6 billion mortgage investment portfolio.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              43 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               americanbanker.com

                            November 10, 2014 Monday

Freddie CEO Puts the Focus on Boosting Single-Family Business

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 1 No. 173

LENGTH: 663  words


WASHINGTON - Freddie Mac is growing its single-family business and taking market
share from its fellow government-sponsored enterprise Fannie Mae.

Freddie's market share jumped to 41% so far this year, up from 35% in 2012,
according to Freddie chief executive Donald Layton.

"Our work to become a more competitive company is bearing fruit in increased
customer satisfaction and market share between the GSEs," Layton said in
releasing Freddie's third quarter results Thursday morning.

Freddie purchased $77 billion in single-family loans from lenders in the third
quarter, up from $59 billion in the second quarter and $49 billion in the first.

Layton noted that Freddie wants to enter the condominium market, which is a
source of affordable housing for first-time buyers. He also said that Freddie is
hiring more account executives to solicit business from mid-size and small
lenders.

"We have cut in half the time it takes to board new lenders," he said during a
conference call with reporters.

Freddie's multifamily business outperformed its single-family business during
the third quarter, a concern since it is just a fraction of the size of
Freddie's single-family portfolio.

Freddie reported $200 million in comprehensive income from its single-family
guarantee business in the third quarter, compared to $300 million from its
multifamily business, which financed $14 billion worth of loans.

"In the long run, single-family should be more profitable than multifamily just
by its size," Layton said in an interview.

The single-family business continues to under-perform because of Freddie's
legacy books of loans that were originated during the 2005 to 2008 period.

These legacy loans account for 14% of Freddie's $1.7 trillion single-family
guarantee portfolio, but represent 83% of credit losses during the first nine
months of this year.

Freddie's newer post-2008 books of business makes up 58% of the single-family
portfolio yet represents just 2% of credit losses.

The enterprise maintains a $22.5 billion allowance for loan losses against its
single family portfolio, compared to $81 million for its multifamily portfolio.

As older loans with lower guarantee fees run off and are replaced with new
loans, "the single-family business will become more profitable," Layton said.

The multifamily is also more profitable because Freddie has more flexibility in
setting guarantee fees.

Freddie currently charges a 57.2 basis point guarantee fee on its single-family
loans, which have a 2% serious delinquency rate. The multifamily portfolio has a
3 basis point delinquency rate, allowing Freddie to charge a 30.8 basis point
guarantee fee.

Pricing on the multifamily side is not "overly controlled by the government,"
Layton said, and Freddie is competing with banks in the marketplace.

The multifamily business "earns a normal return," the CEO said, whereas the
guarantee fees on single-family business are dictated by the Federal Housing
Finance Agency. FHFA Director Mel Watt is currently reviewing the single-family
G-fee structure.

Freddie's earnings are also affected by the difference in pricing between Fannie
and Freddie's mortgage-backed securities. Investors pay a premium for Fannie
MBS. To make up for this difference, Freddie pays its lenders more for their
loans. In 2013, Freddie paid an estimated $650 million to lenders to ensure they
receive nearly the same price as Fannie pays for loans.

Freddie calls this practice "market adjusted pricing" and Layton doesn't see
that drag on earnings lifting for another few more years.

"We do things to minimize them, but the ultimate solution is the FHFA's
proposals to create a single security," the CEO said.

Creating this single Fannie and Freddie security is considered a "multi-year"
project by the GSE regulator.

Overall, Freddie reported $2.8 billion in comprehensive income for the third
quarter, up from $1.9 billion from their prior quarter. Most of the GSE's
earnings come from its $413.6 billion mortgage investment portfolio.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              44 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 August 3, 2009

House OKs Loan Limit Extension

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15 Vol. 33 No. 43

LENGTH: 325  words


WASHINGTON-The House Appropriations Committee has approved an extension of the
maximum loan limits for Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Housing
Administration for another nine months.

The massive stimulus bill that President Obama signed in February raised the
maximum loan limit for Fannie, Freddie and FHA to $729,750. The higher limit is
due to expire at yearend. But the appropriators want to extend it through
September 2010.

In approving the Department of Housing and Urban Development appropriations
bill, the committee also increased FHA and Ginnie Mae's loan commitment
authority, as requested by the Obama administration.

Under the bill, FHA can insure $400 billion in single-family loans during fiscal
year 2010, up from $315 billion in FY 2009, which ends Sept. 30.

The FY 2010 appropriations bill allows Ginnie Mae to guarantee up to $500
billion in securities backed by single-family and multifamily mortgages.
Congress provided the secondary market agency with $400 billion in MBS guarantee
authority in the FY 2009 appropriations bill.

Senate appropriators are slated to markup a HUD appropriations bill this week.

Meanwhile, FHA and Ginnie Mae are on a tear. FHA endorsements are up 83%,
compared to a year ago, as the federal mortgage insurance program ended its
third quarter of the 2009 fiscal year.

As of June 30, FHA has endorsed 1.39 million single-family mortgages, according
to an FHA report. This represents an estimated $255.2 billion in loans, based on
an $184,000 average loan size.

The Government National Mortgage Association guaranteed $207 billion in MBS
during the first six months of this calendar year, compared to $107 billion in
the first half of 2008. Ginnie Mae MBS issuance totaled $43.6 billion in June -
setting a new monthly record - and outstanding Ginnie Mae MBS was $680 billion
as of June 30.

Analysts at Bank of America/Merrill Lynch Research see outstanding GNMA MBS
hitting $1 trillion by the end of 2010.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              45 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 Ottawa Citizen

                   February 25, 2004 Wednesday Final Edition

U.S. mortgage giants' huge debt could threaten entire financial system:
Greenspan

SOURCE: The Associated Press

BYLINE: Martin Crutsinger

SECTION: Careers; Pg. D10

LENGTH: 452 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

WASHINGTON - Mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac could pose a threat to
America's financial system if their ability to take on new debt is not
restrained, Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan said yesterday.

Mr. Greenspan added his influential voice to calls for reforms in the operations
of the two government-chartered companies that dominate the
multi-trillion-dollar U.S. mortgage industry.

Mr. Greenspan told the Senate Banking Committee yesterday that he supports
creating a tough new government regulatory agency to supervise the two
corporations, with similar powers to federal banking regulators, including the
authority to set minimum capital standards.

Fannie and Freddie, both Fortune 500 companies, have grown into two of the
biggest financial companies in the world. They stand behind $4 trillion U.S. in
home mortgages, or more than three-fourths of the single-family mortgages in the
United States.

Mr. Greenspan stressed that this portfolio does not currently represent a risk
to the financial system, but he warned that it could down the road if the
explosive growth in debt held by the government-sponsored enterprises is not
restrained.

Committee chairman Senator Richard Shelby, an Alabama Republican, told Mr.
Green-span that he was making creation of a new regulator for the two
institutions and the Federal Home Loan Bank System a top priority this year.

Mr. Shelby is supporting legislation to replace the current Office of Federal
Housing Enterprise Oversight, which critics say lacks the power to properly
regulate institutions of the size of Fannie and Freddie, with a new independent
regulatory agency.

Both have been under increased scrutiny since an accounting crisis at Freddie
Mac came to light last spring. Freddie acknowledged that it had understated
earnings by $5 billion for 2000 through 2002. It later admitted inflating 2001
profits by nearly $1 billion.

Mr. Greenspan said the problem facing Congress was that investors widely believe
that if either Freddie or Fannie got into financial trouble, the government
would bail them out, even though the bonds issued by the corporations say they
are not backed by the federal government.

Mr. Greenspan said this perceived guarantee allows the two corporations to raise
money at lower interest rates than their financial competitors.

The two companies say their lower cost of funds is passed on as a benefit to
home buyers in the form of lower mortgage rates, but Mr. Greenspan pointed to a
Fed study that this subsidy had lowered mortgage costs on average by a tiny 0.07
per cent, with most of the billions of dollars in savings going instead to the
corporations and their shareholders.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Business

               Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              46 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               December 29, 2014

G-Fees Could Be Used to Control Housing Cycles: OFR

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 319  words


The guarantee fees collected by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac could be used as a
tool to moderate the boom and bust cycles in the housing market, according to a
new report by a Treasury Department office.

The Office of Financial Research is urging the Federal Housing Finance Agency to
adjust guarantee fees to influence borrowing costs in the housing market.

"The key advantage of using G-fees is that the impact is transparent, because an
increase in borrowing costs can have a direct and material effect on borrowing,"
OFR said in its annual report issued in December.

At issue is lowering guarantee fees when credit is tight - as it is now - while
raising them when lending is abundant. One study cited by OFR shows that a
25-basis-point reduction in guarantee fees would result in a 15% increase in
lending based on a 4% mortgage rate. Another study estimates that "for every
basis point increase in G-fees, mortgage rates increase by 2.5 basis points, in
which case the effects would be ever larger," OFR says.

Freddie currently charges a 57.2-basis-point guarantee feeon its single-family
loans in the third quarter and Fannie charges a 63.5-basis-point fee.

The OFR is working on a paper that will design a housing condition index and
suggest ways to appropriately set countercyclical guarantee fees.

"The index, which combines a large number of housing data series, is normalized
to a value of 100 in March 2003, when housing finance conditions were relatively
stable and healthy," the OFR annual report says.

A report by Federal Financial Analytics in early December noted that the OFR and
FHFA have discussed this countercyclical approach to setting G-fees.

"Will FHFA take it on? We expect it will give itself considerable flexibility in
its pending G-fee rule not so much to make OFR happy as to keep its hands free
to do as desired as market conditions and political winds demand," FedFin said
in a Dec. 5 report.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              47 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               December 29, 2014

G-Fees Could Be Using to Control Housing Cycles: OFR

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 319  words


The guarantee fees collected by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac could be used as a
tool to moderate the boom and bust cycles in the housing market, according to a
new report by a Treasury Department office.

The Office of Financial Research is urging the Federal Housing Finance Agency to
adjust guarantee fees to influence borrowing costs in the housing market.

"The key advantage of using G-fees is that the impact is transparent, because an
increase in borrowing costs can have a direct and material effect on borrowing,"
OFR said in its annual report issued in December.

At issue is lowering guarantee fees when credit is tight - as it is now - while
raising them when lending is abundant. One study cited by OFR shows that a
25-basis-point reduction in guarantee fees would result in a 15% increase in
lending based on a 4% mortgage rate. Another study estimates that "for every
basis point increase in G-fees, mortgage rates increase by 2.5 basis points, in
which case the effects would be ever larger," OFR says.

Freddie currently charges a 57.2-basis-point guarantee feeon its single-family
loans in the third quarter and Fannie charges a 63.5-basis-point fee.

The OFR is working on a paper that will design a housing condition index and
suggest ways to appropriately set countercyclical guarantee fees.

"The index, which combines a large number of housing data series, is normalized
to a value of 100 in March 2003, when housing finance conditions were relatively
stable and healthy," the OFR annual report says.

A report by Federal Financial Analytics in early December noted that the OFR and
FHFA have discussed this countercyclical approach to setting G-fees.

"Will FHFA take it on? We expect it will give itself considerable flexibility in
its pending G-fee rule not so much to make OFR happy as to keep its hands free
to do as desired as market conditions and political winds demand," FedFin said
in a Dec. 5 report.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              48 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 17, 2010

Highlights

SECTION: CONVENTION SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 9 Vol. 34 No. 33

LENGTH: 332  words


Here is a quick guide to some key speakers and sessions scheduled at press time
to take place during the conference, as well as some nearby places to see sights
or get a bite near the convention hotel, the Hilton New York, which is located
at 1335 Avenue of the Americas.

* Representativesof all the major government and agency entities in the
secondary market as well as two key MBA officials are slated to speak at the
"GSE Secondary Market Executives Update" from 8:30 a.m.-10 a.m. on Monday, May
24 in the hotel's third floor Trianon Ballroom. Panelists are set to include
Theodore "Ted" Tozer, president of Ginnie Mae; David H. Stevens, commissioner of
the Federal Housing Administration; Donald J. Bisenius, executive vice
president, single-family credit guarantee business, Freddie Mac; Karen R.
Pallotta, EVP, single-family mortgage business, Fannie Mae; and Kevin M. Neylan,
senior vice president, strategy and business development, Federal Home Loan Bank
of New York.

* Views from both sides of the market will be aired at the next panel on Monday,
May 24, "Secondary Market Investors-Buyer and Seller Perspectives," from 10:30
a.m. to 11:45 a.m. This is slated to also be held in the third floor Trianon
Ballroom.

* Getting a "Taste of New York" can be done starting Sunday, May 23, when the
MBA holds its opening reception with that theme in the Americas Hall 1 on the
third floor of the hotel from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. Thereafter, the hotel itself, of
course, also has restaurants: one for business that serves Tuscan food, and two
that are casual-a lounge as well as a buffet designed to serve food
representative of New York's ethnic neighborhoods. The hotel concierge should be
able to find almost any kind of restaurant you want outside the hotel as well.
The "theatre district," which extends southwest from the hotel, has several.
Broadway and its shows are not far from the hotel and Radio City Music Hall is
very close. The Museum of Modern Art also is nearby, as is Central Park.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              49 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Ipswich News (Queensland, Australia)

                          September 23, 2010 Thursday
                                  1 - Edition

Through the keyhole

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 274 words


WINDOW OF FORTUNE

Real estate in Ipswich was on the international agenda when a Chinese delegation
visited the Professionals Thornton office last week. Area manager Lee Whitting
said he noticed ``more than the usual crowd around our window'' and later found
out it was a Chinese delegation with a staff member from the University of
Queensland. The delegation was in Ipswich for a meeting with the Ipswich City
Council and were shown how property was bought and sold in Australia. Mr
Whitting explained to the delegation the various property types, including a
house on a town block and rural land ``which fascinated the Chinese delegation
as private ownership of land is not a normal practice in China''.

DEDICATION REWARDED

PRDnationwide Yamanto's Roger Muller was recognised for dedication at the
company's national annual awards at the Crowne Plaza in the Hunter Valley. Mr
Muller was awarded a 20 Year Service Award at the black-tie event. PRDnationwide
managing director Jim Midgley said he was happy that Mr Muller's contribution
and service were recognised. PRDnationwide Ipswich also took home an impressive
five wins.

HAPPY HOME LOANS

Bankwest has come up with an initiative designed to guarantee happiness with a
home loan from start to finish. Called Happy Banking, it allows a win-win
situation where you either enjoy a home loan approval or a full refund of your
application fee. Happy banking promises a meeting within 24 hours of your
inquiry, a competitive rate against the big banks and your eligible amount in
five minutes. Bankwest's home loan specialist, Huy Vu, is heavily involved from
the initial discussions to the purchase.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IPS


                   Copyright 2010 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              50 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Bristol The Bristol Post

                             July 27, 2013 Saturday

Osborne spells out housing stimulus moves

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 229  words


The Government  insisted this week that only credit-worthy borrowers will be
able to buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed
more details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130 billion of mortgage lending with state guarantees -
including banning second-home buyers and people with property abroad.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a 5 per cent deposit. The scheme
has been credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up prices.
Mortgage guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.

Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover  existing and newly-built homes. Lenders will pay a
fee to use the guarantee. The guarantee will be be available on homes worth up
to £600,000.

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families."

Pete Redfern, chief executive of builders Taylor Wimpey, said: "The second phase
of Help to Buy will benefit the whole market, particularly existing homeowners
who want to move up the housing ladder but have been unable to."

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 25


                      Copyright 2013 Bristol United Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              51 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Western Daily Press

                             July 27, 2013 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Osborne spells out housing stimulus moves

SECTION: WEST COUNTRY PROPERTY;FEATURES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 229 words


The Government insisted this week that only credit-worthy borrowers will be able
to buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed more
details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130 billion of mortgage lending with state guarantees -
including banning second-home buyers and people with property abroad. The first
stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give people the
chance to buy a new-build home with a 5 per cent deposit. The scheme has been
credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up prices. Mortgage
guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the risk of
default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.

Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover existing and newly-built homes. Lenders will pay a
fee to use the guarantee. The guarantee will be be available on homes worth up
to £600,000.

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families."

Pete Redfern, chief executive of builders Taylor Wimpey, said: "The second phase
of Help to Buy will benefit the whole market, particularly existing homeowners
who want to move up the housing ladder but have been unable to."

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chancellor George Osborne is extending the Help to Buy scheme

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WDP


                    Copyright 2013 Northcliffe Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              52 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                            April 22, 2009 Wednesday

GSEs: No Plans to Cut Guarantee Fees

BYLINE: National Mortgage News

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 9 Vol. 174 No. 76

LENGTH: 187  words


Despite the pleas of mortgage bankers, the government-sponsored enterprises have
no intention of cutting guarantee fees, their representatives said at a Mortgage
Bankers Association conference in Chicago this week.

"No," said Donald Bisenius, senior vice president of Freddie Mac's single-family
credit guarantee business, when asked by the trade group's chairman-elect, Rob
Story, whether his GSE is considering such a move.

Thomas Lund, the executive vice president of Fannie Mae's single-family mortgage
business, said its fee structure strikes a balance between providing liquidity
to the mortgage market and protecting taxpayers from footing the bill for loans
that go sour. (Regulators seized Fannie and Freddie last year.)

Lund also said the GSEs' guarantee fees are "still far below" those charged in
the jumbo market by nonagency investors.

Though the overall credit profile of borrowers has improved, Bisenius told the
conference, the fees must remain at current levels because "the housing market
is very, very fragile. Prices at best are flat, and still falling in many
places. We need to balance against that risk."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              53 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Portland Press Herald (Maine)

                            March 23, 2011 Wednesday
                                 FINAL Edition

WAITING FOR UNCLE SAM;
Mainers OK'd for low-income home loans feel the effects of federal funding
delays

BYLINE: J. HEMMERDINGER Staff Writer

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: GORHAM


Karen Pitts is in home ownership limbo.

Six months ago, she signed an agreement to buy a new home in Gorham, and soon
after got approval for a low-income loan from the federal government.

But Pitts still hasn't moved in - the government hasn't cut her a check.

She and about 50 other Mainers are feeling the effects of the federal budget
dispute firsthand. They have been approved for federal home loans, but have been
unable to close on their deals because of cuts to the programs on which they
rely. Also affected are some home sellers, who are forced to hold empty
properties until the federal government pays up.

''It's a waiting game. It's frustrating because I know I can have this house,''
said Pitts, who is eager to move with her daughter from a trailer in Buxton to
the new home in the Hawkes Farm development in Gorham.

''I want to have a newer, safer place for my child,'' she said.

The delayed financing involves Rural Housing Direct Loans, issued by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture's Rural Development agency. The program provides
interest-rate subsidies for low-income home buyers who purchase property in
rural areas. Another Rural Development program guarantees loans from private
lenders to low-income borrowers.

In the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, the Rural Development office in Maine
lent a total of $55 million to 382 single-family home- owners under the Rural
Housing Direct Loan program. So far in 2011, the agency has loaned $7.9 million
to Mainers.

Virginia Manuel, Maine's state director of the Rural Development program, said
the decline is a result of federal spending cuts. She said temporary
appropriations bills - under which the government has operated since October -
have provided limited money.

As a result, Manuel said, loans for about 50 Mainers, totaling $6 million, have
been approved but not paid.

''USDA Rural Development acts like a bank, and if we don't have funding we can't
lend to single-family homeowners,'' she said. ''We get funding through (federal
budget) extensions, but we don't know how much. And we are competing with (all
of the) other states.''

Chris LaRoche, housing director for the York County Community Action Corp., said
the delay has put families in uncertain circumstances.

''A lot of people are waiting to buy their homes - waiting on pins and needles.
And they can't close until Congress (approves) a budget,'' said LaRoche, whose
nonprofit group counsels home buyers and originates some of the USDA's loans.

Susan Duchaine, owner of Design Dwelling Inc. of Gorham, which is developing the
Hawkes Farm community, said she has contracts with about 10 buyers but cannot
close the deals.

''We have (built) nine or 10 homes and have not gotten paid for them,'' she
said.

Duchaine said the uncertainty forced her to delay construction on another 10 to
12 homes in her developments. She has reduced her construction staff.

The Rural Housing Direct Loan program helps Americans who earn 80 percent or
less of an area's median income. Borrowers in the program can pay a discounted
interest rate, based on their income.

Manuel said the goal of the program is to ''help lower-income people own a home
and build wealth.''

LaRoche called the USDA's loans ''one of the best programs the government has
ever put out there.''

He said the loans and loan guarantees make home ownership possible for Americans
who don't qualify for private loans.

Manuel said her agency has been transparent about the lack of federal funds, and
has instructed Rural Development field offices - there are four in Maine - and
partner organizations such as community action corporations to inform home
buyers about the delays.

Only the Rural Housing Direct Loan program, not the loan guarantee program, is
underfunded, she said.


Staff Writer Jonathan Hemmerdinger can be reached at 791-6316 or at:

jhemmerdinger@pressherald.com

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: John Patriquin/Staff Photographer
Susan Duchaine is developing the Hawkes Farm community in Gorham. She said she
has contracts with about 10 buyers but cannot close the deals.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 MaineToday Media, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              54 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                            January 13, 2009 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

Briefs

BYLINE: Lisa Allen, Robert Harley, Paddy Manning

SECTION: NEWS; Briefs; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 298 words


Visitor numbers down

Major falls in the number of Korean, Chinese and Japanese visitors to Australia
in November led to a total 5.8 per cent decrease in international arrivals
compared with the previous corresponding period. The number of Korean travellers
fell 31.5 per cent in November, Chinese tourists were down 17.1 per cent and
Japanese 22.4 per cent, according to Australian Bureau of Statistics figures
released yesterday. Overseas departures were up just under 1 per cent. Lisa
Allen

Agents seek exemption

Real estate agents with trust accounts of more than $1 million pay the new
deposit guarantee premium on the accounts, but in many cases the interest is
paid direct to state governments to fund initiatives like the NSW Rental Board.
Real Estate Institute of Australia president Noel Dyett said it was unfair that
agents should pay the premium when they do not earn any income from the
accounts. "The REIA has requested that the government address what was
presumably an unforeseen consequence by making real estate agents exempt from
the guarantee fee with premiums to be paid from the state and territory
guarantee funds," he said. Robert Harley

Grant may be extended

The Real Estate Institute of Australia has called for a thorough review of the
impact of the First Home Owner Boost before the enhanced grant is stopped, as
planned, on June 30. Over the weekend federal Housing Minister Tanya Plibersek
raised the possibility that the enhanced grant would be extended. Robert Harley

Easier to be green

The mecu credit union has launched an "Eco Pause" home loan feature to allow its
borrowers to delay their repayments for three months, or halve them for six,
while they pay for environmental upgrades such as installing water tanks, grey
water systems or solar power. Paddy Manning

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2009 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              55 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 2, 1994

FHA and VA Volumes Boom

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 592 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON.


Even as interest rates edged upward in the first quarter, government mortgage
programs racked up record-breaking origination volumes.

A time lag in the processing of applications for government loan guarantees
largely accounts for the trend.  Both the Federal Housing Administration and the
Department of Veterans Affairs continued to register increases in originations
through March.

Endorsements for government loan guarantees are often two to four months behind
actual loan originations, so the statistics reflect loans that closed late last
year and very early in 1994.

During the first three months of 1994, the Federal Housing Administration
endorsed almost 400,000 mortgage loans with a balance of $ 40 billion for
insurance.  Though the pace of FHA originations is expected to taper off in
later months, the FHA still is on pace to have a strong year.

The agency endorsed a startling 155,000 loans totaling $ 11.7 billion for
insurance in March alone, when higher interest rates were beginning to affect
mortgage origination activity.

Loan originations for the VA Home Loan Program were boosted by a mailing that
encouraged veterans with high interest rates to refinance their loans under a
special interest rate reduction program.

The DVA guaranteed almost 157,000 loans with a total balance of $ 14.7 billion
in the first quarter of 1994.  Again, because of a three to four month lag
between loan origination and endorsement of the guarantee by the VA, the
statistics in part reflect activity from late last year.

The VA has also eased refinancing rules for veterans with higher interest rates.

Since October, 155,000 veterans have taken advantage of the interest rate
reduction program, accounting for slightly over half of VA originations between
October and March.

The experience of the FHA and the VA Home Loan Program would suggest that many
homebuyers did, as expected, jump into the market when they saw rates begin to
rise.

Both government programs are on a pace that may set records for the government
fiscal year, which runs from October through September.

In the first six months of the fiscal year, the FHA has insured more than half a
million loans.

"We are on a record-breaking pace so far this year," said Morris Carter, a
career FHA single-family official, during a conference sponsored by the National
Association of Realtors.

Mr. Carter said FHA activity has been heaviest in the Denver regional office,
which handles the Rocky Mountain west, and the Minneapolis office, which handles
the upper Midwest.

He said Realtors should be pleased by FHA reform proposals, which include higher
FHA loan limits and simplification of down payment requirements, because the
changes will make it easier to explain the FHA program to homebuyers.

Keith Pedigo, director of loan guaranty services for the DVA, said the VA Home
Loan Program is also in a high volume era, helped by low interest rates and
program changes that have expanded eligibility.

In the first six months of fiscal 1994, the DVA guaranteed $ 28 billion in home
loans, compared with a record of just under $ 35 billion in 1987.

"This is going to be a blockbuster year," Mr. Pedigo said.

However, he said DVA officials are worried about increases in the funding fee
that homebuyers pay to obtain a VA guarantee.  Congress increased the basic
funding fee for a first-time user from 1.25% to 2% of the loan.

Legislation is pending that would effectively increase the VA loan limit to $
203,000, consistent with the current conforming loan limit.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, Volume of Loans Insured by FHA/VA, Source: FHA and VA data

                   Copyright 1994 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              56 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                            March 12, 2009 Thursday
                                  1ST Edition

Money briefs

SECTION: MARKETS; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 463 words


Dell plans layoffs at Forsyth plant

Dell Inc., the world's second-largest computer maker, said Wednesday it is
laying off workers around the world but would not say how many or where.

The company would confirm only that some of the employees are based at an
assembly plant in North Carolina's Forsyth County.

About a year ago, Dell said it planned to cut $3 billion from its annual
expenses, in part by  laying off 8,800 people, or 10 percent of its
88,200-member work force at the time.

As of Jan. 30, Dell indicated it had gone beyond that goal and lowered head
count by 9,300.

Dell bumped up its savings goal to $4 billion in  February and indicated the
additional cuts would come from both layoffs and supply chain improvements.

Dell was already struggling with ever-slimmer margins as PC prices dropped, but
the economic crisis has added to its troubles as both consumers and businesses
are postponing computer purchases.

Freddie Mac seeks more U.S. money

WASHINGTON | Freddie Mac, facing mounting damage from the U.S. housing crisis,
said Wednesday it will ask the government for nearly $31 billion in additional
aid after posting a gargantuan loss of more than $50 billion last year.

The report comes just weeks after Fannie Mae, a sister company, said it would
need more than $15 billion in government assistance after losing almost $60
billion last year.

The two companies, which were seized by the government last fall, are critical
to the health of the U.S. real estate market. Together, Fannie and Freddie own
or guarantee almost 31 million home loans worth about $5.5 trillion - more than
half of all U.S. home loans.

The Treasury Department has pledged up to $400 billion in aid for the duo.

Freddie Mac said that 1.7 percent of the single-family loans it owns or
guarantees were delinquent at the end of the December, up from 1.2 percent in
September and 0.65 percent a year earlier.

RBC exec: Banks  need mergers

RALEIGH | A Royal Bank of Canada executive who oversees the company's
international operations, including its U.S. banking operations based in North
Carolina, said Wednesday the U.S. financial industry needs more
consolidation.But he warned that acquisitions have been complicated by the
government's ongoing effort to keep banks afloat.

Jim Westlake, who guides the company's work outside of Canada, said the Troubled
Asset Relief Program, which has provided billions of dollars to domestic banks,
has been a "made-in-U.S. solution."

He said it would be prudent for the government to allow well-capitalized foreign
banks to participate more in the market.

Despite some bruises, RBC and its U.S. subsidiary RBC Bank - based in Raleigh
with a presence in six Southern states - have fared comparatively well through
the economic downturn.

- From wire service reports

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2009 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              57 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Finance & Commerce (Minneapolis, MN)

                            February 14, 2011 Monday

Fannie, Freddie reforms could threaten nation's rental market

BYLINE: Mark Anderson

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 741  words


Clamor to punish housing giants could stem multifamily funding

It is easy to find critics of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the giant lending
agencies that became wards of the nation after enormous losses in the
single-family housing market.

Many of those critics are unhappy today that the U.S. Treasury did not urge
shuttering those agencies in its Friday white paper on the future of Freddie and
Fannie.

But if the federal government decides to close the so-called
government-sponsored enterprises (GSE), the nation will face a new problem in
finding ways to keep up the supply of affordable rental housing, according to
observers.

The two agencies - formally the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie)
and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Co. (Freddie) - have been creating a low-cost
secondary market for both single-family and multifamily loans since 1938 and
1970, respectively.

The value of the agencies to the rental housing industry became clear in the
last three years, when capital markets abandoned every real estate sector except
for the GSE-supported multifamily markets.

"When every other port had closed, Fannie and Freddie stayed open," said Tom
Musil, a finance professor at the University of St. Thomas and a real estate
specialist.

Together the two agencies delivered about $32 billion in combined loans to
multifamily investors in 2010, more than 60 percent of the total that year,
according to the industry publication Apartment Finance Today. The year before,
the two provided more than 80 percent of all multifamily debt.

"When it comes to multifamily housing, especially affordable, we've fallen way
behind in this nation," a failing that the recession exacerbated, Musil said.
"The agencies are the players" that kept working in those underserved markets,
he said.

But their role could be hindered if they are scaled back dramatically, said Mary
Tingerthal, the recently appointed commissioner of Minnesota Housing (formerly
the Minnesota Housing Finance Agency). "I really think there's serious reason to
be concerned that as Congress and the administration debate the GSEs, rental and
affordable housing will be overlooked. "

The agencies keep the spigot flowing largely because the federal government gave
them a hand.

Fannie and Freddie pooled most of their multifamily loans in the wake of the
downturn and sold them in the mortgage-backed securities market - with the help
of a guarantee from the U.S. Treasury.

But those guarantees have not been put to work yet because of the
characteristically strong performance of both agencies' loan portfolios.

According to data that Fannie compiled, loans that were at least 60 days
delinquent made up 0.80 percent of their multifamily portfolio on June 30. More
than 13 percent of apartment loans held in commercial mortgage-backed securities
were 60-plus days delinquent. Four percent of bank loans were 90 days or more
delinquent, according to data from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and
Barclays Capital.

Freddie Mac's losses were even lower, Tingerthal said.

"People have complained about the agencies' underwriting, but that had nothing
at all to do with the multifamily side," said Neil Cullen, a principal
specializing in the apartment finance market with St. Paul-based Oak Grove
Capital.

That performance - combined with the agencies' huge scale and focused
multifamily loan processing they built over decades - offers protection and
appeal to investors.

That efficiency and safety "helped them attract investors from all over the
world," said Mark Sween, a principal with Dominium, a national multifamily
investor and developer based in Plymouth. Dominium uses agency products on its
investments.

That broad investor market kept capital flowing into rental housing. It also
meant lenders could lower the prices on their Fannie and Freddie loans and offer
long-term fixed-rate loans, Sween said.

That pricing advantage has been "incredibly important" in fueling the
development of affordable rental housing, Tingerthal said.

"Something that struck me in Treasury's report: They said Fannie and Freddie
have developed expertise in funding affordable rental housing," she said.
"Private players haven't served that side; they haven't developed that
expertise. That makes me worried that multifamily will get lost in the shuffle.
"

Shrinking share

60% Portion of 2010 multifamily loans provided by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
down from 80% in 2009

Source: Apartment Finance Today

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Regulatory

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              58 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

US Budget Unit Issues Recommendations For Reforming Federal Credit Programs

                           August 30, 1984, Thursday

By David Ahearn and David Zigas

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 29


The federal Office of Management and Budget issued recommendations today for
reforming federal credit programs.

The restrictive guidelines for federal credit agencies call on loan and loan
guarantee agencies to fully disclose all costs of their lending and insurance
programs, and to have borrowers assume more of the costs of their loan
insurance.

The Reagan administration circular says it ''requires'' many changes in federal
credit programs. However, several sources said most of the changes called for in
the circular directive could not be implemented without action by Congress.

''I would say a good 70% [of the proposals] would require legislation,'' said
Charles L.  Edson, partner in Lane & Edson, a Washington law firm specializing
in housing law.

The proposed changes are so controversial, he said, that if federal credit
agencies attempt to push them through Congress, there will be ''one heckuva
legislative battle next year.''

An OMB source conceded that the agency does not seek to stake out any new
targets through its circular, but to reaffirm long-standing positions of the
administration. He acknowledged that legislative action would be required in
almost all instances to implement its credit controls.

The circular, signed by OMB Director David A. Stockman and approved by President
Reagan in a Jan. 12 Cabinet Council of Economic Affairs meeting, opposes direct
or indirect federal guarantees for federally tax-exempt obligations.

However, the OMB source said the circular would have no effect on several
tax-exempt programs that have made news recently. For example, the Federal
National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, has begun to guarantee multifamily
housing projects financed with tax-exempt borrowings. The OMB source said
today's move has no effect on Fannie Mae or its programs.

Nor will the circular have any bearing on the question of whether the Department
of Housing and Urban Development may issue tax-exempt project notes, the OMB
source said. ''We have no intention of jumping into that controversy,'' he said.
The project notes issue surfaced because of changes made by the new tax law.

Similarly, tax-exempt single-family mortgage revenue bonds, which may fund home
loans guaranteed by the Veterans Administration or the Federal Housing
Administration, are unaffected by the circular.

Generally, the circular does not affect tax-exempt housing bonds, said Mr.
Edson, citing existing laws enacted in 1974 and this year.

Other provisions of the circular urge credit agencies to start requiring down
payments on all federally guaranteed home loans, to have interest rates on such
loans linked with market rates, and to set fees for loan guarantees pegged to
''benchmark guarantee fees or insurance premiums charged by private financial
intermediaries for similar coverage.''

Some 70% of existing Veterans Administration loans did not involve any down
payment.

If the Reagan administration is to win congressional approval of all the
proposed changes, ''They are going to have a very hard fight to get this
through'' Congress, said Scott D. Brown, director of market analysis for the
National Association of Homebuilders.

Glen Corso, staff vice president for government agency relations of the Mortgage
Bankers Association of America, said the administration circular ''does not
supersede legislation.''

For example, he said that Congress authorized the Veterans Administration to
guarantee home loans that involve no down payment by the home buyer. He said
that because the VA for so long has authorized such guarantees, if it now moves
to require down payments, that would be viewed by legislators as ''a breach of
law.''

Stephen Melman, director of federal programs for the National Association of
Home Builders, said the circular might have a chilling effect on the long-range
planning needed for multifamily housing projects. ''They are going to have to
figure out other ways to finance them,'' Mr. Melman said of multifamily housing
developers.

''They are going to have to go for private mortgage insurance, and there is not
a whole lot of that out there,'' he said.

Many single-family home buyers will be squeezed out of the market if the
circular provisions are implemented, several sources said. They estimated that
housing would become unaffordable for a large portion of the roughly 15% to 20%
of home buyers who use VA or FHA guarantees.

Mr. Melman said 10% of the nation's home buyers might be pushed out of the
market, while Mark Riedy, executive vice president of the mortgage bankers
association, would say only that ''a high portion'' of potential FHA and VA
buyers would be affected.

He also expressed puzzlement over why the administration issued the circular
today. ''Their timing is rotten,'' he said. ''Mortgage rates are still
historically high,'' and some home buyers need assistance if they are to afford
homes.

Mr. Melman said, ''It's kind of a surprise to do it right before the [November
presidential] election.'' He said the circular's proposed reforms in federal
credit programs would more appropriately be the administration's agenda for
those programs in the four years of a second Reagan administration.  The
circular ''will raise a lot of commotion, [just] when the President needs
votes,'' Mr. Melman said.

Mr. Brown termed the administration circular ''one of the first volleys'' in
what may be a prolonged lobbying war on Capitol Hill.

While the circular said the changes would help to lessen costs of credit
programs to the government, Mr. Brown said the changes would produce a
negligible impact in cutting budget deficits. Some lending programs, such as
those of the Government National Mortgage Association, even return a profit to
the government, he said.

The circular cover letter signed by Mr. Stockman explains that the directive:

''Requires legislative proposals [sent to Congress] to contain an explicit
statement of any subsidies in direct or guaranteed loan programs.

''Requires that interest rates on new direct loans be related to market interest
rates, and vary with market conditions, rather than remain at static levels that
become outmoded when market realities change.

''Opposes providing direct or indirect federal guarantees for federal tax-exempt
obligations.

''Requires those receiving federal loan guarantees to pay for part or all of the
expected federal default liability on the guaranteed loans.

''Encourages risk sharing with the private sector by offering less than 100%
federal guarantees rather than the full guarantee frequently used now.''

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1104 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1984 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              59 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    The Orange County Register (California)

                          November 29, 2006 Wednesday
                                   1 Edition

Conforming loan limit won't change;
U.S. won't raise cap, citing falling home prices. Move forces buyers in
high-priced areas into higher-interest jumbo loans.

BYLINE: By JEFF COLLINS; The Orange County Register

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. Cover_D

LENGTH: 586 words


Orange County borrowers will get little relief in the cost of financing their
homes under a new federal government decision about jumbo and conforming loans.

Citing a decline in the average U.S. house price, the Office of Federal Housing
Enterprise Oversightdecided Tuesday to keep the conforming loan limit for
single-family mortgages at the 2006 level of $417,000 through next year.

As a result, borrowers will end up paying slightly higher interest rates for
loans greater than $417,000, or so-called jumbo loans.

Rates for conforming loans, or those below the limit, generally are about 0.25
percent lower than jumbo loan rates, according to Mortgage News Daily.

The median price of an existing single-family house was $665,000 in Orange
County last month, according to DataQuick Information Systems.

That means the typical homebuyer in Orange County would have to take out a jumbo
loan, at the higher interest rate, unless he or she can make a down payment of
37 percent or more.

A typical Orange County condo buyer likely will qualify for a conforming loan as
long as he or she puts at least 5.23 percent down. The median price of an
existing Orange County condominium was $440,000 in October, according to
DataQuick.

LoanPerformance, a San Francisco research firm, estimated that 21,500 loans
taken out from January through August this year were above the conforming loan
limit. That's 46.2 percent of all the home loans taken out in the county so far
this year.

The conforming loan limit determines the maximum size of a mortgage that Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac can buy or guarantee. The federally chartered agencies were
formed to increase homeownership by buying mortgages and reselling them to
investors.

It's the first time in 14 years that the loan limit will remain unchanged.

The federal housing oversight agency, which oversees both federal home loan
agencies, had raised the loan limit by 15.9 percent at the start of 2006.

The oversight agency reported that the average U.S. house price fell by $501
from October 2005 to October this year.

The average price was $306,258 last month, compared with $306,759 in October
2005, according to the Monthly Interest Rate Survey of the Federal Housing
Finance Board.

The limits are 50 percent higher for Alaska, Hawaii, Guam and the U.S. Virgin
Islands, considered to be high-cost areas.

The California Association of Mortgage Brokers issued a statement Tuesday
criticizing the federal government for not including California among them.

"Sadly, today's decision continues to ignore the realities of California's
housing market," said Michael Faust, the association's government affairs
chairman.

"If Alaska can be considered a high-cost state, with a median home price about
half of the median cost of a home in California, there is no reason Californians
should not have the same benefits."

The California Association of Realtors likewise was critical, saying that
financing a home will remain prohibitive for some homebuyers.

"California has the second-lowest rate of homeownership in the nation, where
even the most affordable parts of the state have home prices in excess of
$300,000," said Colleen Badagliacco, the association's president. California
homebuyers, she said, "are being shortchanged."

The other unchanged limits are $533,850 for two-family loans; $645,300 for
three-family loans; and $801,950 for four-family loans, according to the federal
office. The 2007 loan limit for second mortgages will be $208,500.

The Associated Press contributed  to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Story

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2006 The Orange County Register (California)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              60 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             March 5, 2013 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Regulator sets goals for Fannie and Freddie

BYLINE: Clea Benson

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 433 words


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will create a common platform for issuing
mortgage-backed securities as they wind down operations and plan for a future in
which the two companies no longer exist, their regulator said Monday.

The government-owned enterprises also will start sharing risk with private
financiers in the single-family loan market, aim to reduce their multifamily
housing business by 10 percent and continue raising the fees they charge to
guarantee securities, Edward J. DeMarco, the Federal Housing Finance Agency's
acting director, said during a conference call with reporters.

DeMarco unveiled his agency's goals for Fannie and Freddie as the two companies
head into their fifth year under U.S. conservatorship. The FHFA is shrinking
operations while waiting for President Obama and Congress to move forward with a
broader makeover of the nation's housing finance system.

"One of the challenges that everyone has in conceiving of housing finance reform
and moving to a post-conservatorship world is, where's the plumbing? Where are
the rules? Where are the standards?" DeMarco said. "What we're trying to do with
these strategic goals is to build out that infrastructure and those standards so
it would ease the transition."

District-based Fannie Mae and McLean-based Freddie Mac buy mortgages and package
them into securities on which they guarantee principal and interest. The
companies, seized by federal regulators amid soaring losses in 2008, returned to
profitability last year after drawing $190 billion in taxpayer aid.

Their new joint securitization company will have its own chief executive and
chairman, and will be funded by Fannie and Freddie, DeMarco said. It will create
a single standard for issuing securities that could survive independently if the
two companies no longer exist, he said.

The two enterprises this year also will aim to execute $30 billion each in
transactions in which they share the risk of backing single-family loans with
private participants in the market. Those could involve mortgage insurance or
include the issuance of different types of securities.

"What we're looking for is to have some portion of the risk sold off to private
owners and that way reduce the exposure of the taxpayer and demonstrate the
viability of these types of transactions," DeMarco said.

Fannie and Freddie will also try to reduce their backing of multifamily loans by
10 percent this year, largely through raising prices and tightening
underwriting, he said. They'll also attempt to sell off at least 5 percent of
the illiquid assets in their retained portfolios.

- Bloomberg News

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              61 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Mortgage Bankers Assail OMB Proposal To Impose or Raise Housing Program Fees

                            January 14, 1985, Monday

By Andrea R. Priest


A new series of proposals by the Office of Management and Budget to impose or
increase existing fees on established housing programs will have a serious and
detrimental effect on the housing industry, a spokesman for the Mortgage Bankers
Association of America said Friday.

The legislative and administrative proposals, which are part of the proposed
1986 fiscal budget, include new user fees for the Federal National Mortgage
Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., and the Government National
Mortgage Association, as well as additional fees for users of the Federal
Housing Administration and the Veterans Administration.

Robert Spiller, president of the Mortgage Bankers Association, said the
association supports fees when they are designed to make these programs
''actuarially sound'' by covering the cost of administering them. But the OMB's
proposed fees, he said, are ''disguised tax hikes for moderate- and
middle-income home buyers.''

The proposals would do the following:

Increase the guarantee fee of the Government National Mortgage Association, paid
by lenders, from six basis points to 15 basis points. The change could be made
administratively.

Increase the Veterans Administration's loan funding fee, a one-time fee paid up
front, from 1% to 5%. This change would require action by Congress.

Increase Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance premiums, paid by
borrowers at the time of closing, from 3.8% to 5%. This change could be made
administratively.

Impose user fees on the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corp. for certain secondary mortgage market activities. The
fees would include an annual fee of five basis points on debt issuance rollovers
and mortgage-backed securities in fiscal 1986. The annual fee on debt issuance
would rise to 8.3 basis points in fiscal 1987 and beyond.

The mortgage bankers group contends that supplemental fees placed on the FHA,
VA, and Ginnie Mae programs could hurt their effectiveness. ''Because of the
number of points that would be added to the mortgage, more people will probably
go to conventional mortgages, and these people could be shut out,'' Mr. Spiller
said.

The FHA's single-family mortgage insurance program and Ginnie Mae's
mortgage-backed security program not only cover their costs but also make a
profit, Mr. Spiller noted. The VA's home loan guarantee program is not
self-sustaining, he said, but it is an entitlement program for veterans that
guarantees no-down-payment loans.

''The proposal to increase the FHA up-front mortgage insurance premium from 3.8%
to 5% would add $627 to the median priced FHA transaction on a $52,000
mortgage,'' he said. ''Coupled with the GNMA fee that would be passed on to the
consumer, this is an additional $928 an average FHA homeowner must pay.''

Veterans would be hit even harder, with an additional four points payable at
closing on an average $63,000 loan. This would mean an extra $2,500 payable up
front. Add in the GNMA increase, and the new up-front charges would amount to
about $2,900, Mr. Spiller said.

Additional fees would also hurt Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, agencies that Mr.
Spiller called ''pivotal in securing adequate supplies of affordable mortgage
credit by ensuring efficient secondary markets.''

Doug Bibby, senior vice president of Fannie Mae, said the user tax would be
retroactive and have severe fiscal implications for his organization.

''The fee penalizes GNMA, FNMA, and Freddie Mac when the market needs them
most,'' he said. ''We have to borrow to purchase mortgages, and our ability will
be impaired.''

Kenneth Thygerson, president and chief executive officer of Freddie Mac, saw the
matter in a different light. He said his organization viewed the budget office's
proposal as ''legitimate,'' but the user fees should be related to the risk
involved. For example, he said, there is no risk with a pass-through security,
but there is with straight new debt issuance. ''The relationship on the proposed
fees are out of sync,'' he concluded.

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 682 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1985 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              62 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Journal (Newcastle, UK)

                            July 24, 2013 Wednesday

First-time Buyers To Get More Help

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 355 words


THE Government yesterday insisted only credit-worthy borrowers will be able to
buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed more
details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130bn of mortgage lending with state guarantees
including banning second home buyers and people with property abroad.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just 5%. The scheme
has been credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up prices.

Mortgage guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.

Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover both existing and newly-built homes.

Guarantees will only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages,
while those with impaired credit ratings will be excluded, the Treasury
insisted. It will include income checks and stress testing.

Mr Osborne held a  meeting yesterday at Number 11 Downing Street with executives
from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major lenders
such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays.

The initial equity loan stage allows people to buy a new-build home worth up to
£600,000 with a Government loan of up to 20%, interest-free for five years.

However, the guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating
another housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government.

Former Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close
for comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages.

And Graeme Leach, chief economist at the Institute of Directors, said: "The
housing market needs help to supply, not help to buy, and the extension of this
scheme is very dangerous."

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families. Help to Buy is about getting behind those who aspire to own a
home."

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2013 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              63 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Journal

                            July 24, 2013 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

First-time buyers to get more help;
Chancellor's plan courts controversy

BYLINE: John Collingridge

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 355 words


THE Government yesterday insisted only credit-worthy borrowers will be able to
buy homes with its expanding housing stimulus programme as it revealed more
details on the Help to Buy scheme.

Chancellor George Osborne met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130bn of mortgage lending with state guarantees -
including banning second home buyers and people with property abroad.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just 5%. The scheme
has been credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up prices.

Mortgage guarantees will launch in January and will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.

Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders, and will cover both existing and newly-built homes.

Guarantees will only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages,
while those with impaired credit ratings will be excluded, the Treasury
insisted. It will include income checks and stress testing.

Mr Osborne held a meeting yesterday at Number 11 Downing Street with executives
from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major lenders
such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays.

The initial equity loan stage allows people to buy a new-build home worth up to
£600,000 with a Government loan of up to 20%, interest-free for five years.

However, the guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating
another housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government.

Former Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close
for comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages.

And Graeme Leach, chief economist at the Institute of Directors, said: "The
housing market needs help to supply, not help to buy, and the extension of this
scheme is very dangerous."

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families. Help to Buy is about getting behind those who aspire to own a
home."

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TJN


               Copyright 2013 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              64 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                  Daily Mirror

                             July 23, 2013 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Building on small deposits;
your money

BYLINE: GRAHAM HISCOTT

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 162 words


BIG builders have given a controversial £12billion Government funding scheme
their backing.

Firms including Barratt, Taylor Wimpey and Persimmon say the latest phase of the
Help to Buy drive will boost the numbers of much-needed new homes.

From next January, Governmentguaranteed home loans will be made available to
those with a 5% deposit.

But critics warn it risks lumbering the taxpayer with losses if house prices
fall. The £12bn of guarantees could enable up to £130bn of lending. The sche
shlaoa scheme, an extension of a shared equity version launched in March, will
be open to first-time buyers and home movers on property worth up to £600,000.

Pete Redfern, boss of Taylor Wimpey, said the scheme would "increase house
building for the industry". However, it remains to be seen how much lenders will
have to pay for the guarantees, and how competitive the mortgage deals will be.

The Home Builders Federation warned the planning system would need to deliver
enough land.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2013 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              65 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                  Daily Mirror

                             July 23, 2013 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                Northern Ireland

Building on small deposits;
your money

BYLINE: GRAHAM HISCOTT

SECTION: BUSINESS; OPINION, COLUMNS; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 162 words


BIG builders have given a controversial £12billion Government funding scheme
their backing.

Firms including Barratt, Taylor Wimpey and Persimmon say the latest phase of the
Help to Buy drive will boost the numbers of much-needed new homes.

From next January, Governmentguaranteed home loans will be made available to
those with a 5% deposit.

But critics warn it risks lumbering the taxpayer with losses if house prices
fall. The £12bn of guarantees could enable up to £130bn of lending. The sche
shlaoa scheme, an extension of a shared equity version launched in March, will
be open to first-time buyers and home movers on property worth up to £600,000.

Pete Redfern, boss of Taylor Wimpey, said the scheme would "increase house
building for the industry". However, it remains to be seen how much lenders will
have to pay for the guarantees, and how competitive the mortgage deals will be.

The Home Builders Federation warned the planning system would need to deliver
enough land.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2013 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              66 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                            December 12, 2014 Friday

New Policy Goes Only Partway in Helping Struggling Homeowners

BYLINE: JENNIFER TAUB

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 993 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Federal Housing Finance Agency is allowing people who have lost
their homes to buy them back at fair market value. But that doesn&#8217;t help
people still in their homes, Jennifer Taub writes in the Another View column.


 Jennifer Taub is a professor at Vermont Law School. Her book "Other People's
Houses" was published in May by Yale University Press.

Well, that was fast.

At a Senate Banking Committee hearing on Nov. 19, Melvin Watt, the director of
the Federal Housing Finance Agency, was in the hot seat, explaining to Senator
Elizabeth Warren why Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had done so little to help
families who were facing foreclosure save their homes.

Grilling Mr. Watt about the plight of underwater homeowners - the millions of
borrowers who, after the housing bubble burst, still owe more on their mortgages
than their homes are worth - Senator Warren, a Massachusetts Democrat, said,
"You've been in office nearly a year and you have not helped a single family,
not even one, by agreeing to a principal reduction."

Since its creation in 2008, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (which acts as
regulator and conservator for Fannie and Freddie) has opposed reducing principal
on underwater mortgages that the two enterprises own or guarantee.  This
opposition prevents borrowers from lowering their total outstanding debt and,
correspondingly, their monthly payments.

Even when the value of reducing mortgage principal is greater than what a
foreclosure sale would yield, Fannie and Freddie refuse.

Over the years, research has indicated that Fannie and Freddie would save money
by reducing amounts owed on underwater mortgages. As one example, a
Congressional Budget Office study in 2013 concluded that principal reduction
could help 1.2 million borrowers and save the two enterprises $2.8 billion. The
agency has not been persuaded by the data.

"Every day that you delay," Senator Warren said, "more families lose their
homes." She then asked, "When are you going to have an answer?" In response, Mr.
Watt assured her that this was a priority and that the agency was "getting
closer." It seemed like the standard bureaucratic answer.

But less than a week after that Senate hearing, Mr. Watt made good. On Nov. 25,
his agency announced a directive aimed at helping families in distress.

The agency told Fannie and Freddie to permit owners who had lost their homes to
buy them back at fair market value. Prior to this directive, former owners had
to pay off the full principal balance to get their old homes back. For
homeowners who were previously underwater, this amount could be substantially
higher than what the home was worth.

Clearly, this policy change took a little heat off Mr. Watt. But who else will
benefit?

Housing advocates like Eloise Lawrence, a staff lawyer with the Harvard Legal
Aid Bureau, have an answer. Although expressing disappointment about the limited
nature of the directive, Ms. Lawrence described it as "a positive move in the
right direction." She also noted that the bureau has four families who would
directly benefit.

Those clients include Ramon and Rosanna Suero. As described in a DealBook column
in June, the Sueros purchased a condominium in Dorchester, Mass., in 2005 for
$283,000, using a combination of two high-risk mortgages.  They lost the condo
in a foreclosure sale in 2010. The nonprofit group Boston Community Capital has
offered to purchase the condo from Freddie Mac for the fair market value of
$115,000. The group hopes to sell it back to the Sueros, financed with a more
affordable fixed-rate mortgage.

Freddie refused Boston Community Capital's offer, saying that only the full
balance on the loan was acceptable because the home would be returned to its
owners. Under Freddie's policy, anyone other than the Sueros could buy at the
lower market value.

So in 2013, the Sueros, who are jointly represent by Andrea Park of the Harvard
Legal Aid Bureau and Nicole Summers of the Northeast Justice Center, sued
Freddie Mac. The court has ordered that pending the outcome of the case, the
family cannot be evicted and the condo cannot be sold. Their condo is one of the
properties in Freddie's inventory that is subject to the new directive.

We wonder, then, will the Sueros have their home back for the holidays? It's too
soon to tell.  Stefanie Johnson, a spokeswoman for the Federal Housing Finance
Agency, responded via email that the agency "does not comment on pending
litigation." She added that "individuals can apply" under the new policy and
that "this will be addressed" by Freddie Mac and Boston Community Capital.

Meanwhile, though, there are considerable gaps in the new directive. It does
nothing to prevent families from losing their homes through short sales or
foreclosures. It only helps those who already lost ownership. Moreover, the only
homes eligible for repurchase are those among the 121,000 properties owned by
Fannie and Freddie.

Helping prevent future defaults and foreclosures remains important, especially
in light of another new policy. In October, Mr. Watt announced plans to permit
Fannie and Freddie to buy or guarantee mortgages where borrowers put down as
little as 3 percent of the purchase price. He said these mortgages would be
subject to "sensible and responsible guidelines" that would take into account
"compensating factors." Just this week, the guidelines were released.

Opponents worry that lower down payments will lead to new defaults, foreclosures
and bank failures.  Supporters contend that the benefit of expanding access to
credit and thus promoting homeownership greatly outweighs any modest increase in
risk. They note that it was the layering of risks, not low down payments on
their own, that caused the last crisis.

History shows, however, that as memories fade and profits are within reach,
risks will get layered, and borrowers will end up in distress.

It is all the more important, then, that the agency direct Fannie and Freddie to
put actual foreclosure prevention policies in place that would help underwater
borrowers still in their homes. If we genuinely value homeownership, then we
need to help families keep their homes once they have acquired them.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              67 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Foreclosure aid takes shape;
Citigroup joins Fannie, Freddie with initiatives

BYLINE: Stephanie Armour and Anna Bahney

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 383 words


The federal government and one of the country's largest banks are expanding
their efforts to help homeowners with troubled mortgages avoid joining the
millions of Americans who have already lost their homes to foreclosure.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which own or guarantee nearly 60% of all
single-family home mortgages, said Tuesday that they will accelerate the process
for modifying thousands of home loans.

In addition, Citigroup announced it will expand its moratorium on foreclosures
and initiate a new program to assist borrowers who may develop problems paying
their mortgages.

Both efforts show how the Bush administration and private lenders are scrambling
to cope with an unprecedented wave of home foreclosures.

The government is working on a plan to help as many as 3 million homeowners
avert foreclosure.

Sheila Bair, the head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and the
government's most vocal advocate for stronger measures to help homeowners, said
Tuesday that the Federal Housing Finance Agency program would not do enough to
prevent "unnecessary foreclosures."

While the government is investing hundreds of billions of dollars in financial
institutions suffering from losses related to bad mortgages, "We must also
devote some of that money to fixing the front-end problem: too many unaffordable
home loans," Bair said.

Foreclosure filings rose 71% in the third quarter from a year earlier according
to RealtyTrac. Home prices continue to fall in many areas, and stricter mortgage
standards make it harder for homeowners to sell or refinance. About 4 million
borrowers are at least one payment behind, according to the Mortgage Bankers
Association.

Some economists say lenders are taking steps on their own to aid homeowners
because troubled mortgages remain a financial risk to banks. Also, lenders
taking steps now have a chance to establish a record of taking action rather
than waiting for a government-imposed mandate.

"The problem has become so great, so everybody is trying to get out and do
something. The financial sector understands that unless they get these loans off
their books, they'll just be bleeding," says Joel Naroff of Naroff Economic
Advisors. "That's good, because if all we do is wait for a government bailout,
nobody has the infrastructure to handle the problem."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              68 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Columbus Telegram (Nebraska)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 29, 2006 Friday

Columbus bank recognized as pioneer

BYLINE: Jim Osborn, Columbus Telegram, Neb.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 585 words


Sep. 29--COLUMBUS -- A 67-year-old woman's joy at receiving a loan to buy her
first home reinforced banker Hollie Olk's belief in the value of a federal loan
guarantee program.

It's not as if she needed it.

"She was a first-time homebuyer," said Olk, vice president of real estate
lending at First National Bank and Trust Co. in Columbus. "She would have made
you cry seeing how happy she was."

That 67-year-old homebuyer had taken advantage of a USDA Rural Development
federally guaranteed loan program that has been a popular choice in Columbus for
more than a decade.

The loan program, known as the Single-Family Housing Guaranteed Loan Program,
accounted for the financing on 23 percent of First National customers' home
purchases from January 2005 to August this year.

"That's a significant number," Olk said.

The federal loan program is designed to provide loans to eligible moderate to
low-income rural residents for the purchase of a single-family dwelling in a
rural area. Loans are made by local approved lenders with USDA Rural Development
issuing a guarantee on the loan.

On Thursday, First National was recognized by the Rural Development agency for
its participation in an effort to streamline the underwriting process to
determine a borrower's eligibility for the loan program.

First National was the first lender in the nation to underwrite a home loan
under the federal program employing the Guaranteed Underwriting System (GUS), a
process that could slash approval time from 48 hours to a mere few seconds.

Underwriting is the process a lender goes through, checking such things as a
potential borrower's credit, employment history, income and debt load to assess
loan eligibility.

The first home mortgage approved for a Rural Development loan using GUS went to
a 24-year-old, single Columbus man, who purchased a home in the city for just
under $80,000.

"I've just got the best job," Olk said.

First National was presented with a plaque on Thursday from Rural Development
officials marking that first loan approval that was underwritten with the GUS
automated system.

"It is an honor to be here today to recognize First National Bank and Trust for
their pioneering accomplishment in home loan making," said Roger Glendenning,
director of Rural Development's loan program.

"Rural Development is excited about GUS because it will result in great benefits
to approved home mortgage lenders through reduced paperwork, faster turnaround
time on loan decisions and improved consistency in underwriting decisions," said
Glendenning, based in Washington, D.C.

First National was one of eight lenders from seven states selected for a pilot
program launching GUS in August. Rural Development plans to implement GUS for
lenders nationwide in 2007.

"We're honored we got asked to participate in the pilot program," Olk said. "GUS
is in its infancy. We'll work out the bugs, and I have no doubt it will
streamline the underwriting process."

First National has actively utilized the federally guaranteed housing program,
leading the state's lenders three of the last five years.

Since the loan program began in 1992, Nebraska-approved lenders have loaned more
than $340 million to nearly 6,000 households in rural areas.

Copyright (c) 2006, Columbus Telegram, Neb. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune
Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call
800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The
Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060929-CU-0929-Columbus-bank-recognized-as-pioneer

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CU


                                 Copyright 2006


                              69 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Daily Record and Sunday Mail

                             July 23, 2013 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Building on small deposits

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 173 words


BIG builders have given controversial £12billion Government funding scheme their
backing. ven a ion me Firms including Barratt, Taylor Wimpey and Persimmon say
the latest phase of the Help to Buy drive will boost the numbers of much-needed
new homes.

d t y rs es. a r y, From next J an u Government-guaranteed home loans will be
made available to those with a five per cent deposit.

But critics warn it risks lumbering the taxpayer with losses if house prices
fall. The £12billion of guarantees could enable up to £130billion of lending.

The sc shar in fimu scheme, an extension of a shared equity version launched
March, will be open to first-time buyers and home movers on property worth up to
£600,000.

Pete Redfern, boss of Taylor Wimpey, said the scheme would "increase house
building for the industry".

T sc ho indus However, it remains to be seen how much lenders will have to pay
for the guarantees and how competitive the mortgage deals will be.

The Home Builders Federation warned the planning system would need to deliver
enough land.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DRC


             Copyright 2013 Scottish Daily Record & Sunday Mail Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              70 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                           February 17, 2011 Thursday

Commentary: The end may be near for Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae

BYLINE: Darren Currin

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 449  words


Could Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac be history within the next five years? That is
the big concern among apartment owners and potential investors with regards to
President Obama's plan to reduce the federal government's footprint in the U.S.
housing market by beginning to wind down both agencies in 2012 and 2013 and
eventually phase them out altogether. Both agencies own or guarantee $5 trillion
in single-family and apartment mortgages and currently provide about 80 percent
of all financing for apartment transactions.

According to an article that appeared in today's CoStar Advisor email
newsletter, the sharp decline in homeownership nationwide has caused a
substantial increase in the demand for rental units as 4 million American
households went from homeownership to renting during the recession. That number
continues to rise, according to the article, as more young people are forming
households of their own, coupled with aging baby boomers settling into their
empty nests. Since this increase in demand should sustain itself for a few
years, there is concern about losing Freddie and Fannie at a time when the
industry will be booming.

The article noted that Fannie and Freddie's apartment mortgage programs operate
much more efficiently than their residential ones in that they originate and
guarantee mortgages for mostly high-quality, well-performing Class A apartment
assets. By throwing them out, the National Multi Housing Council said that it
would be a big mistake that could seriously impact the national apartment
market. The council said the following in the article: "Reform is absolutely
necessary to address the serious flaws in the single-family sector. But as the
administration recognizes, policymakers need to understand that the GSEs'
multifamily programs were not part of the meltdown, and they are a vital capital
source for the rental housing sector. "

This is concerning for the Oklahoma apartment markets considering that a
majority of the Class A and B transactions that have occurred over the past few
years were fueled by Fannie or Freddie loans. If they should go away, there is
fear about the impact it would have on apartment transaction activity in both
Oklahoma City and Tulsa, especially since traditional lenders continue to be
stingy when it comes to financing deals.

The good news is that this situation could result in a flurry of deal activity
in the next couple of years as owners try to make moves before Fannie and
Freddie go away; however, things could get dicey after Freddie and Fannie are
dissolved in five years unless new sources of financing are found. This
situation definitely warrants close watch by those involved in the apartment
industry.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Opinion

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              71 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               February 27, 2012

FHFA Ponders Spinning Off the GSEs' MF Units

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2 Vol. 36 No. 22

LENGTH: 293  words


The Federal Housing Finance Agency is toying with the idea of spinning off to
the private sector the multifamily businesses of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Both units have weathered the housing crisis with flying colors. At yearend
multifamily delinquencies at Freddie totaled just 0.22%, while at Fannie the
rate was a bit higher at 0.59%.

"Unlike the single-family credit guarantee business, each enterprise's
multifamily business has weathered the financial crisis and generated positive
cash flow," according to the FHFA's new strategic plan for managing the GSEs
over the next few years.

The GSE regulator will instruct Fannie and Freddie to conduct a "market analysis
of the viability of its multifamily operations without government guarantees."

The analysis will consider how much capital would be required for the
multifamily units to survive as standalone entities-and how such a move might
impact loan pricing.

"This is really meant to be an assessment process. We don't have a predetermined
outcome," FHFA director Edward DeMarco said in an exclusive interview with
National Mortgage News.

The strategic plan notes several reasons for moving forward with privatizing MF:
the multifamily market is healthy with rising rents, declining vacancies and low
delinquency rates; Fannie and Freddie are key players in the multifamily market
but don't dominate like they do in single-family; and the GSEs are much further
along in terms of risk sharing with multifamily lenders and investors than on
the single-family side.

The FHFA notes that currently there is strong demand for employees with
multifamily experience and both GSEs have "lost key personnel" to private sector
firms.

Separately, several multifamily trade groups welcomed the FHFA's strategic
approach.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              72 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Times (Munster, Indiana)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 21, 2012 Friday

Feds seek hike in Ill. mortgage guarantee fees

BYLINE: Bowdeya Tweh, The Times, Munster, Ind.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 301 words


Sept. 21--The Federal Housing Finance Agency wants to adjust fees homeowners in
Illinois and four other states pay to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to guarantee
their single-family home mortgages.

In a news release issued Thursday, the FHFA said the changes are being made in
the states where costs related to foreclosure practices are statistically higher
than the national average.

The guarantee fees are charged to compensate the government-sponsored
enterprises for credit risks undertaken when they own or guarantee mortgages.
Fees on single family mortgages vary depending on the loan product and borrower
attributes. They also generally include ongoing monthly and upfront payments
once the enterprise acquires the loan.

Illinois homeowners with a 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage of $200,000 could see an
upfront fee hike of $3.50 per month, or $42 a year, according to FHFA.

FHFA is the conservator for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. As of June, the
enterprises said it takes more than four months longer in Illinois than the
national weighted average of 413 days to complete the foreclosure sales process
and obtain title to remarket the property.

FHFA will accept comments on the proposed changes for 60 days after the notice
about the proposed changes appears in the Federal Register. After reviewing
public input, the agency will make a final determination on state-level
guarantee fee pricing and hopes to direct the enterprises to implement changes
next year.

The other four states are New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Florida.

Submissions may be sent to gfeeinput@fhfa.gov, or to FHFA OPAR, 400 Seventh St.,
SW, Ninth Floor, Washington, DC 20024. Submissions may be made public.

___ (c)2012 The Times (Munster, Ind.) Visit The Times (Munster, Ind.) at
www.nwitimes.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120921-MU-Feds-seek-hike-in-Ill-mortgage-guarantee-fees-0921-20120921

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MU


                            Copyright 2012 The Times


                              73 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                        The Camp Verde Journal (Arizona)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                January 1, 2014

Rural home loans expanded, streamlined

BYLINE: The Camp Verde Journal staff

LENGTH: 685  words


U.S. Department of Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack has announced a series of
sweeping changes to a popular loan program for rural home buyers. The changes
are part of an extensive overhaul that will strengthen rural housing markets,
increase the availability of rural home loans and spur the construction of new
homes in rural areas.

"These improvements will help create jobs and enable more people to participate
in the rural home loan guarantee program," Vilsack said. "The changes will add
significant capital to rural areas and give rural Americans more opportunities
to make financing decisions that lay the groundwork for the future prosperity of
their families."

The changes take effect Sept. 1, and make several improvements to USDA Rural
Development's Single Family Housing Guaranteed Loan Program. Among other things,
they expand the types of lenders who are eligible to participate. With the rule
change, any lending entity supervised and regulated by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve Banks, or the Federal
Housing Finance Board may underwrite loans guaranteed by Rural Development. This
will enable many small community banks and credit unions to participate in the
guaranteed loan program. Currently, these entities are not eligible lenders.

In another policy change, for the first time, borrowers will be able to choose
home loan terms shorter than 30 years. This will result in a significant cost
savings for borrowers who qualify for the higher payments and who want to pay
off their loan faster and pay less interest on their loan.

Collectively, these changes will make housing loans more readily available to
residents in underserved communities, such as those targeted by USDA's
StrikeForce initiative. Through StrikeForce, USDA staff work with state, local
and community officials to increase awareness of USDA programs that help rural
residents, businesses and communities.

As part of the overhaul, Rural Development has begun a series of enhancements to
automate processes, reduce paperwork and reduce loan approval times. Additional
program improvements include the following:

Lenders may consider a home's energy efficiency as a compensating factor when
underwriting a mortgage application. Energy efficiency is an attractive feature
for home buyers and sellers. Energy efficient homes help the nation lessen its
dependence on foreign oil and result in lower utility costs for homeowners.
Lower utility costs also improve the local economy by directly increasing
consumers' disposable income.

Lenders and borrowers no longer will be required to initiate separate
construction and permanent loans for new homes. Instead, there will be one
closing for one loan, known as a construction-to-permanent loan.

Lenders will be required to consider foreclosure prevention techniques such as
loan modifications and short sales. Currently, lenders are "encouraged" but not
required to do so.

These changes will be fully outlined in a new handbook to accompany program
regulations. The handbook will provide a single reference point on program rules
for borrowers and lenders. It will replace more than 20 administrative notices
that are written separately and must be updated annually.

For additional details and information on how to submit comments, see page 73927
of the Dec. 9 Federal Register. The USDA welcomes public comment on the changes.
The deadline to submit comments is Wednesday, Jan. 8.

Since the beginning of the administration of President Barack Obama, more than
700,000 rural residents have bought homes with mortgages guaranteed by USDA
Rural Development. In many rural areas, the majority of homes are financed with
loans underwritten through this program.

Vilsack said that today's announcement is another reminder of the importance of
USDA programs for rural America. A comprehensive new food, farm and jobs bill
would further expand the rural economy, Vilsack added, saying that's just one
reason why Congress must get a comprehensive bill done as soon as possible.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CPV

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2014 The Camp Verde Journal


                              74 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                       Cottonwood Journal Extra (Arizona)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                January 1, 2014

Rural home loans expanded, streamlined

BYLINE: Cottonwood Journal Extra staff

LENGTH: 685  words


U.S. Department of Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack has announced a series of
sweeping changes to a popular loan program for rural home buyers. The changes
are part of an extensive overhaul that will strengthen rural housing markets,
increase the availability of rural home loans and spur the construction of new
homes in rural areas.

"These improvements will help create jobs and enable more people to participate
in the rural home loan guarantee program," Vilsack said. "The changes will add
significant capital to rural areas and give rural Americans more opportunities
to make financing decisions that lay the groundwork for the future prosperity of
their families."

The changes take effect Sept. 1, and make several improvements to USDA Rural
Development's Single Family Housing Guaranteed Loan Program. Among other things,
they expand the types of lenders who are eligible to participate. With the rule
change, any lending entity supervised and regulated by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve Banks, or the Federal
Housing Finance Board may underwrite loans guaranteed by Rural Development. This
will enable many small community banks and credit unions to participate in the
guaranteed loan program. Currently, these entities are not eligible lenders.

In another policy change, for the first time, borrowers will be able to choose
home loan terms shorter than 30 years. This will result in a significant cost
savings for borrowers who qualify for the higher payments and who want to pay
off their loan faster and pay less interest on their loan.

Collectively, these changes will make housing loans more readily available to
residents in underserved communities, such as those targeted by USDA's
StrikeForce initiative. Through StrikeForce, USDA staff work with state, local
and community officials to increase awareness of USDA programs that help rural
residents, businesses and communities.

As part of the overhaul, Rural Development has begun a series of enhancements to
automate processes, reduce paperwork and reduce loan approval times. Additional
program improvements include the following:

Lenders may consider a home's energy efficiency as a compensating factor when
underwriting a mortgage application. Energy efficiency is an attractive feature
for home buyers and sellers. Energy efficient homes help the nation lessen its
dependence on foreign oil and result in lower utility costs for homeowners.
Lower utility costs also improve the local economy by directly increasing
consumers' disposable income.

Lenders and borrowers no longer will be required to initiate separate
construction and permanent loans for new homes. Instead, there will be one
closing for one loan, known as a construction-to-permanent loan.

Lenders will be required to consider foreclosure prevention techniques such as
loan modifications and short sales. Currently, lenders are "encouraged" but not
required to do so.

These changes will be fully outlined in a new handbook to accompany program
regulations. The handbook will provide a single reference point on program rules
for borrowers and lenders. It will replace more than 20 administrative notices
that are written separately and must be updated annually.

For additional details and information on how to submit comments, see page 73927
of the Dec. 9 Federal Register. The USDA welcomes public comment on the changes.
The deadline to submit comments is Wednesday, Jan. 8.

Since the beginning of the administration of President Barack Obama, more than
700,000 rural residents have bought homes with mortgages guaranteed by USDA
Rural Development. In many rural areas, the majority of homes are financed with
loans underwritten through this program.

Vilsack said that today's announcement is another reminder of the importance of
USDA programs for rural America. A comprehensive new food, farm and jobs bill
would further expand the rural economy, Vilsack added, saying that's just one
reason why Congress must get a comprehensive bill done as soon as possible.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CJX

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                    Copyright 2014 Cottonwood Journal Extra


                              75 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   February 3, 1990, Saturday, Final Edition

VA Down Payment Plan Rallies Critics of Budget;
Hill Fight Looms Over Higher Fees

BYLINE: Ann Mariano, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; PAGE E1

LENGTH: 1065 words


Bush administration proposals to impose fees on some federally insured home loan
programs and to increase existing levies on others quickly ran into opposition
from Capitol Hill and the mortgage finance industry this week.

The heaviest fire was directed at the proposal to require veterans to make down
payments when they buy homes with Veterans' Affairs-guaranteed loans. Veterans,
who have never been required to make down payments in the 46-year history of the
loan program, also would face increases in funding fees they are charged when
taking out a loan.

These legislative proposals "are pretty much dead on arrival" at the Capitol,
said a spokesman for the House Veterans Affairs Committee. Rep. G.V. Montgomery
(D-Miss.), the committee chairman, is strongly opposed to the proposals and is
not likely to change his mind in the future, the spokesman said.

A similar reaction came from Senate Veterans Affairs Committee Chairman Alan
Cranston (D-Calif.), who said "major retrenchments" in the home loan guaranty
rules were the most objectionable features in the VA budget proposals. Cranston
said he would oppose changes "in the fundamental nature of this important
veterans benefit" and predicted there would be no "time for committee hearings
on these kinds of proposals."

The White House recommendations were part of the fiscal 1991 budget submitted to
Congress this week.

Under the administration plan, veterans would be required to make a down payment
of 4 percent of the amount of the loan over $ 25,000. The down payment on an $
80,000 mortgage would be 4 percent of $ 55,000 or $ 2,200. Proposed increases in
funding fees, similar to mortgage insurance premiums, would add $ 400 to the
closing costs on this mortgage.

Even with the added costs, "We believe [VA loans] are the best deal in town,"
said Anthony J. Principi, deputy secretary of the Department of Veterans
Affairs. The changes proposed "are important to make this program more
financially solvent and in doing so to protect" veterans, he said.

Congress has appropriated more than $ 2.2 billion since 1984 to cover losses in
the VA's Loan Guaranty Revolving Fund. Principi said the department will need $
512 million to cover expected losses in 1991.

The White House also asked for congressional approval to end the VA authority to
guarantee mobile home loans, which have had a foreclosure rate of nearly 30
percent since the program began.

In its budget, the administration said the VA and the Farmers Home
Administration, which makes direct loans to rural home buyers, could lose
"several billion dollars" during the next 20 years, even under favorable
financial conditions.

The White House said the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) also could lose
"tens of billions of dollars" during the same period, with more than half of the
losses resulting from insurance commitments made before the end of 1990.

But the administration postponed suggestions for changes in FHA regulations
until a review of the agency's financial condition by Price Waterhouse, an
independent accounting firm, is finished in March. Then, according to the
budget, the administration will propose reforms to restore "actuarial soundness"
in the single-family insurance program "while maintaining its benefits for
first-time home buyers."

The budget proposes to limit overlapping government guarantees that often shield
lenders and saddles the government with all of the losses when loans go bad.
"Even more importantly, a partial guarantee exposes mortgage lenders to default
losses, which makes them more careful in their underwriting," according to the
administration.

Warren Lasko, executive vice president of the Mortgage Bankers Association of
America, said the predictions of heavy FHA losses in the future are "extremely
conjectural" and without "statistical foundation." The Office of Management and
Budget "is trying to paint as bleak a picture as possible" to justify the higher
fees the administration wants, he said.

"The fees should be adequate to cover the costs of a program," and increases
should be based only on higher costs, Lasko said. "People have lost sight of the
basic purpose of [federal housing insurance programs], which is to promote
homeownership."

One source familiar with the FHA program said preliminary figures show the
single-family insurance fund broke even in fiscal 1989.

The General Accounting Office, however, reported late last year that the fund is
expected to show a $ 485 million loss for 1989. The actual loss for fiscal 1988
was $ 1.4 billion, the GAO said.

The White House also proposed that new fees be levied on the Federal National
Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
(Freddie Mac), secondary mortgage market institutions that buy home loans from
financial institutions as a way to provide money for more loans and then package
the mortgages to sell to investors. The new fees would initially total five
one-hundredths of a percentage point of the amount of the securities sold.
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were federally chartered to raise mortgage money but
have few government ties now.

"Although the government is not legally liable for Fannie and Freddie, it is
widely believed" that the government would bail out the two organizations rather
than risk disruption "of mortgage markets and ... the failure of mortgage
lenders," according to the administration. The White House budget document also
notes that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have grown rapidly during the last decade
and that "any budget threat that they pose is remote."

Congress has rejected similar proposals for such fees in the past.

William R. Maloni, Fannie Mae's senior vice president for policy and public
affairs, said "any user fee raises the cost of owning or renting a house," and
predicted that Congress would reject these proposals. He called such fees a
"homeowners' tax" that would annually price about 100,000 families out of the
housing market.

In other proposals, the administration asks for a ceiling of $ 75 billion on the
total amount of mortgages FHA can insure during fiscal 1990, a small increase
over the $ 73.8 billion ceiling in 1990. The Government National Mortgage
Association, HUD's secondary mortgage market agency, would have an $ 80 billion
credit ceiling, a decrease from the $ 81.7 billion limit for this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1990 The Washington Post


                              76 of 998 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                             May 14, 2014 Wednesday
                            All_but_Toronto Edition

U.S. regulator opens door wider on mortgages; Policy deviation

BYLINE: Margaret Chadbourn, Reuters

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. FP6

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The regulator of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac laid out plans for the
government-run companies on Tuesday that could make it easier for Americans to
obtain mortgages, marking a sharp departure from a predecessor who wanted to
aggressively shrink their role in the housing finance market.

Federal Housing Finance Agency Director Mel Watt, in his first public speech
since taking office in early January, said he would hold off on a proposed
reduction in the size of loans the firms can buy, and added he was jettisoning
plans to reduce the financing they provide for apartment building loans.

He also said the two companies, which own or guarantee about 60% of all U.S.
home loans, would ease standards that govern when banks must buy back faulty
loans from them, which could also help open the credit taps.

"I don't think it's FHFA's role to contract the footprint of Fannie and
Freddie," Watt said at an event sponsored by the Brookings Institution. "Our
overriding objective is to ensure that there is broad liquidity in the housing
finance market and to do so in a way that is safe and sound."

The Senate Banking Committee will consider a bill on Thursday to replace Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac with an industry-financed government mortgage reinsurer, but
the likelihood of any legislation becoming law soon is slim, leaving the
regulator with power to direct the firms.

Mr. Watt said he did not see it as his role to weigh in on the debate.

Both Mr. Watt's predecessor, Edward DeMarco, and the Obama administration
favoured cutting the size of so-called conforming loans as a way to make room
for more private capital. But housing industry groups had warned the step could
undercut a market that already appears to be flagging.

Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen said last week there was a risk a protracted
housing slowdown could undermine hopes for stronger economic growth this year.

"FHFA will not use its authority as conservator to reduce current loan limits,"
Mr. Watt said. "This decision is motivated by concerns about how such a
reduction could adversely impact the health of the current housing finance
market."

Some investors saw the shift as making it more likely the bailed-out companies,
which lawmakers and the Obama administration want to shut down eventually, would
ultimately survive. Their common stock shot up more than 11% in early trading to
around $4.70 a share. If the companies are wound down, the stock would likely be
worthless.

Investors also seemed heartened by Mr. Watt's decision to not force Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac to pull back support for multi-family housing. The PHLX Housing
Index of homebuilders ticked up 0.7%, with several major builders, including
PulteGroup, Lennar and KB Home each rallying.

In easing rules that govern when banks are required to repurchase faulty
mortgages they sold to the two companies, Mr. Watt took aim at a risk that
lenders cite for the stilltight credit that has hindered the housing recovery.

Mr. Watt said Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which buy mortgages and package them
into securities they issue with a guarantee, would expand the universe of loans
exempt from repurchase requests in part by relaxing mortgage payment history
requirements.

"While none of his actions will solve the mortgage credit crunch. They all will
help at the margins," said Jaret Seiberg, a senior policy analyst at Guggenheim
Securities. "The path Watt has laid out is positive for mortgage originators,
mortgage insurers and homebuilders."

Mr. DeMarco earned a reputation as a staunch protector of the taxpayers who
bailed out Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac with US$187.5-billion, but housing
advocates felt he did not do enough to help Americans whose home values
plummeted when the U.S. housing bubble burst.

Mr. Watt said his agency had no plans to cut mortgage principal for borrowers
whose homes were now worth less than their mortgages, but he said that did not
necessarily mean FHFA was "not considering it."

He also announced a pilot program in Detroit that would permit extended loan
modifications than available under a program that helps so-called underwater
borrowers refinance loans. He said the FHFA hoped to expand the program
nationwide.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2014 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              77 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                       July 23, 2013 Tuesday 8:27 AM GMT

George Osborne meets housebuilders and mortgage lenders over Help to Buy scheme

BYLINE: Agency

SECTION: BUSINESS NEWS

LENGTH: 448 words


George Osborne is meeting major housebuilders and mortgage lenders today to
discuss an extension to the Government's flagship housing stimulus programme.

The Chancellor will reveal more details of plans to underwrite £130 billion of
mortgage lending with state guarantees through the Help to Buy scheme.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just 5%. The scheme
has been credited with spurring a surge in home sales and driving up prices.

Mortgage guarantees, due to launch in January, will see the state take on the
risk of default by borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a loan. The scheme
aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk for lenders.

Mr Osborne is holding a breakfast meeting at Number 11 Downing Street with
executives from builders including Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey as well as major
lenders such as Lloyds Banking Group and Barclays to discuss the scheme.

The initial equity loan stage allows people to buy a new-build home worth up to
£600,000 with a Government loan of up to 20%, interest-free for five years.

The next stage will be extended to existing homes as well as newly-built
properties, and also available on homes worth up to £600,000. It will see the
state offer guarantees totalling up to £12 billion on £130 billion of high
loan-to-value mortgage lending.

Guarantees will only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages, the
Chancellor is expected to announce, while those with impaired credit ratings
will be excluded.

It will also not be available to buy a second home, nor will it be able to be
used in conjunction with another state scheme.

However, the guarantee plans have been widely criticised for risking inflating
another housing bubble and piling huge housing risk on the Government.

Former Bank of England governor Lord King warned that the scheme is "too close
for comfort" to a general scheme to guarantee mortgages.

The Bank's deputy governor, Paul Tucker, also warned that it would be "unwise"
as a medium or long-term scheme.

"This is not a market that needs a permanent subsidy," he said recently. "They (
home loan guarantees) are devices for getting out of a hole to dig another one
for the future."

Mr Osborne said: "I'm determined to back people who want to do their best for
their families. Help to Buy is about getting behind those who aspire to own a
home.

"The mortgage guarantee will support an increase in high loan-to-value mortgages
for people who can't afford large deposits, and it will also boost
housebuilding. As of today lenders have the detail they need to go away and get
ready for next January's launch."

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2013 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              78 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Carleton Place

                            January 7, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Fannie Mae to review hundreds of Florida condo projects, approve more loans for
buyers

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 328  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


WASHINGTON - Fannie Mae is seeking to prop up Florida's ravaged real estate
market by reviewing hundreds of condo projects in the state that currently don't
qualify for its loans.

The mortgage finance company said Thursday that buildings deemed stable after
the review will be given a special approval lasting up to 18 months.

If they are approved, lenders will be allowed to offer mortgages to homebuyers
and sell those loans to Fannie Mae, which pools them into bonds and sells them
to investors.

The reviews will look at the buildings' occupancy, homeownership association
dues, financial stability and physical condition.

Under nationwide regulations enacted in March, Fannie Mae has been rejecting any
mortgage for a condo buyer if more than 15 per cent of a development's other
owners are delinquent on their association fees. Fannie Mae has been willing to
make exceptions to that rule, but now it is actively seeking out applications
for exceptions.

The initiative is "is geared toward providing maximum support for Florida's
distressed condo market," Karen Pallotta, executive vice-president of the
company's single family mortgage business.

The rules for new buildings still are tight. Fannie Mae will only guarantee
mortgages in new or newly converted condo developments if 70 per cent of the
units are sold or under contract.

Fannie Mae and sibling company Freddie Mac provide vital cash to the mortgage
industry by purchasing home loans from lenders and selling them to investors.
Together, they own or guarantee almost 31 million home loans worth about US$5.5
trillion, or about half of all mortgages.

The two companies, facing mounting losses from mortgage defaults, were taken
over by the government in September 2008 under the authority of a law Congress
passed in summer of 2008.

So far the government has provided $60 billion to Fannie Mae and $51 billion to
Freddie Mac, and the Treasury Department last month promised unlimited aid over
the next three years.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              79 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                            January 7, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Fannie Mae to review hundreds of Florida condo projects, approve more loans for
buyers

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 328  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


WASHINGTON - Fannie Mae is seeking to prop up Florida's ravaged real estate
market by reviewing hundreds of condo projects in the state that currently don't
qualify for its loans.

The mortgage finance company said Thursday that buildings deemed stable after
the review will be given a special approval lasting up to 18 months.

If they are approved, lenders will be allowed to offer mortgages to homebuyers
and sell those loans to Fannie Mae, which pools them into bonds and sells them
to investors.

The reviews will look at the buildings' occupancy, homeownership association
dues, financial stability and physical condition.

Under nationwide regulations enacted in March, Fannie Mae has been rejecting any
mortgage for a condo buyer if more than 15 per cent of a development's other
owners are delinquent on their association fees. Fannie Mae has been willing to
make exceptions to that rule, but now it is actively seeking out applications
for exceptions.

The initiative is "is geared toward providing maximum support for Florida's
distressed condo market," Karen Pallotta, executive vice-president of the
company's single family mortgage business.

The rules for new buildings still are tight. Fannie Mae will only guarantee
mortgages in new or newly converted condo developments if 70 per cent of the
units are sold or under contract.

Fannie Mae and sibling company Freddie Mac provide vital cash to the mortgage
industry by purchasing home loans from lenders and selling them to investors.
Together, they own or guarantee almost 31 million home loans worth about US$5.5
trillion, or about half of all mortgages.

The two companies, facing mounting losses from mortgage defaults, were taken
over by the government in September 2008 under the authority of a law Congress
passed in summer of 2008.

So far the government has provided $60 billion to Fannie Mae and $51 billion to
Freddie Mac, and the Treasury Department last month promised unlimited aid over
the next three years.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              80 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Hays Daily News (Kansas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              June 27, 2010 Sunday

USDA touts benefit of homeowner aid

BYLINE: Dawne Leiker, The Hays Daily News, Kan.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 890 words


June 27--As National Homeownership Month enters its final week, local USDA Rural
Development employees are getting the word out about loan programs for home
ownership and repairs.

With a nationwide push under way to educate the public about its loan programs,
area events are being staged including gatherings Monday in Hoisington and
Tuesday in Hays.

Highlights of Monday's event will include USDA officials meeting with a family
who recently purchased a home with the help of American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act funds.

Harold Alford, USDA Rural Development public information coordinator, said this
month has been busy for offices throughout Kansas and the nation. Events held
during the month have helped drive home the importance of Rural Development
programs.

Alford has heard from families who have taken advantage of the programs, many
who told him they would have been unable to become homeowners without Rural
Development programs.

"The fact that we are making safe, affordable housing available to so many
people, especially in these economic times is phenomenal," he said. "You can get
kind of emotional when you hear homeowners talking about their experience with
the program."

One of five offices statewide, the Hays USDA Rural Development office handles
loan programs for 26 counties in the northwest Kansas region.

"We've had a lot of people take advantage of our programs," said Stacey Komarek,
Rural Development area technician, who added the influx of stimulus money has
created new opportunities for homeowners.

Among Rural Development's programs are two home ownership loan programs, both
based on income eligibility guidelines.

Through the guaranteed rural housing loan, Rural Development agrees to guarantee
loans so a lending institution can help buyers while incurring less risk. With
this program, buyers may qualify for a home loan without a down payment and
closing costs may be financed.

Rural Development has served 1,674 Kansas homeowners with this program,
financing a total of $169.3 million this fiscal year.

Five Hays lending institutions are approved lenders for Rural Development
guaranteed loans, including; Golden Belt Bank, Golden Plains Credit Union,
Mortgage Sources Corp., Priority Mortgage Solutions and Sunflower Bank.

Golden Plains Credit Union loan processor Phyllis Bigge said many people from
northwest Kansas are taking advantage of USDA home loan programs, estimating
that 90 percent of GPCU home loans are Rural Development loans.

With Rural Development's low interest rates, Bigge said she would encourage
people to take advantage of the program.

The single family housing direct loan program provides 100 percent low-interest
financing for those who qualify, and can be used for home purchase, repair or
refinancing. Payments are based on income, with no down payment required. Since
Rural Development might be able to help those who do not qualify for
conventional loans, their program enables many people to buy homes who otherwise
would not be able. Loans are processed and funded through area offices.

The direct loan program has three years of funding available thanks to the ARRA
funds. Rural Development housing program director Tim Rogers said $27 million is
available for purchases and repairs in Kansas, compared to about $7 million last
year. The increase reflects the addition of ARRA funds.

Under the ARRA, $10.9 billion in loans and loan guarantees have been made to
more than 87,000 home buyers nationwide.

One hundred seventy-one Kansans have taken advantage of the direct program for a
total of $15.6 million this fiscal year.

"We have to have those funds obligated for home buyers, either for the repair
program or for purchase or new construction by Sept. 30 of this year," Rogers
said. "Our field staff is working very hard to recruit and promote and market
the program."

Rogers added the repair program for low income home owners has been
under-utilized in the past.

The repair program entails a one percent fixed rate loan for up to 20 year
repayment and up to $20,000 targeted primarily to remove health and safety
issues in a home, he said.

According to Alford, USDA Rural Development financed more than $63.4 million in
repairs for more than 5,000 low income and elderly rural home owners and
provided home ownership loans to more than 140,000 rural Americans in 2009.

Other Rural Development programs include community facility loans and grants,
water and waste projects and multi-family housing programs.

Rogers said relationships developed between Rural Development and Kansas
realtors have been helpful in spreading the word about loan programs to
potential homeowners. The Kansas Association of Realtors has included
information regarding the loan programs in their newsletter and are working to
add it to their website.

"We're a pretty small agency, so we have to depend on outside help in order to
get applications out the door," he said.

To see more of The Hays Daily News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.hdnews.net. Copyright (c) 2010, The Hays Daily News, Kan. Distributed
by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the
content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit
www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or call
866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100627-EZ-USDA-touts-benefit-of-homeowner-aid-20100627

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EZ


                       Copyright 2010 The Hays Daily News


                              81 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 4, 2015 Friday

Loan Guarantees: Maximum Allowable Foreclosure Timeframes; FR Doc. #2015-30592

LENGTH: 743 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington, DC:  This Notice document was issued by the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA)



  Action



 Notice.

 Summary



 This notice provides information to participants in the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) home loan guaranty program concerning the state
foreclosure timeframes allowable in the calculation of the maximum interest
payable on a foreclosure of a VA-guaranteed loan. The table in this notice
contains the timeframes the Secretary has determined to be reasonable and
customary for all states, following an annual review of amounts allowed by other
government-related home loan programs.



 Dates



 The new foreclosure timeframes will be effective for all loan terminations
completed on or after January 4, 2016.

 For Further Information Contact



 Andrew Trevayne, Assistant Director for Loan and Property Management,
Department of Veterans Affairs, 810 Vermont Ave. NW., Washington, DC 20420,
(202) 632-8795 (not a toll-free number).

 Supplementary Information



 In accordance with 38 U.S.C. Chapter 37, the VA home loan guaranty program
offers a partial guaranty against loss to lenders who make home loans to
Veterans. VA regulations concerning the payment of loan guaranty claims are set
forth at 38 CFR 36.4300, et seq. Computation of guaranty claims is addressed in
38 CFR 36.4324, which states that one part of the indebtedness upon which the
guaranty percentage is applied is the allowable expenses/advances as described
in 38 CFR 36.4314 (re-designated from &sect; 36.4814).



 The Secretary annually reviews timeframes in connection with the termination of
single-family housing loans including foreclosure, deed-in-lieu of foreclosure,
and bankruptcy-related services, issued by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac. See 38 CFR 36.4322(a). Based on
increases announced over the past year by these entities, the Secretary has
deemed it necessary to publish in theFederal Registerrevised timeframes the
Secretary now determines reasonable and customary.



 The following table represents the Secretary's determination of the reasonable
foreclosure timeframes for the preferred method of terminating VA-guaranteed
loans and mirrors the timeframes allowed by Fannie Mae. This table will be
available throughout the year at: http://www.benefits.va.gov/homeloans/.
Pursuant to 38 CFR 36.4314(f)(2) and 36.4324(a)(3)(ii), a guaranty claim can
include unpaid interest for a period of up to 210 calendar days from the due
date of the last paid installment, in addition to the State calendar day
timeframe for foreclosure. (1) These timeframes will be allowed for all loan
terminations completed on or after January 4, 2016.

 Jurisdiction    Timeframe(calendar days)

 Alabama    360

 Alaska    450

 Arizona    330

 Arkansas    450

 California    510

 Colorado    420

 Connecticut    750

 Delaware    780

 District of Columbia    300

 Florida    810

 Georgia    330

 Guam    500

 Hawaii    840

 Idaho    540

 Illinois    630

 Indiana    570

 Iowa    630

 Kansas    420

 Kentucky    540

 Louisiana    510

 Maine    690

 Maryland    660

 Massachusetts    440

 Michigan    300

 Minnesota    390

 Mississippi    360

 Missouri    330

 Montana    450

 Nebraska    420

 Nevada    690

 New Hampshire    420

 New Jersey    750

 New Mexico    720

 New York--Western Counties 2     820

 New York--Eastern Counties    990

 North Carolina    450

 North Dakota    630

 Ohio    570

 Oklahoma    570

 Oregon    600

 Pennsylvania    750

 Puerto Rico    720

 Rhode Island    660

 South Carolina    600

 South Dakota    570

 Tennessee    300

 Texas    390

 Utah    540

 Vermont    810

 Virgin Islands    510

 Virginia    390

 Washington    660

 West Virginia    300

 Wisconsin    510

 Wyoming    330

 Signing Authority



 The Secretaryof Veterans Affairs, or designee, approved this document and
authorized the undersigned to sign and submit the document to the Office of the
Federal Register for publication electronically as an official document of the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Robert L. Nabors II, Chief of Staff, Department
of Veterans Affairs, approved this document on November 20, 2015, for
publication.

 Dated: November 30, 2015.

 Michael Shores,

 Chief Impact Analyst, Office of Regulation Policy & Management, Office of the
General Counsel, Department of Veterans Affairs.

 [FR Doc. 2015-30592 Filed 12-3-15; 8:45 am]

 BILLING CODE 8320-01-P



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              82 of 998 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2017 LexisNexis, a division of Reed Elsevier Inc.,
                              All Rights Reserved
                     LexisNexis® Corporate Affiliations[TM]

                                 March 27, 2017

                     Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

                              8200 Jones Branch Dr
                             McLean,  VA 22102-3110
                                 United States


MSA: 47900 - Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: (703) 903-2000, (800) 424-5401 (Toll Free)
URL: www.freddiemac.com
E-MAIL: corprel@freddiemac.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
TICKER: FMCC
CUSIP: 313400301
DCA NUMBER: 213694

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
FOUNDED: 1970
PLACE OF INCORPORATION: New York
LEGAL STATUS: PUBLIC
EMPLOYEES:
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES:  5,959

IMPORT:  NO
EXPORT:  NO

PENSION TYPES:  401(k); Defined Benefit; Defined Contribution; ESOP
DOING BUSINESS AS:  d/b/a Freddie Mac

* * * * * * * * * * CORPORATE STRUCTURE * * * * * * * * * *

CORPORATE HIERARCHY

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *

OFFICER             TITLE TYPE          ROLE(S)             EMAIL/SOCIAL MEDIA
Sharon McCail,      Executive           Vice President      EMAIL:
VP-PR                                   Public Relations    Sharon_McCail@fredd
                                                            iemac.com
David M. Brickman,  Executive           Executive Vice      EMAIL:
Exec VP-Multifamily                     President           David_Brickman@fred
Bus                                                         diemac.com
Carol A. Wambeke,   Executive           Senior Vice         EMAIL:
Chief Compliance                        President           Carol_Wambeke@fredd
Officer & Sr VP                         Chief Compliance    iemac.com
                                        Officer
Hollis McLoughlin,  Executive           Senior Vice         EMAIL:
Sr VP-External Rels                     President           Hollis_McLoughlin@f
                                                            reddiemac.com
Mitchell Kiffe,     Executive           Vice President      EMAIL:
VP-Multifamily Loan                                         Mitchell_Kiffe@fred
Production                                                  diemac.com
Joe Mosley, Exec    Executive           Executive Vice      EMAIL:
VP-Lending                              President           Joe_Mosley@freddiem
                                        Loan(s)/Lending     ac.com
Chris Bowden,       Executive           Vice President      EMAIL:
VP-HomeSteps                                                Chris_Bowden@freddi
                                                            emac.com
Paul E. Mullings,   Executive           Senior Vice         EMAIL:
Sr VP-Single Family                     President           Paul_Mullings@fredd
Sourcing                                                    iemac.com
Anil Hinduja, Chief Executive           Executive Vice      EMAIL:
Enterprise Risk                         President           Anil_Hinduja@freddi
Officer & Exec VP                       Risk Management     emac.com
                                        Officer
David Leopold,      Executive           Vice President      EMAIL:
VP-Affordable                           Production          David_Leopold@fredd
Housing                                                     iemac.com
Production-Multifam
ily Bus
Dwight P. Robinson, Executive           Senior Vice         EMAIL:
Chief Diversity                         President           Dwight_Robinson@fre
Officer & Sr VP-HR,                     Human Resources     ddiemac.com
Diversity &                             Diversity
Outreach
Timothy F. Kenny,   Executive           Senior Vice         EMAIL:
Sr VP                                   President           Timothy_Kenny@fredd
                                                            iemac.com
William H. McDavid, Executive           Executive Vice      EMAIL:
Gen Counsel, Sec &                      President           William_McDavid@fre
Exec VP                                 General/Corporate   ddiemac.com
                                        Counsel
                                        Corporate Secretary
James G. Mackey,    Executive           Executive Vice      EMAIL:
CFO & Exec VP                           President           James_Mackey@freddi
                                        Chief Financial     emac.com
                                        Officer
Robert Lux, CIO &   Executive           Senior Vice         EMAIL:
Sr VP                                   President           Robert_Lux@freddiem
                                        Chief Information   ac.com
                                        Officer
Donald J. Bisenius, Executive           Senior Vice         EMAIL:
Sr VP-Single Family                     President           Donald_Bisenius@fre
Credit Guarantee                                            ddiemac.com
Bus
Jerry Weiss, Chief  Executive           Executive Vice      EMAIL:
Admin Officer &                         President           Jerry_Weiss@freddie
Exec VP                                 Chief               mac.com
                                        Administrative
                                        Officer
Deborah Jenkins, VP Executive           Vice President      EMAIL:
& Natl                                  Credit              Deborah_Jenkins@fre
Head-Multifamily                                            ddiemac.com
Underwriting &
Credit
David B. Lowman,    Executive           Executive Vice      EMAIL:
Exec VP-                                President           David_Lowman@freddi
Single-Family Bus                                           emac.com
Mark C. Hanson,     Executive           Vice President      EMAIL:
VP-Mortgage Funding                                         Mark_Hanson@freddie
                                                            mac.com
Paige H. Wisdom,    Executive           Executive Vice      EMAIL:
Chief Enterprise                        President           Paige_Wisdom@freddi
Risk Officer & Exec                                         emac.com
VP


DIRECTOR            TITLE TYPE          ROLE(S)             EMAIL/SOCIAL MEDIA
Saiyid Naqvi        Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Saiyid_Naqvi@freddi
                                                            emac.com
Carolyn Byrd        Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Carolyn_Byrd@freddi
                                                            emac.com
Thomas Goldstein    Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Thomas_Goldstein@fr
                                                            eddiemac.com
Eugene Shanks Jr.   Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Eugene_Shanks@fredd
                                                            iemac.com
Lance Drummond      Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Lance_Drummond@fred
                                                            diemac.com
Nicolas Retsinas    Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Nicolas_Retsinas@fr
                                                            eddiemac.com
Sara Mathew         Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Sara_Mathew@freddie
                                                            mac.com
Anthony Williams    Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Anthony_Williams@fr
                                                            eddiemac.com
Christopher Lynch   Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Christopher_Lynch@f
                                                            reddiemac.com
Richard Hartnack    Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Richard_Hartnack@fr
                                                            eddiemac.com
Raphael Bostic      Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Raphael_Bostic@fred
                                                            diemac.com
Steven Kohlhagen    Board of Director   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                                                            Steven_Kohlhagen@fr
                                                            eddiemac.com
Donald Layton, CEO  Supervisory Board   Board of Directors  EMAIL:
                    of Directors        Chief Executive     Donald_Layton@fredd
                                        Officer             iemac.com

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
Founded in 1970 and headquartered in McLean, VA, Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (OTC; OTCB: FMCC) is a provider of residential mortgage services.
The company operates in three reportable segments: Single-Family Guarantee,
Investments, and Multifamily. Its Single-Family Guarantee segment purchases
single-family residential mortgages and mortgage-related securities in the
primary mortgage market. The company's Investments segment is engaged in
managing its mortgage-related investments portfolio and single-family
performing, re-performing, and delinquent loans. According to the company's
current 10K government filing it had FYE 12/31/2016 revenue of $65.6 billion and
has 5,959 employees.

INDUSTRY TYPE: Federally Sponsored Home Mortgage Credit Services

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
PRIMARY NAICS:
522310 - Mortgage and Nonmortgage Loan Brokers
SECONDARY NAICS:
522298 - All Other Nondepository Credit Intermediation
PRIMARY SIC:
6163 - Loan Brokers
SECONDARY SIC:
6159 - Miscellaneous Business Credit Institutions
PRODUCTS:
WE MAKE HOME POSSIBLE - Slogan
FREDDIE MAC - Logo
REO MANAGER - Financial Services
REFERENCE REMIC - Financial Services
REFERENCE POINT - Financial Services
REFERENCE NOTES - Financial Services
REFERENCE BONDS - Financial Services
PMMS - Financial Services
MULTISUITE - Financial Services
MI ACCESS - Financial Services
HOMESTEPS - Financial Services
HOME POSSIBLE - Financial Services
GOLD RUSH - Financial Services
GOLD PERSPECTIVE - Financial Services
GOLD MEASURE - Financial Services
GOLD CASH - Financial Services
FREDDIE SUBS - Financial Services
AFFORDABLE SECONDS - Financial Services
AFFORDABLE MERIT RATE - Mortgage
REMIC - Home Modification Program
RELIEF REFINANCE MORTGAGES - Home Modification Program
MAKING HOME AFFORDABLE - Home Modification Program
PROGRAM PLUS - Financial Services
IMMINENT DEFAULT INDICATOR - Enhancements & Important Reminder
WORKOUT PROSPECTOR - Prospector Enhancements
PRIMARY MORTGAGE MARKET SURVEY
FREDDIE MAC MULTI-INDICATOR MARKET INDEX
BPODIRECT - Financial Services
REFERENCE BILLS - Financial Services
COMPETITORS:

     ·    Federal National Mortgage Association
     ·    Citigroup Inc.
     ·    Federal Home Loan Bank of New York
     ·    Rural Electrification Corporation Limited
     ·    Triad Guaranty Inc.
     ·    WMIH Corp.
     ·    Bank of America Global Wealth & Investment Management
     ·    Morgan Stanley


* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: December 31, 2016

SALES:  USD 65,665,000,000
NET INCOME:  USD 7,815,000,000
NETWORTH:  USD 5,075,000,000
REVENUE TYPE:  Revenue

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EXCHANGE: OTC-Over-the-Counter Pink Sheets, OTCB-Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, 1800 Tysons Blvd, McLean, VA, 22102-4261,
(703) 918-3000

TRANSFER AGENT:  Computershare Trust Company N.A., PO Box 30170, College
Station, TX, 77842-3170
REGISTRAR:  Computershare Trust Company N.A., PO Box 30170, College Station, TX,
77842-3170

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017


                              83 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                August 25, 2008

FHLBanks Get New Bond Authority

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: Pg. 20 Vol. 32 No. 46

LENGTH: 460  words


WASHINGTON-Congress has granted the Federal Home Loan Banks broader authority to
guarantee municipal bonds and provide a backstop for community banks that want
to facilitate financing of community and economic development projects.

The 12 FHLBanks have issued letters of credit to guarantee tax-exempt financing
for housing-related projects for some time.

But with all the problems in the credit markets and with the bond insurers,
Congress decided to open the door for the FHLBanks to temporarily provide relief
for small towns and cities that need financing for the construction and
renovations of roads, bridges, sewer projects, schools, medical facilities and
public buildings. This authority expires in two years.

Of course, several FHLBanks lobbied very hard for this new authority, which
Congress included in a major housing bill that President Bush signed on July 30.
And no one pushed harder than Pittsburgh FHLBank president John Price.

"We are tremendously pleased that the president has signed into law historic
legislation that empowers the nation's FHLBanks to do even more on behalf of
community and economic development," Mr. Price said.

With this expanded authority, small- and medium-size banks will be able to
guarantee new issues of tax-exempt bonds or refinance existing bonds with the
assistance of their FHLBank.

The local bank issues a letter of credit to cover the municipal bond and the
FHLBank guarantees the letter of credit.

"We provide an AAA-backed letter of credit to wrap around the member's letter.
We are the backstop," said Pittsburgh FHLBank spokesman Neil Cotiaux.

The member has to put up collateral for the standby letter of credit, just like
they put up collateral to borrow from the FHLBank. The Pittsburgh bank has yet
to tell its members how much collateral will be required.

"You have to work with members to get this opportunity to work," Mr. Cotiaux
said. But he noted that a number of public works projects have stalled in the
Pittsburgh district - Pennsylvania, Delaware, West Virginia - over the past year
as bond insurers have been downgraded.

"There has been a big void left in the marketplace," the spokesman said.

Meanwhile, the Pittsburgh FHLBank remains committed to the Mortgage Partnership
Finance program and it continues to purchase $30 million to $50 million in
single-family mortgages a month from its members.

Craig Howie, group director for member services, said the bank likes to produce
enough loan volume to keep up with the runoff on its $6 billion MPF portfolio.

The Pittsburgh FHLBank also has volunteered to purchase MPF loans from Chicago
FHLBank members for a few months since the Chicago bank has to conserve capital.

This commitment has increased Pittsburgh's mortgage purchases by $100 million a
month.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com/

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2008 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              84 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 18, 2013

Private MI Firms Poised for a Resurgence

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2 Vol. 37 No. 25

LENGTH: 634  words


Private mortgage insurers are staging a comeback. Their market share has been
increasing in relation to the Federal Housing Administration single-family
insurance program and they are strengthening their balance sheets.

In the past 12 months, new and surviving MI companies have raised $3 billion in
capital.

Pressure on government officials to raise FHA mortgage insurance premiums over
the past two years has helped the industry. And it is reflected in a recent
report by MGIC, a private insurer based in Milwaukee.

"We believe that the FHA's current premium pricing...has allowed us to be more
competitive with the FHA than in the past for loans with high FICO scores," MGIC
said.

However, private insurers depend on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac loans for their
bread and butter. And the GSEs still charge relatively high fees called "loan
level price adjustments" that borrowers pay.

The GSEs claim the LLPAs are risked based and partially reflect the fact that
private insurers rescinded insurance coverage and didn't pay claims on some
defaulted loans. The MI companies claim the fees are arbitrary and designed to
increase revenue.

In addition, the GSE regulator has been raising the guarantee fees on Fannie and
Freddie loans and more hikes are coming. "We expect to continue to raise
guarantee fees in 2013," according to Federal Housing Finance Agency acting
director Edward DeMarco.

In testifying before a House Financial Services panel last week, Radian Guaranty
president Teresa Bazemore noted that the outlook for private insurers improved
as FHA raised its premiums over the past two years.

"The difficulty is the increased GSE fees," she said. The LLPAs and g-fees make
GSE loans more expensive than FHA loans. Bazemore also noted that FHA is still
insuring jumbo loans with loan balances of up to $730,000.

Potomac Partners founder Brian Chappelle testified that the problems private
insurers are facing in the marketplace are not FHA related.

He noted GSE LLPAs are a problem. But FHA loans above $625,500 are a "very small
part of FHA's business." Last year, 71% of FHA loans were below $200,000.

"Mortgage companies have problems doing business with MIs because they had
policies rescinded," the mortgage consultant said. "There are a lot of other
factors that have nothing to do with FHA," he added.

FBR Capital Markets has raised $1.5 billion in capital for private MIs.

"Notably, investors chose to invest the capital only after FHA instituted
premium increases," said FBR senior vice president Stephen Stelmach.

However, investors remain hesitant because of the regulatory uncertainty
involving GSE reform, FHA reform and implementation of the qualified mortgage
and the qualified residential mortgage rules.

"We believe that as the market receives greater clarity on all these regulatory
issues-this clarity can facilitate an even greater investment in the private
mortgage insurance industry," Stelmach testified.

The Radian Guaranty president also raised concerns that the proposed QRM risk
retention and Basel III capital rules could curtail the recovery of the private
mortgage insurance industry.

The Basel proposal does not recognize private MI insurance as a factor that
lowers potential losses in cases of default. And privately insured loans are not
exempt from the QRM risk retention proposal. (While the GSEs are in
conservatorship, Fannie and Freddie MBS are exempt from risk retention-so just
about all privately insured loans would be exempt as well.)

The net result of these proposals will "steer borrowers to the FHA and further
crowd out the private market," said Rep. Ed Royce, R-Calif.

Bazemore agreed with the congressman. The cost of private mortgage insurance
will become significantly higher, she said, "unless the QRM and Basel III rules
recognize private MI as a risk mitigant."

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              85 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Gloucestershire Echo

                             July 25, 2013 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Help to Buy scheme grows

SECTION: HOMEBUYER;FEATURES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 286 words


Those aspiring to own a home have been given a further boost after the
Government announced it is expanding its Help to Buy scheme.

But Chancellor George Osborne said only credit-worthy borrowers will be able to
buy homes. The Chancellor met major housebuilders and mortgage lenders to flesh
out plans to underwrite £130 billion of mortgage lending with state guarantees,
including banning second home buyers and people with property abroad.

The first stage of Help to Buy was launched in April and offers loans to give
people the chance to buy a new-build home with a deposit of just five per cent.
The scheme has been credited with driving a surge in home sales and driving up
prices, including in Gloucestershire where housebuilders Bovis Homes, Taylor
Wimpey, Redrow and Newland Homes all praised the scheme. Mortgage guarantees
will launch in January and will see the state take on the risk of default by
borrowers by guaranteeing a proportion of a home loan.

Extending Help to Buy aims to boost mortgage availability by reducing the risk
for lenders and covering both existing and newly-built homes. Guarantees will
only be available to borrowers who can afford the mortgages while those with
impaired credit ratings will be excluded, the Treasury insisted. It will include
income checks and stress testing.

Guarantees will also not be available for second home purchases and lenders will
be required to collect a declaration stating that the borrower has no interest a
property anywhere else in the world. It will not be able to be used in
conjunction with another state scheme.

Lenders will pay a fee to use the guarantee based on loan-to-value banding.

The guarantee will be available on homes worth up to £600,000.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GLE


                      Copyright 2013 Gloucestershire Echo
                              All Rights Reserved


                              86 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 4, 2008 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

Caution on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 192 words


We should not forget that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have long helped maintain
affordable housing nationwide, in both the single-family market and the
multifamily housing finance system.  Fannie and Freddie hold or guarantee
approximately $5 trillion in mortgages. Any suggestion that portions of these
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) should be "sold off in pieces" is rash
at best when considering that the two agencies have long played an essential
role in the U.S. housing market ["The Game Is Over," editorial, Aug. 23].

By buying mortgages from lenders and packaging them into securities that
investors purchase, with a guarantee, the GSEs create important liquidity that
enables more families to purchase more homes at a lower cost. So any quick
action without careful thought to rational policy formulation -- and the
ultimate consequences of such intervention and regulation -- would be
detrimental to not only Fannie and Freddie, the markets, and taxpayers but also
to the millions of American families that have benefited from the current
structure of the GSEs.

CONRAD EGAN

President and Chief Executive

National Housing Conference

Washington

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              87 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 9, 2016 Tuesday

New Maxico: RHS Releases Final Rule for Single Family Loan Program

LENGTH: 232  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Santa Fe: National Association of Home Builders has issued the following news
release:



 The U.S. Department of Agriculture's Rural Housing Service (RHS) published a
final rule on Feb. 8 implementing changes to its Single Family Housing
Guaranteed Loan Program (SFHGLP).





 Designed to streamline the program, the final rule:



     Removes the cap on the number of units per year for a single contractor or
builder under the combination construction and permanent loan feature. It also
allows a combination construction and permanent loan to be used for a
manufactured home if the builder's contract includes the sum of the cost of the
unit and all on-site installation costs.



     Allows discount points as a permissible loan purpose to "buy down" the
interest rate for moderate-income borrowers, as well as for low-income
borrowers.



     Extends the SFHGLP guarantee to coincide with the terms of a loan
modification, including an extended-term loan modification so that the guarantee
will cover the duration of the loan.



     Permits lenders to charge a maximum interest rate equal to the Fannie Mae
posted yield plus 1%, but removes language from a 2013 interim rule referencing
the Freddie Mac required net yield, since Freddie Mac no longer publishes its
net yield rate.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              88 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 bondbuyer.com

                             March 23, 2012 Friday

IRS Asks for Housing Guidance Comments

BYLINE: Jennifer DePaul

SECTION: WASHINGTON Vol. 121 No. 57

LENGTH: 177  words


WASHINGTON - The Internal Revenue Service is seeking comment from the public and
federal government agencies on the guidance it issued for provisions in the
Housing Assistance Tax Act of 2008, which provided additional volume cap for
tax-exempt housing bonds.

That law provided a temporary $11 billion increase in the annual
private-activity bond volume cap for qualified housing issues and allowed the
use of qualified mortgage bonds to refinance certain subprime mortgages.

It also provided loans to first-time homebuyers and permanently exempted the
housing bonds from the alternative minimum tax.

In addition, it gave the Federal Home Loan Banks temporary authority to
guarantee certain tax-exempt bonds.

The IRS' Notice 2008-79 allocated the additional tax-exempt bond volume cap for
qualified housing issues among states and U.S. territories. It also provided
guidance on the use of single-family housing bonds to refinance subprime
mortgages and other tax-exempt bond provisions.

Written comments are due by May 21 and should be sent to Yvette Lawrence at the
IRS.

URL: http://www.bondbuyer.com

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BONDBUYER_BB


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              89 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               September 15, 2008

Fannie and Freddie Are Rapidly Losing Share to the FHA

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: THE GSE TAKEOVER; Pg. 16 Vol. 32 No. 49

LENGTH: 688  words


WASHINGTON-For most of the year Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have been the only
game in town when it comes to the secondary market but lost in all the news of
their federal takeover is the fact that their ability to purchase mortgages from
seller/servicers was deteriorating rapidly.

As the GSEs tightened and increased their guarantee and delivery fees, demand
for Federal Housing Administration and Rural Development-backed loans
accelerated.

The FHA insured 351,140 mortgages in the second quarter, a 48% spike from the
first quarter. FHA loan endorsements have been rising all year and some industry
experts believe the program accounted for nearly 40% of newly originated loans
in July and August.

Prior to the federal takeover of Fannie and Freddie, FHA was the fastest growing
segment of the mortgage market.

Dennis Anderson, a mortgage broker based in Abilene, Texas, said it has been
hard getting borrowers into Fannie and Freddie loans. Roughly 90% of his
business is now FHA and Rural Development-guaranteed loans.

"If you are broker today, and you don't have FHA approval, you are out of
business," he said just a few days before the takeover. Mr. Anderson owns
Abilene Mortgage Inc.

Rural Development has guaranteed $6.1 billion in single-family loans this fiscal
year, up from $3.2 billion in FY 2007. RDGL program director Joaquin Tremolf
said the single-family program is on track to guarantee $10 billion in loans in
FY 2009, which starts Oct. 1.

The shift over to FHA loans was clearly on the mind of the Treasury Department,
industry executives told National Mortgage News.

GSE regulator James Lockhart pointed out that Fannie and Freddie's market share
has fallen since reaching 80% earlier this year. He said the mortgage giants
were not providing the level of support the market needed.

As their "earnings and capital have continued to deteriorate, their ability to
fulfill their mission has deteriorated," the Federal Housing Finance Agency
director said.

Treasury secretary Henry Paulson told reporters the housing correction is at the
"heart" of the financial turmoil in the capital markets, noting that Fannie and
Freddie are key to "turning the corner on housing."

Placing the government-sponsored enterprises into conservatorships and providing
capital infusions, the enterprises "will be able to work proactively to increase
the availability of mortgage finance," Mr. Paulson said.

Over the past nine months, Fannie and Freddie have implemented several loan fee
increases to compensate for market risk. These fee increases also increased
their profits. The GSEs also tightened their lending standards and reduced their
purchases of alt-A and stated-income loans.

The National Association of Realtors blames the fee increases for slowing homes
sales. "Overly stringent lending criteria imposed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
in the past month no doubt held back contract signings," said NAR chief
economist Lawrence Yun.

With the government takeover, Fannie and Freddie are expected to be more
aggressive and industry executives are hoping the new managers will roll back
some of the fees and loosen underwriting standards. (See related story.)

"If they do that, that will help further stem this decline in house values and
spur consumer demand. It is the exact right thing to do," said Jerry Howard,
chief executive of the National Association of Home Builders.

The FHA continues to offer a low-downpayment product with traditional
underwriting standards that services borrowers with credit scores as low as 580.

Mortgage rates have already come down and it could spark a refinancing wave,
according to an A-paper mortgage broker in Lake Success, N.Y.

"Now that the market is getting more confidence in MBS, it is going to be
reflected right down the food chain," said Don Marino, the president of Shelter
Rock Mortgage Corp. "If we can stay below 6%, there will be wave of refinancing
activity."

But it will not be cash-out refinancings. In terms of equity, borrowers are
"right at the edge," he said. "It is very possible that people have to bring
money to the table in order to refinance," said the Long Island broker.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com/

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2008 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              90 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                     June 10, 1978, Saturday, Final Edition

Opportunities in a Tight Home Loan Market;
VA Aims Program at Mobile Homes for Young Veterans;
VA Aims at Mobile Homes for Young Veterans

BYLINE: John B. Willmann

SECTION: Real Estate; Realty Happenings; E1

LENGTH: 1102 words


For the past six years the number of house loans guaranteed by the Veterans
Administration has exceeded those backed by the Federal Housing Administration,
an older program which for years has been regarded as the basic federal housing
program.  Last year VA-backed home loans accounted for nearly 60 percent of the
total.

There were 390,000 VA-backed home loans made last year, for a total of $14
billion.  The average price of houses purchased by veterans using the program
was nearly $37,000.  Almost all of them were conventional, stick-built
dwellings.

Since the VA home loan program began in 1944, more than 9.7 million loans have
been guaranteed - most of them on the no-down-payment basis that has made the VA
program widely popular.

Buyer and developer interest in VA financing has mounted in the 1970s with the
liberalization of veteran eligibility for VA financing.  A 1974 law provided
that VA could guarantee refinancing, condominium and mobile home loans.

However, most of the VA-guaranteed loans are placed on existing and new
single-family houses for which financing is provided by large-volume mortgage
lenders.  The VA guarantees up to $17,500 of a total loan that can go far
higher, depending on the lender.

The VA guarantee of that portion makes the loan more secure and desirable to a
lender.  The current FHA-VA interest ceiling is 9 percent.  Because it is nearly
1 percent below the market average for conventional loans, the builders or
sellers have to pay mortgage discount points (now 5 in most areas) to make up
the difference in rates.  One mortgage discount point is 1 percent of the total
mortgage and is payable at time of settlement as a price for the lower loan
rate.

FHA loans, which have been available to all Americans since 1934, have a maximum
loan limit of $60,000 and 30-year payout terms similar to VA's.  FHA pioneered
in long-term amortization of home mortgages.

However, the FHA basic home loans program (Section 203b) has been used less in
recent years because of what builders and developers have described as red tape
delays in the processing stage and because of the increased use of private
mortgage insurance to provide lender protection on a portion of conventional
loans.

While numbers indicate the use of the VA home loan programs by thousands of
qualified veterans, they don't tell the entire story.

The VA is making a "major effort to be helpful in trying to provide decent homes
for $30,000 or under for the many young veterans of Vietnam military service,"
said Robert C. Coon, national director of the VA loan guarantly program.

"That's why we are trying to encourage the development of permanently sited
modular (or mobile) houses that meet FHA minimum property standards and can be
part of the local tax base."

That program is now relatively small in numbers - an estimated 1,000 units
produced in subdivisions and a few hundred more on scattered lots.  But Coon
said that the growing interest in low-cost housing for young families makes the
use of manufactured, two-section housing units a logical target.

"New, conventionally built houses are far more expensive - and so are most of
the resale houses in metropolitan areas," he added.

As the VA's Coon put it: "The assistance to veterans and military personnel is
chiefly through substituting the government's guaranty on loans in lieu of the
substantial downpayment, relatively short terms and other investment safeguards
applicable to conventional mortgage transactions."

As an example of what is being done now in modifying mobile homes for use as
low-cost, permanently sited houses on individual lots, Coon's assistant, George
Alexander, cited an ongoing development in Kileen, Tex., near Fort Hood.

"Developer Jack Morris has delivered 70 one-story houses, priced from $22,800 to
$29,900, within 15 months," he said.  "The houses are eligible for 30-year, VA
loans - instead of the 20-year, 12 percent VA loans for mobile homes that are
not permanently sited on individuals lots," Alexander said.

The VA official said that the houses, which meet local codes and HUD standards
for mobile homes as well as FHA minimum property standards, have 1,200 to 1,500
square feet of space.  He said the buyers are mostly young married couples with
two children and an average annual income of $12,500.

"One of the dwellings was resold after seven months for $1,200 more than the
seller had paid for it," he added.

Therein is one of the key differences between the so-called mobile home on
wheels and the same modular dwelling on a permanent foundation - on a subdivided
lot that becomes part of the tax base.

"While the mobile house on rented space in a park tends to depreciate, the house
that is adapted for permanent status appreciates because it is real property,"
Alexander said.

In the Washington area, where Robert M. O'Toole heads the regional office,
general VA home loan activity has been high in new house sales, resales of
existing houses and condominium apartments.  Since VA began making condo loans
in 1975, 80 projects have qualified for loan approvals.But adaptations of the
mobile homes into permanent dwellings have been missing here.

However, Gary Nordheimer, president of Norbeck Development Associates in Chevy
Chase, said that his firm has been developing "permanents" with VA financing in
Virginia Beach and Fort Lauderdale and Lakeland, Fla., that sell for just under
$30,000.

"And now we seem, finally, to be in the threshold of being able to start a
360-house development on 100 acres in the Germantown area," he said.With
landowner Maurice Berk as a partner in the development of that site at Rtes. 355
and 118, Nordheimer seeks to build a land-planned community of dwellings that
would be priced under $40,000.  He said that the project had been turned down by
the county planning board on the basis of established priorities for sewer
allocations but later won approval of the county council.  "We hope to get a
final decision from the county council in late July," he added.

"Our idea is to have a half-million-dollar community center as part of the
subdivision and to adapt the double-wide modulars to have cathedral ceilings and
higher-than-usual roofs," he said.  "Obviously we think this is a means of
providing lower priced housing in Montgomery County.  We have Blair & Abernathy,
of Aberdeen, Fla., doing the land planning and we are studying the double-wides
of several manufacturers whose products we might use."

And the manufacturers of mobile, homes are interested in marketing more of their
double-wides for permanent houses.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture, Veterans Administration officials Robert Coon and George
Alexander, by Frank Johnston - The Washington Post

                       Copyright 1978 The Washington Post


                              91 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                February 6, 1995

Homebuilders Publish Guide to ADC Funds

SECTION: Pg. 32

LENGTH: 385 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON


A guide by the National Association of Home Builders' Mortgage Finance Committee
to help small volume builders find production funding will be available by the
end of February.

The guide, a final draft copy of which was circulated at the NAHB convention
here late last month, tells small single-family builders and developers exactly
what they need to know about new real estate lending regulations.  It also
provides advice on obtaining sometimes hard-to-acquire financing from
traditional as well as non-traditional sources of capital.

For example, it describes in detail the Small Business Administration's Regular
Construction Loan Guaranty Program, which backs regular business loans to small
contractors to finance new construction or renovations.

The maximum guarantee amount was recently reduced from $ 750,000 to $ 500,000,
but the SBA will still guarantee as much as 75% of the loan up to that ceiling.

Another often overlooked source of acquisition, development and construction
funding mentioned in the booklet is the Federal Home Loan Bank System's
community investment program, which will provide funding for lenders that
finance homes purchased by families with incomes not exceeding 115% of the
median for their areas.

State and local housing finance agencies also are a good source of ADC loans,
said NAHB Mortgage Finance Committee Chairman Kent Conine, noting that
Connecticut has a $ 15 million revolving construction loan program geared toward
small subdivisions.

Small builders are advised, too, to consider obtaining construction money from
mortgage bankers.  These lenders don't typically engage in production funding,
Mr. Conine said, but in recent months some have been offering limited
construction financing through their affiliated conduits.

Other off-beat sources listed in the guide include finance companies, tax-exempt
bond financing and subordinated land sales.  But Mr. Conine, who heads the TPC
Residential Group, a multifaceted Dallas-based building and development firm,
said that eventually, pension funds could be the best source of all.  Pension
funds currently have $ 2 trillion in assets, 5% of which is invested in real
estate.  But their assets will grow to $ 4 trillion in the near future, he said,
and their "real estate allocation will double."

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              92 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Origination News

                                  October 2008

Ginnie Mae Raises Bar For Issuer Net Worths

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: Pg. 20 Vol. 18 No. 1

LENGTH: 434  words


WASHINGTON-The rapid increase in issuance of Ginnie Mae-guaranteed
mortgage-backed securities has prompted agency officials to increase the net
worth requirement for Ginnie issuers by as much as four times.

Issuance of Ginnie single-family MBS jumped from $38 billion in the first
quarter to $67.2 billion in the second quarter of this year.

In the month of July, Ginnie MBS issuance totaled $25.8 billion, which exceeded
Freddie Mac MBS issuance by $4 billion.

To control risks, the agency is increasing the net worth requirement for Ginnie
single-family issuers from $250,000 to $1 million.

This $1 million net worth requirement also applies to issuers of Ginnie reverse
mortgage securities that are backed by FHA Home Equity Conversion Mortgages.

"All issuers in the single-family MBS and HMBS programs will be required to meet
the new requirement by Oct. 1, 2010," Ginnie Mae said in a memorandum to
issuers.

The $250,000 net worth requirement for multifamily issuers remains unchanged.

Ginnie also is starting a new monitoring program for new issuers who will be on
"probation" during the first 12 months.

"During this time, Ginnie Mae will closely evaluate performance metrics,
including, but not limited to, loan level insurance statistics, delinquency
levels and early payment defaults," the memorandum says.

Ginnie Mae MBS issuance has surged along with the origination of Federal Housing
Administration single-family loans in fiscal year 2008, which ends Sept. 30.

Lenders have originated $156.5 billion in FHA single-family loans during the
first 11 months of this fiscal year - nearly triple the total for all of FY
2007, according to Department of Housing and Urban Development data.

The HUD data show FHA loan production accelerated during the spring and summer.

In July and August, lenders originated the $47.9 billion in FHA loans, nearly
topping the $54.3 billion originated during the previous three months.

In August, FHA lenders originated $24.4 billion in single-family loans and
Ginnie guaranteed $28.8 billion in MBS.

Ginnie also guarantees pools of Department of Veterans Affairs loans and Rural
Development single-family loans. These government mortgage programs also are
experiencing an uptick in demand.

Lenders originated $8.2 billion in VA loans in July and August, compared to
$10.4 billion during the previous three months.

The Rural Development loan program is expected to generate $6.5 billion in
single-family loans this fiscal year, up from $3.2 billion in FY 2007. And it is
on track to guarantee $10 billion in loans in FY 2009 if Congress approves
additional support for the program.

URL: http://www.originationnews.com/

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: ON


                        Copyright 2008 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              93 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               September 22, 2008

GNMA Hiking Net Worth

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: Pg. 19 Vol. 32 No. 50

LENGTH: 435  words


WASHINGTON-The rapid increase in issuance of Ginnie Mae-guaranteed
mortgage-backed securities has prompted agency officials to increase the net
worth requirement for Ginnie issuers by as much as four times.

Issuance of Ginnie single-family MBS jumped from $38 billion in the first
quarter to $67.2 billion in the second quarter of this year. In the month of
July, Ginnie MBS issuance totaled $25.8 billion, which exceeded Freddie Mac MBS
issuance by $4 billion. To control risks, the agency is increasing the net worth
requirement for Ginnie single-family issuers from $250,000 to $1 million. This
$1 million net worth requirement also applies to issuers of Ginnie reverse
mortgage securities that are backed by FHA Home Equity Conversion Mortgages.

"All issuers in the single-family MBS and HMBS programs will be required to meet
the new requirement by Oct. 1, 2010," Ginnie Mae said in a memorandum to
issuers.

The $250,000 net worth requirement for multifamily issuers remains unchanged.

Ginnie also is starting a new monitoring program for new issuers who will be on
"probation" during the first 12 months.

"During this time, Ginnie Mae will closely evaluate performance metrics,
including, but not limited to, loan level insurance statistics, delinquency
levels and early payment defaults," the memorandum says. Ginnie Mae MBS issuance
has surged along with the origination of Federal Housing Administration
single-family loans in fiscal year 2008, which ends Sept. 30.

Lenders have originated $156.5 billion in FHA single-family loans during the
first 11 months of this fiscal year - nearly triple the total for all of FY
2007, according to Department of Housing and Urban Development data. The HUD
data show FHA loan production accelerated during the spring and summer. In July
and August, lenders originated the $47.9 billion in FHA loans, nearly topping
the $54.3 billion originated during the previous three months.

In August, FHA lenders originated $24.4 billion in single-family loans and
Ginnie guaranteed $28.8 billion in MBS.

Ginnie also guarantees pools of Department of Veterans Affairs loans and Rural
Development single-family loans. These government mortgage programs also are
experiencing an uptick in demand.

Lenders originated $8.2 billion in VA loans in July and August, compared to
$10.4 billion during the previous three months.

The Rural Development loan program is expected to generate $6.5 billion in
single-family loans this fiscal year, up from $3.2 billion in FY 2007. And it is
on track to guarantee $10 billion in loans in FY 2009 if Congress approves
additional support for the program.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2008 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              94 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 12, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Home Builder Says It Broke U.S. Rules and Will Restate Earnings

BYLINE: By FLOYD NORRIS

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 689 words


Beazer Homes USA, a major home builder, said yesterday that it had broken
federal rules to help buyers of its homes qualify for federally insured
mortgages.

The statement did not indicate precisely how the rules had been broken, nor did
it disclose the volume of mortgages involved. Beazer said it hoped to reach a
relatively inexpensive settlement with federal regulators over the practices,
which it said were related to rules governing down payment assistance for home
buyers.

Beazer's statements came as it reported that sales of new homes plunged in the
third quarter. It also said it would restate several years of financial
statements, with changes going back to 1999, because it had improperly used
reserves to first hide earnings and then to overstate them.

Beazer previously disclosed that federal prosecutors in North Carolina had
subpoenaed documents relating to its mortgage origination services. Yesterday's
announcement gave no details on that investigation, or on a formal investigation
by the Securities and Exchange Commission.

The company said that as a result of its mortgage actions, it could be liable if
the Federal Housing Administration, which guarantees mortgages before selling
them to investors, suffered any losses from defaults on those mortgages.

The company said the practices went back to at least 2000, and involved the down
payment assistance rules. It said it thought ''that an adequate settlement with
regulatory authorities in a range of $8 million to $15 million may be
attainable.''

An F.H.A. spokesman had no comment. A company spokesman did not return a call
seeking clarification of which regulatory authorities were involved. Beazer
shares, which sold for more than $82 in early 2006, have fallen sharply this
year amid its reports of investigations and plunging home sales. Yesterday, in
what appeared to be relief that the investigation might be nearing a close, the
shares rose 20 cents, to $10.13.

The company, which builds homes in the Northeast, South and West, said that it
recorded net new orders for 990 homes in the quarter that ended in September,
the last of its fiscal year, down 52 percent from the 2006 quarter, and 80
percent below the quarter in 2005, when the housing boom was going strong.

It pointed to ''an unusually high cancellation rate'' of 68 percent, which it
attributed to the tight mortgage market in August and September.

With the subprime mortgage crisis causing a rising number of foreclosures, it
has become very difficult to sell mortgage-backed securities unless they carry a
guarantee from the F.H.A. or one of the government-sponsored lenders, Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac. To get such a guarantee, loans must meet certain
specifications.

Among those specifications are down payment requirements. Buyers must put up at
least 3 percent of the purchase price as a down payment, although they are
allowed to get help from relatives or charities.

The F.H.A. has adopted a rule, effective at the end of this month, to close off
the practice of home builders contributing to charities that then provided down
payment assistance to the builders' customers. Critics said that amounted to a
way for builders to evade the rules, and the F.H.A. said mortgages that received
such help were far more likely to default than were other mortgages.

That practice was legal, however, so Beazer's practices presumably took a
different form. That could have included directly providing down payment
assistance without disclosing that fact to the F.H.A.

For its 2006 fiscal year, Beazer reported revenue of $6.46 billion and net
earnings of $388.8 million. Before taxes, its net income was reported as $613.2
million.

Yesterday, it said those results would be reduced by two factors. It said its
improper use of reserves had reduced pretax income before 2006 by about $25
million, and had increased it in that year by $20 million. It also said that
improper accounting for the sale and leaseback of model homes had resulted in
the reporting of $20 million of additional income through June 30 of this year.
It did not say how much of that was reported in 2006.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1988, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Builder Will Buy 5 Texas Savings Units

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 843 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 9


The Federal Home Loan Bank Board announced today that it had agreed to sell five
insolvent savings associations in Texas to one of the nation's largest builders
of single-family homes.

M. Danny Wall, the bank board chairman, said the Pulte Diversified Companies of
Bloomfield, Mich., an affiliate of the Pulte Home Corporation, had agreed to buy
the five savings institutions for $45 million in cash. The Federal Savings and
Loan Insurance Corporation, a unit of the bank board, will provide $556.9
million in assistance for four of the units and an undetermined amount for the
fifth.

''This transaction represents another type of acquirer from outside the state of
Texas bringing in new capital,'' Mr. Wall said at a news conference.

The announcement marked the seventh deal that the bank board has made under its
Southwest Plan, which is aimed at consolidating more than 100 insolvent
institutions in the Southwest and selling them to interested investors.
Including today's deal, the agency has taken action on 35 institutions.

Since Aug. 18, the bank board has committed itself to inject more than $12
billion in financial assistance into more than 50 insolvent institutions.

Mr. Wall said the transaction would take place in two steps. The agency
disclosed today the names of four institutions it took over and will soon sell
to Pulte. As early as next week, the agency will assume control of a fifth
institution and transfer ownership to Pulte. It would not identify the fifth
institution but indicated it would be considerably larger than any of the four
others.

At Pulte's request, the bank board, after it took over the four institutions,
formed two new savings institutions.

The Allenpark Federal Savings and Loan Association of Houston, the Bay City
Federal Savings and Loan Association and the Gulf Coast Savings and Loan
Association of Richmond were consolidated into one institution, called Heights
of Texas, a Federal Savings Bank. The fourth institution, the Heights Savings
Association of Houston, will be called First Heights, a Federal Savings Bank.
$311.8 Million Promissory Note Mr. Wall said the four institutions had total
deposits and other liabilities of $925.5 million. The $556.9 million in
F.S.L.I.C. assistance is made up of a promissory note of $311.8 million and
guarantees against losses on loans and other assets of $245.1 million.

The size of the assistance illustrates how expensive it is to shut down the
insolvent Texas institutions. Effectively, the assets of the four institutions
are worth only 40 percent of their original book value, losses that the
Government insurance fund is absorbing.

Mr. Wall would not say how much the assistance could be for the fifth
institution.

Pulte Diversified will be the holding company for the four institutions. Under
terms of the transaction, Pulte Diversified will initially put $15.5 million
into the four institutions, and within a year add $6.2 million. Both Pulte Home
and Pulte Diversified are subsidiaries of the PHM Corporation.

For the fifth institution, Pulte plans to infuse $14.5 million at the time of
acquisition and $8.8 million more within a year.

Loans to Own Operations

Bank board officials said that under the agreement, Pulte would be able to lend
to its building operations, but that those transactions would be closely
monitored and would have to be reported to the bank board on a quarterly basis.

The bank board's efforts to shut, merge or find buyers for more than 500
insolvent savings institutions have come under intense criticism from some
members of Congress.

Lawmakers worry that the agency is creating very large liabilities that it will
never be able to pay back and that in the end the taxpayers will have to make
good on those obligations. Moreover, they are concerned that the agency is
structuring these transactions in a manner that amounts to little more than a
fire sale of Texas savings and loan associations.

Savings industry experts say there is a significant difference between buying a
savings institution in Texas and one in California or another state.

In California, they note, many insolvent savings institutions have a stable
deposit base from local customers that provides low-cost borrowing.

But in Texas, the deposit situation is often very different. A large amount has
been attracted from out of state because of the very high rates the Texas
institutions have been paying. These funds are often placed by so-called money
brokers and tend to be withdrawn quickly and in very large amounts if rates are
lowered.

Bank board officials said the reorganization of the four savings associations in
today's deal was structured for tax purposes. The agency said all deposits of
the acquired institutions were transferred in full to the new institutions,
which will operate out of the branch offices of the former institutions.

In return for injecting the financial assistance, the bank board will hold
warrants representing 20 percent of the acquired institutions and get 25 percent
of the tax benefits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chronology of rescue packages worked out under Southwest plan (pg. 45)

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Mortgage Servicing News

                                 December 2013

Congress Off the Dime On Reform of the GSEs

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; MORTGAGE SERVICING NEWS; Pg. 6 Vol. 17 No. 12

LENGTH: 863  words


The new chairman of the Mortgage Bankers Association, E.J. Burke, thinks
Congress finally seems to be getting serious about reform of the
government-sponsored enterprises.

The MBA has been very engaged in trying to influence the direction of housing
finance reform by working with policymakers, issuing white papers and testifying
on Capitol Hill.

The incoming chairman recently testified before the Senate Banking Committee on
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's multifamily businesses, and he was impressed by the
senators' interest in a transfer of the GSE's multifamily platforms to the
private sector.

The GSEs (Fannie and Freddie) have been in conservatorship for five years. "It
seems there is momentum to try to get something done," Burke said in an
interview.

Burke will be installed as the new chairman on Oct. 27-the first day of the MBA
annual conference in Washington. He succeeds Debra Still.

His first name is "E.J." which stands for Edward James. He is named after his
father. "Over the years 'E.J.' stuck with me and that is how I introduce myself
whether professionally or otherwise," he explained.

A native of Buffalo, N.Y., and a long-suffering Buffalo Bills football fan,
Burke is executive vice president and group head of KeyBank Real Estate Capital.

The Cleveland-based banking company provides its clients with a one-stop shop
for commercial real estate services.

KeyBank offers Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Federal Housing Administration
multifamily loans. "We also have our own proprietary commercial mortgage-backed
securities program," Burke said in an interview.

KeyBank is a major player. It is the fourth largest CRE loan servicer in the
U.S. and it is the fourth largest loan syndicator for the REIT sector.

But being big doesn't shield a company from government shutdowns or processing
delays. KeyBank had Federal Housing Administration multifamily and skilled
nursing home loans ready for processing when the Department of Housing and Urban
Development shut down on Oct. 1. Now that the government has reopened, FHA has
begun working through the backlog. Burke expects to receive firm commitments on
the nursing home loans by the end of the year.

"It is hard to run a business when you can't predict something like this," he
said.

Burke took his first MBA correspondent course in 1979. In 1994, he was working
at Midland Loan Services and launched a CRE loan conduit program at the
Commercial Real Estate Finance conference.

Seven years ago, he was invited to join the Commercial Board of Governors and
ended up serving two years as vice chair and one year as the chair of COMBOG.

While serving as the COMBOG chair, "I was approached to see if I would agree to
go on the national leadership ladder." And now he is the new MBA chairman.

"It is a lot of work," Burke said. "Before I got involved in MBA, I used to play
a lot of tennis. I still like to play. I just don't have as much time." He also
used to attend the U.S. Open every year, but not any more.

As the MBA's new chairman, Burke wants to see more member engagement.

"We are a member-driven organization. Our staff is very dependent on the members
to provide them with information," he said, and shape MBA's agenda.

"We need our members to get involved in committees and task forces-being willing
to go up on Capitol Hill and talk to members of Congress," he added.

In testifying before the Senate Banking Committee, the chairman-elect was struck
by the senators' concern about the shortage of apartments in small towns and
rural communities. The senators noted their communities are doing well with low
unemployment. But apartments are hard to come by.

Burke realized that these senators view GSE reform as a way to help their
communities back home.

"With the proper incentives," he said during the interview, more multifamily
financing could reach those small towns.

Burke along with other multifamily experts testified that the Fannie and Freddie
multifamily platforms are valuable assets and should be transferred to private
entities that will continue to serve the multifamily market.

Throughout the financial crisis and economic downturn, the GSEs continued to
purchase multifamily loans and generated positive cash flows-unlike the
single-family side, which crippled Fannie and Freddie and forced the Treasury
Department to bail them out.

Moving Fannie and Freddie's multifamily businesses to the "private sector
through a sale or public offering-with continued access to a government
guarantee-would likely return substantial capital to the U.S. Treasury," Burke
testified on Oct. 9.

He stressed that the private multifamily entities would be regulated by a new
government agency-the Federal Mortgage Insurance Corp.-that would also provide a
government-backed guarantee for multifamily and single-family loans and
securitizations.

Looking back on the Senate hearing, Burke said he "sensed the committee members
were receptive" to the ideas the MBA advocated.

The new MBA chairman also senses that Congress is poised to advance legislation
to wind down Fannie and Freddie and replace them with a new housing finance
system. And the MBA will be part of that effort. "I am hopeful we will make some
progress," he said.

URL: http://www.mortgageservicingnews.com/

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: MSN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              97 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                October 28, 2013

Congress Off the Dime On Reform of the GSEs

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 38 No. 7

LENGTH: 863  words


The new chairman of the Mortgage Bankers Association, E.J. Burke, thinks
Congress finally seems to be getting serious about reform of the
government-sponsored enterprises.

The MBA has been very engaged in trying to influence the direction of housing
finance reform by working with policymakers, issuing white papers and testifying
on Capitol Hill.

The incoming chairman recently testified before the Senate Banking Committee on
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's multifamily businesses, and he was impressed by the
senators' interest in a transfer of the GSE's multifamily platforms to the
private sector.

The GSEs (Fannie and Freddie) have been in conservatorship for five years. "It
seems there is momentum to try to get something done," Burke said in an
interview.

Burke will be installed as the new chairman on Oct. 27-the first day of the MBA
annual conference in Washington. He succeeds Debra Still.

His first name is "E.J." which stands for Edward James. He is named after his
father. "Over the years 'E.J.' stuck with me and that is how I introduce myself
whether professionally or otherwise," he explained.

A native of Buffalo, N.Y., and a long-suffering Buffalo Bills football fan,
Burke is executive vice president and group head of KeyBank Real Estate Capital.

The Cleveland-based banking company provides its clients with a one-stop shop
for commercial real estate services.

KeyBank offers Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Federal Housing Administration
multifamily loans. "We also have our own proprietary commercial mortgage-backed
securities program," Burke said in an interview.

KeyBank is a major player. It is the fourth largest CRE loan servicer in the
U.S. and it is the fourth largest loan syndicator for the REIT sector.

But being big doesn't shield a company from government shutdowns or processing
delays. KeyBank had Federal Housing Administration multifamily and skilled
nursing home loans ready for processing when the Department of Housing and Urban
Development shut down on Oct. 1. Now that the government has reopened, FHA has
begun working through the backlog. Burke expects to receive firm commitments on
the nursing home loans by the end of the year.

"It is hard to run a business when you can't predict something like this," he
said.

Burke took his first MBA correspondent course in 1979. In 1994, he was working
at Midland Loan Services and launched a CRE loan conduit program at the
Commercial Real Estate Finance conference.

Seven years ago, he was invited to join the Commercial Board of Governors and
ended up serving two years as vice chair and one year as the chair of COMBOG.

While serving as the COMBOG chair, "I was approached to see if I would agree to
go on the national leadership ladder." And now he is the new MBA chairman.

"It is a lot of work," Burke said. "Before I got involved in MBA, I used to play
a lot of tennis. I still like to play. I just don't have as much time." He also
used to attend the U.S. Open every year, but not any more.

As the MBA's new chairman, Burke wants to see more member engagement.

"We are a member-driven organization. Our staff is very dependent on the members
to provide them with information," he said, and shape MBA's agenda.

"We need our members to get involved in committees and task forces-being willing
to go up on Capitol Hill and talk to members of Congress," he added.

In testifying before the Senate Banking Committee, the chairman-elect was struck
by the senators' concern about the shortage of apartments in small towns and
rural communities. The senators noted their communities are doing well with low
unemployment. But apartments are hard to come by.

Burke realized that these senators view GSE reform as a way to help their
communities back home.

"With the proper incentives," he said during the interview, more multifamily
financing could reach those small towns.

Burke along with other multifamily experts testified that the Fannie and Freddie
multifamily platforms are valuable assets and should be transferred to private
entities that will continue to serve the multifamily market.

Throughout the financial crisis and economic downturn, the GSEs continued to
purchase multifamily loans and generated positive cash flows-unlike the
single-family side, which crippled Fannie and Freddie and forced the Treasury
Department to bail them out.

Moving Fannie and Freddie's multifamily businesses to the "private sector
through a sale or public offering-with continued access to a government
guarantee-would likely return substantial capital to the U.S. Treasury," Burke
testified on Oct. 9.

He stressed that the private multifamily entities would be regulated by a new
government agency-the Federal Mortgage Insurance Corp.-that would also provide a
government-backed guarantee for multifamily and single-family loans and
securitizations.

Looking back on the Senate hearing, Burke said he "sensed the committee members
were receptive" to the ideas the MBA advocated.

The new MBA chairman also senses that Congress is poised to advance legislation
to wind down Fannie and Freddie and replace them with a new housing finance
system. And the MBA will be part of that effort. "I am hopeful we will make some
progress," he said.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              98 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               September 26, 1988
                              Correction Appended

Management Expertise of One SW Plan Acquirer Is Being Questioned

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


As the industry awaits transactions that are expected to resolve many
insolvencies by the end of September, an analyst here has raised questions about
the management expertise of the latest acquirer in the Federal Home Loan Bank
Board's Southwest Plan.

The ability of Pulte Diversified Cos., Bloomfield, Mich., to manage the five
Texas thrifts it is acquiring in the Federal Home Loan Bank Board's Southwest
Plan was questioned by Barbara Allen of Prudential Bache Securities.

In the seventh transaction in the Southwest Plan, which is designed to bring new
capital and management into the Texas thrift industry by selling packages of
insolvent thrifts to investors, Pulte agreed to pour $ 45 million of new capital
into five thrifts in and around Houston.

The bank board agreed to provide $ 556.9 million of assistance to Pulte
Diversified, an affiliate of one of the nation's leading homebuilders.

Pulte will pay $ 15.5 million to acquire Allenpark Federal Savings and Loan
Association, Houston; Bay City Federal Savings and Loan Association; Gulf Coast
Savings Association, Richmond; and Heights Savings Association, FSB, Houston.

The company will add another $ 6.2 million within a year of the acquisition.

Pulte also agreed to acquire a fifth insolvent institution -- identified late
last week by a Bank Board source as Champion Savings Association, Houston --
infusing $ 14.5 million initially and another $ 8.8 million within a year.

While the capital infusion appears to reflect a new emphasis on capital by the
Bank Board, following criticism of earlier deals for being undercapitalized,
this deal raised questions about the other stated goal of the Southwest Plan --
new management.

"Yes, they've had experience in the mortgage market, but I'm not sure it's
helpful," Ms. Allen said of Pulte.

"Their record is not stellar.  They've been hurt by Federal Housing
Administration and Veterans Administration forclosures in the Southwest."

Ms. Allen, who in July improved her rating of the company's stock to the
"average performer" category, also noted the company last year took a large
reserve against losses in the failure of TICOR, a major private mortgage insurer
that has been declared insolvent by the California Commissioner of Insurance.

Ms. Allen's Company Update on PHM Corp., parent of Pulte Home and Pulte
Diversified Cos., identified mortgage financing operations as "a problem area,"
and noted "our confidence level remains low."

Ms. Allen said Pulte officials told her they were satisfied with "the guarantees
and supports" provided by FSLIC.  And she said the thrifts, (which have been
reorganized into two units: Heights of Texas, FSB and First Heights, FSA) will
be operated separately from Pulte's home building operation.

Pulte officials did not return reporters' calls, but several observers said tax
benefits were the main attraction for the builder.

Pulte will receive 75% of the net operating loss carryforwards of the five
companies, with FSLIC receiving the remaining 25%.

According to figures provided by Ferguson and Co., Irving, Texas, the 1987 loss
for the five totaled $ 179 million.  The five, with combined assets of $ 1.1
billion, lost $ 101 million in the first quarter.

Observers noted Pulte, like other builders, lost favorable tax treatment for
installment sales under the tax act of 1986.  They argued the potential NOL
benefit of acquiring thrifts is especially attractive to builders.

The Bank Board official said that in addition to the acquisition of Champion by
Pulte, deals for Olney (Texas) Savings Association and Guaranty Federal Savings
and Loan Association, Dallas were expected by the end of the month.

The official said a cash infusion of $ 80 million was expected in the Olney deal
and an infusion of $ 75 to $ 125 million was expected from an investor group
comprised of Trammel Crow and Co., Mason Best Co. and Temple Inland Corp., the
apparent acquirers of Guaranty.

The official did not say what other institutions would be folded into Olney and
Guaranty.

He said a third deal, in which a country club operator is expected to infuse $
40 million,, will be announced by the end of the month.

Bob Dedham, owner of Clubs of America, will acquire Creditbanc Savings
Association, Austin and Fanklin Savings Association of Austin and several
smaller thrifts.

The self-made millionaire and philathropist is reportedly interested in
acquiring some club properties that have been foreclosed on by one of the
thrifts.

However, the Bank Board does not expect to complete negotiations to sell 1st
Texas (Dallas) and Gibraltar (Houston) Savings Associations, the official said.

An industry source said insiders in the company that owns the two thrifts have
raised a significant amount of new capital, but the regulator is not impressed.

That source said Columbia Savings and Loan Association, Beverly Hills, Calif.,
was "making a hot run" for 1st Texas-Gibraltar.

In recent assisted transactions outside of Texas, FSLIC reached a tentative
agreement with Southeast Banking Corp., Miami, under which Southeast would
acquire South Florida Savings Bank, Miami, with $ 29 million of assistance.

Southeast will put $ 75 million of capital into South Florida.  It also said it
would acquire First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Jacksonville,
subject to Bank Board approval.

FSLIC has provided $ 4.9 million of cash assistance to Home Federal Savings and
Loan Association, Rockford, Ill, to acquire Loves Park (Ill.), FSB.

Washington Federal Savings and Loan Association, Seattle, said it received
"substantial assistance" from FSLIC to acquire Freedom Federal Savings and Loan
Association, Corvallis, Ore.

Citizens Savings Financial Corp., Miami, acquired its first out-of-state thrift,
Ultimate Savings Bank, Richmond, Va.  As part of the deal, Ultimate's loans were
transfered to FSLIC as the receiver for the bank.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 31, 1988

CORRECTION: An article appearing in the Sept. 26, 1988 issue about the Federal
Home Loan Bank Board's Southwest Plan misidentified the private mortgage insurer
that has been declared insolvent by the California Commissioner of Insurance.
It should have been identified as TMIC Mortgage Insurance Co., Inc.  Although
TMIC was formerly known as Ticor Mortgage Insurance Co., TMIC's parent company,
Ticor, is not a private mortgage insurer and is not directly involved in the
insolvency proceedings.

                   Copyright 1988 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              99 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              March 3, 2017 Friday

Berger, Watt to meet on CUs' concerns

LENGTH: 251  words

DATELINE: New York



 Arlington: National Association of Federally-Insured Credit Unions has issued
the following news release:



  NAFCU President and CEO Dan Berger and senior staff will meet with Federal
Housing Finance Agency Director Mel Watt today to discuss top credit union
concerns about the agency's housing finance measures, including the agency's new
duty-to-serve rule.





 NAFCU Executive Vice President of Government Affairs and General Counsel Carrie
Hunt, Vice President of Legislative Affairs Brad Thaler, Director of Regulatory
Affairs Alexander Monterrubio and Regulatory Affairs Counsel Ann Kossachev will
also attend the meeting.



 Under the final rule, and as urged by NAFCU, the FHFA is allowing credit unions
that have experience making chattel loans for manufactured housing to be
eligible for duty-to-serve credit.



 The meeting will also focus on the planned common securitization platform and
single-family credit risk transfers.



 The FHFA listed building the common securitization platform as a top priority
for 2017. NAFCU has previously lodged concerns about this platform possibly
making it more difficult for credit unions to sell their loans to
government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.



 NAFCU representatives will also update Watt on credit union participation in
Federal Home Loan Banks.



 NAFCU continues to advocate for housing reform that guarantees access for
credit unions to the secondary mortgage market, and fair prices based on loan
quality rather than volume.







LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              100 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Express and Echo

                            March 15, 2012 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Home loans scheme 'will boost market'

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 71

LENGTH: 251 words


HOUSE builders and business leaders have hailed the Government's NewBuy mortgage
indemnity guarantee scheme as a welcome boost to the market.

The scheme, launched this week, aims to help up to 100,000 first-time buyers get
higher loan-to-value mortgages to purchase new homes.

Simon Perks, managing director of Exeter-based Persimmon Homes South West, said:
"The launch of NewBuy is hugely significant as it removes the obstacle of a
large deposit which has been a key factor holding back the housing market in
recent years.

"NewBuy opens up a 95 per cent mortgage product to both first time buyers and
those looking to move up the property ladder. It is a much-needed shot in the
arm for the whole housing sector and the Government's provision of up to 100,000
New-Buy mortgages will also give a welcome boost to UK growth and employment."

Janine Davey, regional sales and marketing director for Taylor Wimpey Exeter,
added: "We welcome the NewBuy scheme as we believe it will go a long way in
helping a wide range of buyers who have had to put their dreams of getting on or
moving up the property ladder on hold due to the size of deposits required by
mortgage lenders." Gerry Jones, chairman of the Institute of Directors in the
South West, argued that "real planning reform" would kickstart the construction
industry, adding: "Subsidising 95 per cent mortgages through the NewBuy
guarantee won't do any harm, but the best way to help housebuilders and aspirant
homeowners is to allow more houses to be built."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EEE


                        Copyright 2012 Express and Echo
                              All Rights Reserved


                              101 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Express and Echo

                            March 15, 2012 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Home loans scheme 'will boost market'

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 71

LENGTH: 251 words


HOUSE builders and business leaders have hailed the Government's NewBuy mortgage
indemnity guarantee scheme as a welcome boost to the market.

The scheme, launched this week, aims to help up to 100,000 first-time buyers get
higher loan-to-value mortgages to purchase new homes.

Simon Perks, managing director of Exeter-based Persimmon Homes South West, said:
"The launch of NewBuy is hugely significant as it removes the obstacle of a
large deposit which has been a key factor holding back the housing market in
recent years.

"NewBuy opens up a 95 per cent mortgage product to both first time buyers and
those looking to move up the property ladder. It is a much-needed shot in the
arm for the whole housing sector and the Government's provision of up to 100,000
New-Buy mortgages will also give a welcome boost to UK growth and employment."

Janine Davey, regional sales and marketing director for Taylor Wimpey Exeter,
added: "We welcome the NewBuy scheme as we believe it will go a long way in
helping a wide range of buyers who have had to put their dreams of getting on or
moving up the property ladder on hold due to the size of deposits required by
mortgage lenders." Gerry Jones, chairman of the Institute of Directors in the
South West, argued that "real planning reform" would kickstart the construction
industry, adding: "Subsidising 95 per cent mortgages through the NewBuy
guarantee won't do any harm, but the best way to help housebuilders and aspirant
homeowners is to allow more houses to be built."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EEE


                        Copyright 2012 Express and Echo
                              All Rights Reserved


                              102 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                January 12, 2009

OPEN FORUM: Stop the Downward Spiral

BYLINE: James Lockhartdirector, Federal Housing Finance Agency

SECTION: Pg. 4 Vol. 33 No. 15

LENGTH: 855  words


Mr. Lockhart's Remarks At A Press Conference In Washington Where He Discussed A
New Streamlined Loan Modification Program Are Presented As Our Open Forum.

As housing prices have fallen, delinquencies on mortgages have tripled, not just
for subprime and alt-A, but also for prime mortgages. Foreclosures have
increased almost 150% from two years ago. Foreclosures hurt families, their
neighbors, whole communities and the overall housing market. We need to stop
this downward spiral.

Today we are announcing a major program designed to greatly reduce preventable
foreclosures with a simplified, streamlined loan modification program to get
struggling homeowners into mortgages that they can afford. It is an achievable
goal if homeowners, banks, mortgage servicers, investors, Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac all work together.

As the regulator of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Home Loan Banks, the
Federal Housing Finance Agency strongly supports the enterprises' leadership
role in setting industry standards for assisting "at risk" borrowers who could
lose their homes to foreclosure. This streamlined modification program with
uniform eligibility requirements will be supported by a consistent, efficient
process approved by key industry participants. This program resulted from a
unified effort among the enterprises, Hope Now and its 27 servicer partners, the
Department of the Treasury, the Federal Housing Administration and FHFA.

In developing this program, we have drawn on the FDIC's experience and
assistance, and have greatly benefited from the FDIC's input.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac own or guarantee almost 31 million mortgages, about
58% of all single-family mortgages. Although these mortgages only represent 20%
of serious delinquencies, I believe their leadership role combined with the many
partners of Hope Now should spread this approach throughout the whole mortgage
loan servicing business. The performance of private label mortgage-backed
securities that were sliced and diced and sold to investors is just the opposite
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's. Private label securities represent less than
20% of the mortgages but 60% of the serious delinquencies. As the regulator of
the housing GSEs that own over a quarter of a trillion dollars of private label
securities, I ask the private label MBS servicers and investors to rapidly adopt
this program as the industry standard. Not only will this streamlined program
assist borrowers, but broad acceptance and effective implementation could
stabilize communities and property values. The program targets the highest risk
borrower who has missed three payments or more, owns and occupies the property
as a primary residence, and has not filed for bankruptcy. To be considered for
the program, a seriously delinquent borrower should contact his or her servicer
and provide the requested income information. The program creates a fast-track
method of getting troubled borrowers to an affordable monthly payment where
"affordable" is defined as a first mortgage payment, including homeowner
association dues, of no more than 38% of the household's monthly gross income.
This affordable payment will be achieved through a mix of reducing the mortgage
interest rate, extending the life of the loan or even deferring payment on part
of the principal. Servicers will have flexibility in the mix used to get there,
but the goal is to create a more affordable payment.

If the servicer is unable to create an affordable payment with this streamlined
program, it will further evaluate the borrower's situation through a customized
process. The key to success is the borrower's ongoing cooperation and
communication with the servicer. Borrowers shouldn't fear working with
servicers.

They have dedicated personnel who are experienced in working with borrowers who
are struggling with finances, but who are eager to keep their homes.

The streamlined modification program complements existing loss mitigation
programs. We expect that it could significantly increase the number of
modifications completed. Borrowers who participate will be strongly encouraged
to seek financial counseling through HUD-approved agencies - particularly, if
the default is a result of being overextended or due to financial mismanagement.
To encourage participation, servicers will receive a fixed payment of $800 for
each loan modified through this program.

Troubled borrowers eligible for this program have already experienced
significant erosion in their credit scores, making them unlikely to obtain
mortgage credit, through typical means. Many also lack equity in their homes.
This streamlined program is meant to reach as many of these borrowers as
possible to give them a chance to save their homes and begin restoring their
credit. The borrowers' ultimate obligation to repay his or her current mortgage
does not change.

Regrettably, there are many American families in this situation. This unified
effort on the part of the Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, private lenders and
servicers, and the federal agencies represented here is a bold attempt to move
quickly in defining a nationwide program.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              103 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 1, 2017 Wednesday

Berger, Watt to meet on CUs' concerns

LENGTH: 249  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the
following news release:



  NAFCU President and CEO Dan Berger and senior staff will meet with Federal
Housing Finance Agency Director Mel Watt today to discuss top credit union
concerns about the agency's housing finance measures, including the agency's new
duty-to-serve rule.





 NAFCU Executive Vice President of Government Affairs and General Counsel Carrie
Hunt, Vice President of Legislative Affairs Brad Thaler, Director of Regulatory
Affairs Alexander Monterrubio and Regulatory Affairs Counsel Ann Kossachev will
also attend the meeting.



 Under the final rule, and as urged by NAFCU, the FHFA is allowing credit unions
that have experience making chattel loans for manufactured housing to be
eligible for duty-to-serve credit.



 The meeting will also focus on the planned common securitization platform and
single-family credit risk transfers.



 The FHFA listed building the common securitization platform as a top priority
for 2017. NAFCU has previously lodged concerns about this platform possibly
making it more difficult for credit unions to sell their loans to
government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.



 NAFCU representatives will also update Watt on credit union participation in
Federal Home Loan Banks.



 NAFCU continues to advocate for housing reform that guarantees access for
credit unions to the secondary mortgage market, and fair prices based on loan
quality rather than volume.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              104 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 1, 2017 Wednesday

Berger, Watt to meet on CUs' concerns

LENGTH: 249  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the
following news release:



  NAFCU President and CEO Dan Berger and senior staff will meet with Federal
Housing Finance Agency Director Mel Watt today to discuss top credit union
concerns about the agency's housing finance measures, including the agency's new
duty-to-serve rule.





 NAFCU Executive Vice President of Government Affairs and General Counsel Carrie
Hunt, Vice President of Legislative Affairs Brad Thaler, Director of Regulatory
Affairs Alexander Monterrubio and Regulatory Affairs Counsel Ann Kossachev will
also attend the meeting.



 Under the final rule, and as urged by NAFCU, the FHFA is allowing credit unions
that have experience making chattel loans for manufactured housing to be
eligible for duty-to-serve credit.



 The meeting will also focus on the planned common securitization platform and
single-family credit risk transfers.



 The FHFA listed building the common securitization platform as a top priority
for 2017. NAFCU has previously lodged concerns about this platform possibly
making it more difficult for credit unions to sell their loans to
government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.



 NAFCU representatives will also update Watt on credit union participation in
Federal Home Loan Banks.



 NAFCU continues to advocate for housing reform that guarantees access for
credit unions to the secondary mortgage market, and fair prices based on loan
quality rather than volume.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              105 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 1, 2017 Wednesday

Berger, Watt to meet on CUs' concerns

LENGTH: 249  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the
following news release:



  NAFCU President and CEO Dan Berger and senior staff will meet with Federal
Housing Finance Agency Director Mel Watt today to discuss top credit union
concerns about the agency's housing finance measures, including the agency's new
duty-to-serve rule.





 NAFCU Executive Vice President of Government Affairs and General Counsel Carrie
Hunt, Vice President of Legislative Affairs Brad Thaler, Director of Regulatory
Affairs Alexander Monterrubio and Regulatory Affairs Counsel Ann Kossachev will
also attend the meeting.



 Under the final rule, and as urged by NAFCU, the FHFA is allowing credit unions
that have experience making chattel loans for manufactured housing to be
eligible for duty-to-serve credit.



 The meeting will also focus on the planned common securitization platform and
single-family credit risk transfers.



 The FHFA listed building the common securitization platform as a top priority
for 2017. NAFCU has previously lodged concerns about this platform possibly
making it more difficult for credit unions to sell their loans to
government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.



 NAFCU representatives will also update Watt on credit union participation in
Federal Home Loan Banks.



 NAFCU continues to advocate for housing reform that guarantees access for
credit unions to the secondary mortgage market, and fair prices based on loan
quality rather than volume.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              106 of 998 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                            August 17, 2010 Tuesday
                                National Edition

U.S. needs to reset mortgage mess

BYLINE: Antony Currie, Reuters

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. FP2

LENGTH: 775  words


Washington faces a mortgage market conundrum. A conference today hosted by the
U.S. Treasury is supposed, finally, to start addressing what to do with Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac. But the bunch of fixes proposed by regulators and lawmakers
in attempts to make private home loans safer is causing other problems.

Assuming the eventual goal is to sharply reduce the role of government agencies
in mortgage finance, then there's a matching need to increase private-sector
funding for mortgages. The most obvious difficulty is crowding out by the
subsidized agencies. But there are other structural barriers to private lending,
too.

The most glaring case of crowding out is in so-called jumbo mortgages, where
borrowers may meet all other criteria to conform with Fannie and Freddie
standards except that the loan they want is too large. Until the crisis, the
maximum loan the GSEs could guarantee was US$417,000 for single-family
properties. Now it's US$730,000.

Neither banks nor asset-backed investors -- both of which increasingly want to
hold loans of this kind -- can compete with the lower funding costs the
government agencies enjoy.

Another example is the subprime market. The Federal Housing Administration has
made it almost impossible for banks to consider jumping back in, however
cautiously. The agency made US$451-billion in loans last year, accounting for a
quarter of all new U.S. mortgages. Not only are its funding costs lower than the
private sector's, it is also using methods discredited by the housing crunch,
such as taking only minuscule down payments from borrowers. In that regard, its
decision last week to increase the minimum equity requirement to 10% is
encouraging.

If the government loosened its grip on these parts of the market, banks should
be able to pick up the slack, especially in jumbos. Bank lending alone, however,
would struggle to compensate for any broader moves to shrink Fannie, Freddie and
the FHA.

That's because even with the inevitable somewhat higher mortgage interest rates,
there's simply not enough room on U.S. banks' books. Over the past decade,
lenders' balance sheets have rarely accounted for more than 15% of U.S. mortgage
financing, according to a report last year from the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco.

If banks had held on to all mortgages extended last year rather than selling
them on, they would have needed an extra US$180-billion in equity capital,
assuming a 10 times leverage multiple. And that's one year --to take on the
entire US$5.8-trillion of mortgages Fannie and Freddie currently own or
guarantee, the banking system would need to go in search of US$580-billion of
fresh ammo.

That's where alternative forms of financing come in -- including securitization,
in which home loans are repackaged and sold to a broad range of private
investors. But recent actual and mooted regulatory changes have bred
uncertainty. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., for example, is still debating
the rules on what happens if a lender fails. Securitized assets ought to be
protected from a bankruptcy, but early drafts called this into question and have
spooked the market.

Another logical-seeming new rule requires that lenders retain risk in their
securitizations. As the argument goes, that should keep them more mindful of
their lending standards. That's also supposed to be one of the strengths of
covered bonds, the primarily European funding tool that creates extra funding
capacity for banks while keeping mortgages on their balance sheets. Congress
recently passed legislation that should make it easier to establish covered
bonds in the United States.

Yet plenty of U.S. lenders, including HSBC, Wachovia and Washington Mutual, kept
mortgages on their balance sheets that have since turned horribly sour.
Meanwhile, the existence of covered bonds did nothing to prevent housing bubbles
inflating and bursting in Spain and the U.K.

More worrying, though, is the interplay of U.S. accounting and capital rules.
The way these are currently shaping up, lenders will often be forced to hold
reserves against the entirety of a securitized package of mortgages despite
retaining, say, only a 5% slice. That will make securitization expensive and
won't increase the amount of capital available to fund mortgages much, if at
all.

In short, reforming Fannie and Freddie will be even more of a struggle unless
constraints and anomalies affecting the private market are also dealt with.
Otherwise, attempts to wean the industry off the agencies could leave mortgage
funding scarce.

antony.currie@thomsonreuters.com---

- For more independent financial commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.
com

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2010 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              107 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 31, 2010

Regulator: GSEs On the Mend but Still Need Federal Aid

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2 Vol. 34 No. 35

LENGTH: 449  words


WASHINGTON-The nation's GSE regulator has a message for Congress: Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac are once again investing in safe and profitable loans, but will need
continuing government support to deal with mounting losses on their "legacy"
assets.

Single-family loans originated in 2009 represent the best "book of business" the
GSEs have turned out since 2003, according to Edward DeMarco, acting director of
the Federal Housing Finance Agency.

"The enterprises have made significant progress in improving the quality of new
mortgages," he told a Congressional panel recently.

The average FICO score on a GSE-backed single-family loan is 750, up from 715
during 2006 and 2007, vintage years that account for most of the GSEs' credit
losses.

In 2009, nearly half (49%) of Fannie/Freddie mortgages had loan-to-value ratios
of 70% or less and only 1% of loans had LTVs above 95%.

Previously, only 31% had LTVs of 70 or less and 10% were above 95%.

But several Republican lawmakers have raised concerns that the GSEs are being
too conservative and pushing borrowers into Federal Housing Administration
loans. Rep. Scott Garrett, R-N.J., noted that the GSEs increased their
loan-level adjustment fees during the financial crisis to deal with falling
prices and other risks.

Now that home prices are stabilizing and the economy improving, Garrett wants to
know if Fannie and Freddie will lower those fees.

The regulator pointed out that the mispricing of risk on loans in 2006 to 2008
landed the GSEs in conservatorships that have cost taxpayers $145 billion, and
counting.

Despite better underwriting, Fannie and Freddie will continue to set their fees
to cover expected losses on new loans, he said. DeMarco noted that the guarantee
fees charged by the two have been reduced. The FHFA soon will release a report
on "g-fees," he said.

"The report will show that both enterprises have set their 2009 pricing at
levels that are expected to cover future losses, operating expenses and a
reasonable return on their new loan guarantees," he said.

The FHFA also is pushing Fannie and Freddie to expand their data collection on
loans and appraisals using new uniform standards. Under this initiative, the new
data standard will be phased in through a common platform and structured to use
existing originator and appraiser technologies.

DeMarco told subcommittee members it will raise the quality and consistency of
key information and improve the enterprises' risk management capabilities.

"This type of change also improves the functioning of the mortgage market," he
said.

And it will be "beneficial," he said, regardless of what course Congress takes
in the future to restructure the housing finance system and the GSEs.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              108 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 15, 2014 Monday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 92 words

Freddie Mac

8200 Jones Branch Rd.

McLean, Va. 22012

202-434-8600

Year Founded: 1970

CEO: Donald H. Layton

Employees (local): 5,059 (4,541)

www.freddiemac.com

Chartered by Congress in 1970, Freddie Mac purchases mortgage loans and issues
mortgage-related securities. Under the direction of the Federal Housing Finance
Agency, Freddie Mac aims to reduce the number of foreclosures and help families
obtain mortgages. Its business lines are single-family credit guarantees for
home loans; a multifamily business for apartment financing; and an investment
portfolio.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              109 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           October 10, 2013 Thursday

Mortgage Industry Rallies Against Lower Loan Limits

BYLINE: Sarah Todd

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 178 No. 157

LENGTH: 346  words


Reports that the ceiling on government-backed mortgages may fall at the start of
2014 have much of the housing industry up in arms.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac currently guarantee loans of up to $417,000 in most
areas of the U.S., with higher caps in more expensive regions. But the Federal
Housing Finance Agency and President Obama have each released statements in
recent months suggesting that the conforming loan limit for single-family
mortgages may drop next year.

Lowering the loan limit would help reduce the private mortgage sector's reliance
on government support, according to supporters of the change. Fannie, Freddie,
and the Federal Housing Administration backed about 95% of newly originated
mortgages in 2012.

But the private industry has little interest in being weaned off Fannie and
Freddie, if recent letters to the FHFA from the National Association of Realtors
and mortgage lenders are any indication. Reducing the loan limit "would have a
very disruptive impact on the availability of affordable housing credit, on our
housing recovery and our economy as a whole," the Mortgage Bankers Association
and 14 other industry organizations wrote in a Wednesday letter to FHFA Acting
Director Edward DeMarco.

"Lowering the loan limits further restricts liquidity and makes mortgages more
expensive for households nationwide," the letter states.

Implicit in these objections is the idea that banks would be more hesitant to
make mortgage loans without the reassurance provided by government backing.
"While there has been some return of private lending without the benefit of a
federal guarantee, it remains limited and available only to the most highly
qualified borrowers," the National Association of Realtors wrote in a letter
last month. The NAR suggested that lowering the cap for government-backed
mortgages would risk "denying homeownership to many credit-worthy homeowners who
are not in a position to meet the extremely risk-averse standards of the current
jumbo lending market."

Representatives at the FHFA did not immediately respond to calls seeking
comment.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              110 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

The Digest

                            July 15, 1999, Thursday



Municipal securities ended unchanged after a rangebound session yesterday, with
high-grades mildly higher. The market looked ahead to today's massive
Foothill/Eastern Transportation deal. Complete market coverage by Nicholas
Kralev appears on page 2

News

OFFSETTING PRICE DECLINES in the energy sector and gains in food costs during
June resulted in the first decline in producer prices in four months, the Labor
Department reported. Page 2

Regions

AFTER TWO DOWNGRADES from different rating agencies in two weeks, a reeling
Nassau County, N.Y., altered its financing plans yesterday. Page 3

Washington

UNLESS IT IS MORE CAREFULLY targeted, a Senate Finance Committee proposal to
allow the Federal Home Loan banks to guarantee up to $500 million in tax-exempt
school bonds each year could "accomplish little for those districts that
actually need it,'' a new study concludes. Page 5

Investors & Investing

INTEREST RATES CAN MAKE or break a single-family mortgage revenue bond,
depending on the methods used to account for them. Today's volatile market puts
housing authorities on uneven ground, market watchers say. Page 7

Southeast

THE SHELbY COUNTY Health, Educational, & Facilities board is scheduled to issue
$130 million of revenue backed debt to finance an expansion project at St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital. Page 29

Underwriters & Dealers

MORGAN STANLEY Dean Witter Tuesday confirmed that Ira Smelkinson recently joined
the firm as a principal to take the reins of its transportation group. Page 31

Listings

New-Issue Calendar Page 8

Requests for Proposals Page 12

Notices of Sales Pages 13-17

Executive Placement Page 19

bond Redemptions Pages 21-26

Market Statistics Pages 32-35

Copyright c 1999 American banker, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.bondbuyer.com

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 303 words

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1999 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              111 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               February 22, 1993

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Clinton administration will move ahead with plans to start a Government
National Mortgage Association Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduit,
administration officials said last week.

The Clinton administration believes the long-awaited GNMA REMIC will generate $
584 million in budget savings over four years, contributing to deficit reduction
goals.

The Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans Affairs Home Loan Program
also are asked to play a role in the budget package.

The administration is counting on higher revenue from popular loan guarantee
programs to help put a dent in the deficit.

Though former GNMA President Raoul Carroll had spoken in support of starting a
REMIC, top HUD officials in the previous administration were concerned about
GNMA's ability to manage the program.

Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry Cisneros told reporters last week
that HUD can save money by issuing GNMA-guaranteed REMICs.

He also said that he has not yet interviewed anyone for the position of GNMA
president.  He said he hopes to interview several candidates for the job this
week.

The Office of Management and Budget estimated that the GNMA REMIC would generate
$ 146 million in budget savings annually.

The GNMA pools FHA and VA guaranteed loans into mortgage-backed securities.

Last year, a Public Securities Association task force recommended that HUD start
a REMIC program.  The PSA said it would save money for homeowners and generate
revenue for the government.

Although the GNMA does not yet offer a REMIC guarantee, the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corp. and the Federal National Mortgage Association currently create
REMICs using GNMA pass-through securities as collateral.

The PSA working group estimated that a GNMA REMIC would reduce the average yield
on FHA/VA insured mortgages by five-to-ten basis points, reducing the monthly
payment for homeowners.

The REMIC would also generate an additional $ 30 million to $ 75 million in
Federal revenue above expenses annually, according to the PSA working group's
report.

This range would provide less revenue than the budget savings estimated by the
Clinton administration.

The PSA based its estimates on a projected GNMA REMIC volume of $ 100 billion
annually.

The PSA said a REMIC program would add only "negligible risk" to the GNMA while
allowing the GNMA to target products to different investor needs.

Unspecified "reforms" made to to the FHA mortgage insurance program would
generate another $ 253 million in budget savings in the fiscal 1994-1997 period,
according to the OMB.

Secretary Cisneros did not elaborate last week on what specific FHA changes may
be sought.

The administration also has proposed changes to the VA Home Loan Program.  Under
the budget plan, veterans using the guarantee for a second or subsequent time
would be required to make a downpayment.

In addition, the guarantee fee would be increased to two percent of the loan.
The higher guarantee fee would result in budget savings of $ 620 million over
four years, according to the OMB.

Currently, VA home buyers pay a 1.25% loan guarantee fee.

The Bush administration on several occassions proposed an increase, but the
proposals met stiff opposition from Congress.

As part of the 1990 budget agreement, the VA home loan guarantee fee was raised
to 1.87% during fiscal 1991, but the fee automatically dropped back down to
1.25% the following year.

All Federal departments, including HUD, will be affected by the President's
proposal to reduce administrative costs by three percent and eliminate 100,000
Federal jobs by attrition.

The cuts will not prevent HUD from undertaking new initiatives, Secretary
Cisneros said.

The Department plans to forge a new partnership with local governments and the
private sector to address urban needs and increase the supply of affordable
housing, he told a congressional panel.

"Through this partnership, we can help the American people build a better future
for themselves and their children, and we can help bring about an urban
renaissance all across America."

Because the FHA has not yet met its capital goals, "further reforms appear
necessary" in the FHA-single-family mortgage insurance fund, an OMB report said.

Changes in the FHA's multifamily mortgage insurance programs will reduce losses
and result in budget savings, the OMB said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              112 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Credit Union Journal

                               November 14, 2011

ON DEADLINE

BYLINE: Editorial Staff

SECTION: MISCELLANEOUS; Pg. 1 Vol. 15 No. 44

LENGTH: 620  words


Legislation Seeks To

Privatize Secondary Market

WASHINGTON-Bolstered by exploding losses at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, Sen.
Robert Corker (R-TN) introduced legislation last week that would privatize the
secondary mortgage market and end government guarantees on mortgages and
mortgage backed securities.

Corker's bill comes days after Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, under federal
conservatorship since September 2008, reported additional $14 billion of losses
for the third quarter and increased their need for taxpayer assistance to more
than $160 billion.

The bill, similar to efforts being undertaken in the House, would sell off all
systems and technology owned by Fannie and Freddie to private investors and
gradually eliminate the government guarantee on mortgage backed securities
issued by the two secondary mortgage giants, which now back a staggering 90% of
all new single family home loans.

The privatization of the secondary mortgage market has been keenly opposed by
credit unions which rely on Fannie and Freddie to buy more than half of their
mortgages and to guarantee the MBS they buy with surplus credit union funds.
Corker's proposal would create a uniform legal structure for MBSs, which would
be regulated by the Federal Housing Finance Agency. Under the bill all borrowers
would need a 5% downpayment and full documentation to qualify for a loan.

NCUA Projects Assessment

To Be In 8-11 BP Range

ALEXANDRIA, Va.-NCUA last week said it is projecting the 2012 corporate credit
union assessment will be well below the 2011 assessment of 25 basis points, and
is more likely to be in the 8-11 BP range. NCUA Chairman Debbie Matz also
confirmed that for the first time in three years there will be no NCUSIF premium
in 2011, but that the premium may need to be charged again in 2012. The agency
is also projecting its spending increase will be in the "single digits" in 2012.

NCUA Nominee Hearing Nov. 17

WASHINGTON-The Senate Banking Committee has scheduled a confirmation hearing on
NCUA Board nominee Carla Leon-Decker for Nov. 17, a committee aide confirmed to
Credit Union Journal.

Leon-Decker, president of the $47 million D.C. Government Employees FCU, would
be the second Democrat on the three-member panel, succeeding Gigi Hyland, whose
six-year term on the Board expired in August. If endorsed by the Senate Banking
Committee the nomination must be approved by the full Senate.

CFPB To Offer 'Heads Up'

WASHINGTON-The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau last week indicated it will
give financial institutions a heads up when they face possible enforcement
actions. The early warning notice would give the subject of any
investigation-including individuals and institutions -an opportunity to respond
to allegations before the bureau decides whether to take legal action.

"The early warning notice announced today strikes a balance between the goal of
fairness to those being investigated and our mission to protect consumers," Raj
Date, the bureau's interim leader, said in a press release. "This process will
help us fulfill our commitment to transparency in enforcing the law."

Under its own early warning process, the CFPB will notify firms or individuals
that evidence gathered in an investigation indicates that they have violated
consumer financial laws. They then have 14 days to respond in writing, including
any relevant legal or policy arguments or facts, according to the press release.

Former NY Leader, Gordon, Dies

ALBANY, N.Y.-Berris R. Gordon, 90, the former president of the Credit Union
Association of New York, has died. Gordon joined what was then known as the New
York State Credit Un ion League in 1964 as a field representative and by 1978
had worked his wa up to president. He retired in 1984.

URL: http://www.cujournal.com/

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: CUJ


                        Copyright 2011 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              113 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                           November 26, 2009 Thursday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Fannie opens window for ordinary home buyers

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 271 words


FANNIE Mae has announced a program aimed at helping ordinary home buyers compete
with investors for foreclosed homes.

Under its First Look program, Fannie plans to consider offers only from
potential owner-occupants and certain public-housing entities during the first
15 days in which a foreclosed home is on the market.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, government-controlled companies that buy or
guarantee home mortgages, are among the biggest owners of foreclosed homes. As
of September 30, Fannie had 72,275 single-family foreclosed homes on its books
and Freddie had 41,133.

Many investors can move faster on home purchases because they are able to pay
cash and don't have to wait to qualify for a loan and get an appraisal.
Investors often turn the homes into rental units or flip them to other buyers
for a quick profit. People seeking to take advantage of the drop in house prices
to buy their first homes complain that they often lose bidding wars to
investors.

Fannie said it would also help owner-occupants acquire homes by reducing deposit
requirements to as little as $500 and would also give them a chance to
renegotiate offers after appraisals. Such buyers will also be given 45 days to
complete the transaction, up from the usual 30 days.

Freddie said it had similar pilot programs and was helping owner-occupants pay
closing costs.

Fannie's supply of foreclosed homes is likely to keep growing. It said yesterday
that 4.72 per cent of the single-family home loans it owned or guaranteed were
90 days or more overdue in September, up from 4.45 per cent in August and 1.72
per cent in September last year.

JAMES R. HAGERTY

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              114 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 5, 2016 Saturday

3Q net income of $2.3B for Freddie, $3.2B for Fannie

LENGTH: 225  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the
following news release:



  Government-sponsored enterprises Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae reported net
incomes of $2.3 billion and $3.2 billion, respectively, in the third quarter of
2016.





 For the third quarter, Freddie said its single-family guarantee fee income
increased but was partially offset by a decline in its investments portfolio.
Fannie said it was the largest provider of liquidity to the mortgage market
during the third quarter, providing $184 billion in mortgage financing.



 Fannie said it expects to pay the Treasury Department $3 billion in dividends
in December, bringing its total payments to $154.4 billion. Freddie will pay
$2.3 billion in December, bringing its total to $101.4 billion.



 For the GSEs' comprehensive income - which is the sum of their net income and
items that have not yet been realized - Freddie reported $2.3 billion for the
third quarter, while Fannie reported $3 billion.



 Fannie and Freddie have been under the FHFA's conservatorship since 2008. NAFCU
continues to push for housing reform that guarantees credit unions access to the
secondary housing market and for fair pricing based on loan quality instead of
volume.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              115 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 4, 2016 Friday

3Q net income of $2.3B for Freddie, $3.2B for Fannie

LENGTH: 224  words

DATELINE: New York



 Arlington: National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the
following news re



  Government-sponsored enterprises Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae reported net
incomes of $2.3 billion and $3.2 billion, respectively, in the third quarter of
2016.





 For the third quarter, Freddie said its single-family guarantee fee income
increased but was partially offset by a decline in its investments portfolio.
Fannie said it was the largest provider of liquidity to the mortgage market
during the third quarter, providing $184 billion in mortgage financing.



 Fannie said it expects to pay the Treasury Department $3 billion in dividends
in December, bringing its total payments to $154.4 billion. Freddie will pay
$2.3 billion in December, bringing its total to $101.4 billion.



 For the GSEs' comprehensive income - which is the sum of their net income and
items that have not yet been realized - Freddie reported $2.3 billion for the
third quarter, while Fannie reported $3 billion.



 Fannie and Freddie have been under the FHFA's conservatorship since 2008. NAFCU
continues to push for housing reform that guarantees credit unions access to the
secondary housing market and for fair pricing based on loan quality instead of
volume.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              116 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 5, 2016 Friday

2Q net income of $1B for Freddie, $2.9B for Fannie

LENGTH: 228  words

DATELINE: New York



 Arlington: National Association of Federal Credit Unions the followingA news
release



 Government-sponsored enterprises Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae reported net
incomes of $1 billion and $2.9 billion, respectively, in the second quarter of
2016.





 Freddie also reported a comprehensive income of $1.1 billion for the second
quarter, while Fannie said it had comprehensive income of $2.9 billion.



 For the first quarter, Freddie reported a $354 million net loss while Fannie
reported a $1.1 billion net gain. It was Freddie's second loss in three
quarters, but the GSE maintained that no Treasury Department draw would be
necessary.



 For the second quarter, Freddie said its single-family guarantee fee income
increased but was offset by a decline in revenue from the investments portfolio.
Fannie said it had higher net revenues due to an increase in mortgage
prepayments and higher credit-related income due to an increase in home prices
and decrease in actual and projected mortgage interest rates.



 Fannie and Freddie have been under the FHFA's conservatorship since 2008. NAFCU
continues to push for housing reform that guarantees credit unions access to the
secondary housing market and for fair pricing based on loan quality instead of
volume.







 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              117 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 28, 1994

OFHEO's Regulatory Role

BYLINE: By AIDA ALVAREZ, Director; Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
Oversight

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 914 words

HIGHLIGHT: (Ms. Alvarez spoke recently before Women in Housing and Finance
regarding OFHEO's role regulating Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  Her prepared
statement is excerpted here as our Open Forum report.)


Most of you are aware of the basic mission of the Office of Federal Housing
Enterprise Oversight.  It is to oversee and regulate, in matters of financial
safety and soundness, the two largest government-sponsored enterprises.  They
are the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corp. -- known to all of you, of course, as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

As a government entity, OFHEO is a hybrid.  We are part of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development in somewhat the same way that the Office of the
Comptroller and the Office of Thrift Supervision are regulators within the
Treasury Department.

But OFHEO is more independent of HUD than OCC or OTS are of Treasury.  OFHEO
reports directly to Congress.  Unlike the other two regulators, we are not
required to submit testimony or regulations through HUD.

To reinforce that independence from HUD, we moved late last year from the main
HUD building to our own headquarters in the OTS building near the corner of 17th
and Pennsylvania.

Finally, in its safety and soundness mission, which includes duties of
oversight, examination, and enforcement, OFHEO has authority comparable to that
of OCC and OTS, as well as FDIC and the Federal Reserve Board.

There is, of course, one major difference.  The government's other financial
regulators watch over banks, bank holding companies and thrift institutions
numbering in the thousands.

OFHEO, on the other hand, has just two regulatees -- Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

These two companies play a unique role in the economy.

Chartered by Congress, but now shareholder-owned firms listed on the New York
Stock Exchange, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are the foundation of the secondary
mortgage market as we know it today.

Between them, they bought half of all the single-family mortgages originated
last year.  In dollar terms, that's $ 530 billion of loan purchases.

On Fortune magazine's most recent list of the 50 largest diversified financial
companies, Fannie Mae was No. 1 in terms of assets, and Freddie Mac was No. 9.

And here's one more comparison.  Fannie and Freddie's combined assets and
off-balance sheet obligations totaled $ 1.3 trillion at the end of 1993.

That's nearly two-thirds of the $ 2.1 trillion combined assets of the nation's
commercial banks.  And it's almost double the combined $ 775 billion assets of
the nation's thrift institutions.

Congress, which created OFHEO as part of the Federal Housing Enterprises
Financial Safety and soundness Act of 1992, has long recognized that a healthy
secondary mortgage market, and the resulting liquidity that it creates, is
crucial to the economic health of this country.

Equally important, a healthy secondary mortgage market is crucial to the hopes
and dreams of all homebuyers, especially first-time homebuyers.

By extension, Congress also recognized that as long as the secondary market is
structured in its present form, a healthy Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is an
imperative.

But Congress recognized one other factor.  The mortgages that Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac package into securities and sell to investors are guaranteed by the
two enterprises.

The problem in the minds of some is that in the marketplace, this guarantee has
been widely perceived as if it were a fullfledged government guarantee.

There are a variety of reasons for this perception.  One factor is the public
policy mission of the enterprises.

That link was reinforced yesterday when HUD Secretary Henry Cisneros helped
Fannie Mae launch its ambitious program to increase its commitment to low- and
moderate-income housing by $ 50 billion over the next seven years.

The sheer size of these enterprises, and their importance in the overall
economy, lends credence to the perception of an implied guarantee.

There's also Fannie and Freddie's line of credit to the Treasury at $ 2.25
billion each; the precedent set by the rescue of the Farm Credit System in the
1980s; and the ongoing cleanup of the savings and loan industry.

It is critical to note here that our statute explicitly states that the
securities of the two Enterprises are not, repeat are not, backed by the full
faith and credit of the government.

Still, over the years, implicit guarantees have a way of becoming explicit, and
the American taxpayer ultimately pays the price.

Given this history, Congress decided that it was prudent to create an office to
keep an independent watch on these two enterprises.

To serve as an early warning system, if you will.  And if necessary, to require
the enterprises to increase capital.

To do this, the legislation gives OFHEO the following responsibilities:

* To conduct annual-examinations of the two companies.

* To make quarterly findings of capital levels.

* To conduct research and financial analysis, including the establishment of a
sophisticated stress test;

* To review executive compensation.

* To issue regulations concerning capital and enforcement standards.

* To take necessary enforcement actions.

And by assessing the two enterprises for the cost of the regulation -- a
practice similar to the way banking regulatory agencies are funded -- our
efforts pose no direct cost to the taxpayer.

The legislation certainly doesn't raise any doubts about the current financial
health of these two enterprises.

Indeed, officials of both companies, as well as several government studies that
preceded the legislation, indicate that the two companies are robust.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              118 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2013 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                         GlobalData - Company Statement

                               December 11, 2013

                     Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

                            8200 Jones Branch Drive
                             McLean,  VA 22102-3110
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *
Overview:

   A statement from Management Discussion and Analysis is given below. The
statement has been taken from the company's 2012 10K report.

   Overview

   We continue to expect key macroeconomic drivers of the economy, such as
income growth, employment, and inflation, to affect the performance of the
housing and mortgage markets in 2013. Since we expect that economic growth will
continue and mortgage interest rates will remain low in 2013, we believe that
housing affordability will remain relatively high in 2013 for potential home
buyers. We also expect that the volume of home sales will likely increase in
2013, but still remain relatively low compared to historical levels. Important
factors that we believe will continue to negatively affect single-family housing
demand are the relatively high unemployment rate and relatively low consumer
confidence measures. Consumer confidence measures, while up from recession lows
of 2009, remain below long-term averages and suggest that households will likely
continue to be cautious in home buying. We also expect to continue to experience
high levels of refinancing activity in the near term, due to the impact of the
expanded HARP initiative as well as the historically low interest rates on
fixed-rate single-family mortgages. For information on the HARP initiative, see
RISK MANAGEMENT-- Credit Risk -- Mortgage Credit Risk -- Single-Family Mortgage
Credit Risk -- Single-Family Loan Workouts and the MHA Program.

   While home prices remained at significantly lower levels from their peak in
most areas during 2012, declines in the market's inventory of vacant housing
have supported stabilization in home prices in a number of metropolitan areas.
However, to the extent a large volume of loans complete the foreclosure process
in a short period, the resulting increase in the market's inventory of homes for
sale could have a negative effect on home prices. Our expectation is that
national average home prices will experience a modest increase in 2013.

Single-Family

   Our charge-offs remained elevated during 2012 and we expect they will remain
elevated during 2013. This is in part due to the substantial number of
underwater mortgage loans in our single-family credit guarantee portfolio. For
the near term, we also expect:


     ·    the amount of non-performing assets and the volume of our loan
          workouts to remain high;
     ·    continued high rates of rescission and reduced payments for mortgage
          insurance coverage compared to periods before 2008.


   Multifamily

   During 2012, we continued to serve as a stable source of liquidity and
continued our support of the multifamily market and the nation's renters, as
evidenced by our $28.8 billion of multifamily loan purchases and issuance of
other guarantee commitments in 2012, which provided financing for more than
1,600 properties amounting to more than 435,000 apartment units. The majority of
these apartments were affordable to low and moderate income families. We expect
similar purchase and guarantee volumes for 2013, as demand for multifamily
financing is expected to remain strong.

   We expect continued strength in the multifamily market during 2013. As a
result of the positive market fundamentals and continuing strong portfolio
performance, we expect our credit losses and delinquency rates to remain low in
2013. We believe that the supply of multifamily housing will remain relatively
low in the near term and that new construction, while increasing, will continue
to be constrained by the availability of financing and rising construction
costs.

   Consolidated Results of Operations The following discussion of our
consolidated results of operations should be read in conjunction with our
consolidated financial statements, including the accompanying notes. Also see
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES for information concerning certain
significant accounting policies and estimates applied in determining our
reported results of operations.

   Net Interest Income

   The net interest income and net interest yield and provides an attribution of
changes in annual results to changes in interest rates or changes in volumes of
our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Average balance
sheet information is presented because we believe end-of-period balances are not
representative of activity throughout the periods presented. For most components
of the average balances, a daily weighted average balance was calculated for the
period. When daily average balance information was not available, a simple
monthly average balance was calculated.

   Net interest income decreased by $786 million to $17.6 billion for 2012
compared to $18.4 billion for 2011. The decrease in net interest income was
primarily due to the reduction in the balance of higher-yielding
mortgage-related assets due to continued liquidations. Net interest yield
increased by two basis points to 84 basis points for 2012 compared to 82 basis
points for 2011. The increase in net interest yield was primarily due to the
benefit of lower funding costs from the replacement of debt at lower rates,
partially offset by the negative impact of the reduction in the higher-yielding
mortgage related assets.

   Net interest income and net interest yield increased $1.5 billion and 11
basis points, respectively, during 2011, compared to 2010. The primary driver of
the increases was lower funding costs from the replacement of debt at lower
rates, partially offset by the reduction in the balance of higher-yielding
mortgage-related assets due to continued liquidations.

   We recognize interest income on non-performing loans that have been placed on
non-accrual status only when cash payments are received. We refer to the
interest income that we do not recognize as foregone interest income (i.e.,
interest income we would have recorded if the loans had been current in
accordance with their original terms). Foregone interest income and reversals of
previously recognized interest income, net of cash received, related to
non-performing loans was $3.1 billion, $4.0 billion and $4.7 billion during
2012, 2011, and 2010, respectively. These amounts have declined since 2010
primarily because of the reduction in the volume of non-performing loans on
non-accrual status.

   During 2012, spreads on our debt and our access to the debt markets remained
favorable relative to historical levels. For more information, see LIQUIDITY AND
CAPITAL RESOURCES-- Liquidity.

   The objectives set for us under our charter and conservatorship, restrictions
in the Purchase Agreement and restrictions imposed by FHFA have negatively
impacted, and will continue to negatively impact, our net interest income. For
example, our mortgage-related investments portfolio is subject to a cap that
decreases by 15% each year until the portfolio reaches $250 billion. This
decline in asset balances will cause a reduction in our interest income over
time. For more information on the various restrictions and limitations on our
investment activity and our mortgage-related investments portfolio, see
BUSINESS-- Conservatorship and Related Matters --Limits on Investment Activity
and Our Mortgage-Related Investments Portfolio. However, we had two
across-the-board increases in guarantee fees during 2012, which increased our
net interest income in 2012 and will positively affect it in the future. For
additional information on these increases in guarantee fees, see BUSINESS-- Our
Business Segments --Single-Family Guarantee Segment.
* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Business Description                    Corporate Strategy
Company Overview                        Company Statement
Events                                  Financial Ratios
History                                 Key Employee Biographies
Key Employees                           Key Facts
Locations and Subsidiaries              SWOT Analysis
Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013


                              119 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                                 August 1, 2016

Guarantee Fees Moved Little in 2015: FHFA

BYLINE: Jacob Passy

SECTION: SECONDARY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 252  words


The average single-family guarantee fee paid to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac only
increased by two basis points in 2015 to 59 bps, according to the Federal
Housing Finance Agency's annual report to Congress.

After a review of the adequacy of its fees, the FHFA found that there was "no
compelling economic reason to change the overall level of fees," the agency said
in the report released Monday. Of the 59-basis-point total for average guarantee
fees, 16 bps came from upfront charges while 42 bps came from ongoing ones.

Last year, the FHFA ordered the elimination of the 25-basis-point upfront
adverse market charge that had been in place since 2008. The
government-sponsored enterprises were directed to replace revenue lost from the
elimination of that charge with targeted charges for risk-based and
access-to-credit considerations, the report said. Overall, the FHFA said that
the changes made were revenue neutral to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

The FHFA used the report to shoot down a callfor the elimination or reduction in
loan-level price adjustmentsfrom a group of housing organizations.

"Although positive developments in the mortgage market continue to occur, we
believe that current g-fees and LLPAs continue to strike the right balance,"
FHFA Director Mel Watt wrote in a letter sent today to the petitioners in
response to that request.

"However, we are consistently evaluating and re-evaluating the level of g-fees
and LLPAs to be sure that they reflect appropriate assessments of the above
factors."

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              120 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 28, 2011 Wednesday

Lower mortgage limits already having impact

BYLINE: Robert Digitale, The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 494 words


Sept. 28--Beginning Saturday, the federal government will withdraw some of its
support for the real estate market by scaling back the size of home loans it
will guarantee.

The lower loan limits are already making it more expensive for buyers to get
mortgages on upscale homes in Sonoma County.

The new rules affect a relatively small segment of Sonoma County's housing
market -- mostly homes between $575,000 and $800,000, according to local
mortgage brokers. Such properties comprised roughly 10 percent of single-family
home sales so far this year.

But buyers of such homes now need to seek jumbo loans, which require them to
provide bigger downpayments, accept a higher interest rate and pay more in
upfront loan costs.

"Something like this is certainly not helping," said Norm Valmassoi, a loan
officer at First Priority Financial in Petaluma.

Three years ago, Congress attempted to bolster the housing market by increasing
the maximum size of loans that can be purchased or guaranteed by the Federal
Housing Administration, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. But lawmakers, some citing
concerns about federal budget deficits, declined to extend the higher loan
limits this year.

Although the change does not officially take place until Saturday, lenders
already are using the lower limits when processing new loan applications,
Valmassoi said.

Under the old limits, buyers could get federally guaranteed loans of up to
$662,500 in Sonoma County and $512,500 in Mendocino County. Lake County received
a maximum amount of $401,250 for FHA loans only.

The new maximum limit for Sonoma County is $520,950. Lake County's limit for FHA
loans declined to $271,050. Mendocino County's limit dropped to $373,750 for FHA
loans and $417,000 for other federally backed loans.

Kris Anderson, a senior loan consultant with Allstate Mortgage Company in Santa
Rosa, said sellers in Sonoma County with homes priced at or above $600,000 may
have trouble finding buyers with enough cash to make required downpayments of up
to 30 percent of the sales price.

"For those who do have the downpayment," Anderson said, "it's going to be a
buyers market."

Otto Kobler, branch manager for Summit Funding in Santa Rosa, said some lenders
are responding with what used to be called "piggy-back loans," essentially a
second home-equity loan to cover the difference between the federally-backed
first mortgage.

"This will be a new alternative," he said.

The California Association of Realtors lobbied to keep the higher loan limits.
Even so, real estate agents differ on the impact of the new rules.

John Duran, president of the Santa Rosa chapter of the North Bay Association of
Realtors, said that amid today's historically low interest rates, the
higher-cost loans won't prevent sales once more people believe it makes
financial sense to buy homes.

___ (c)2011 The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) Visit The Press Democrat
(Santa Rosa, Calif.) at www.pressdemocrat.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110928-UR-Lower-mortgage-limits-already-having-impact-0928-20110928

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UR


                                 Copyright 2011


                              121 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             July 7, 2011 Thursday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

LIMITS TIGHTEN ON LOAN BACKING

BYLINE: MARK PUENTE, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 333 words



HIGHLIGHT: The federal government is lowering the maximum value of mortgages it
will guarantee Oct. 1.


Starting Oct. 1, home buyers seeking government-insured mortgages will have to
pick lower-priced houses if they want the federal government to back the loans.

Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae and the Federal Housing Administration are lowering the
maximum loan amounts that the agencies will guarantee in more than 850 counties
in the United States.

The new limits were supposed to take effect in January 2009, but the economic
downturn led Congress to delay the implementation. In the Tampa Bay area, the
FHA is reducing the maximum insured loan for single-family homes from $292,500
to $271,050.

The limits will drop from $729,750 to $625,500 in the priciest areas like New
York, California and Washington, D.C. Borrowers whose loans exceed the
government maximum will need larger down payments or jumbo mortgages, which
carry higher interest rates.

Unless Congress intervenes, the new limits take effect in 85 days. Real estate
agents and loan officers fear the limits will drive home values down by reducing
the pool of homes that first-time buyers - who typically use government-backed
loans with low down payments - could purchase.

"I believe this will cause widespread defaults and foreclosures," said Andy Wood
of American Mortgage Services in Tampa. "If this is not stopped, it will be the
thing we look back on as the straw that broke the housing market's back."

Despite the pushback, the Obama administration says it's time for the new limits
to take effect. Some Republicans in Congress are looking to further shrink the
Federal Housing Administration's impact on the market.

Mark Puente can be reached at mpuente@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8459. Follow him
on Twitter at twitter.com/markapuente.

* * *

New maximums, by state region

Mortgage limits for single-family homes backed by the Federal Housing
Administration
Area                                              Current             Oct. 1
Tampa Bay                                        $292,500           $271,050
Sarasota- Bradenton                              $442,500           $285,200
Broward County                                   $423,750           $345,000
Duval County                                     $387,500           $304,750
Lee County                                       $356,250           $271,050
Miami-Dade County                                $423,750           $345,000

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2011 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              122 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 7, 2017 Tuesday

Loan Guarantees: Maximum Allowable Attorney Fees; FR Doc No: 2017-02474

LENGTH: 1417  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington, DC:  This Notice document was issued by the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA)





  Action

  Notice.

  Summary

  This notice provides updated information to participants in the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) Home Loan Guaranty program concerning the maximum
allowable bankruptcy attorney fees that are incurred by a servicer for legal
services performed on their behalf. The notice also provides the allowable
maximum attorney fees in calculating the indebtedness used to determine the
guaranty claim payable upon loan termination. The table in this notice contains
the amounts the Secretary has determined to be reasonable and customary for all
States, following an annual review of amounts allowed by other
government-related home loan programs.



 Dates
 The new maximum amounts for bankruptcy attorney fees will be allowed for each
bankruptcy filed on or after March 9, 2017.

  For Further Information Contact

  Mr. Andrew Trevayne, Assistant Director for Loan and Property Management
(261), Loan Guaranty Service, Department of Veterans Affairs, Washington, DC
20420, (202) 632-8795 (Not a toll-free number).

  Supplementary Information

  The VA Home Loan Guaranty program authorized by title 38, United States Code
(U.S.C.), Chapter 37, offers a partial guaranty against loss to lenders who make
home loans to veterans. VA regulations concerning the payment of loan guaranty
claims are set forth at 38 CFR 36.4300, et seq. Computation of guaranty claims
is addressed in 38 CFR 36.4324, which states that one part of the indebtedness
upon which the guaranty percentage is applied is the allowable expenses/advances
as described in 38 CFR 36.4314. Paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of section 36.4314
describes the procedures to be followed in determining what constitutes the
reasonable and customary fees for legal services in the termination of a loan.

  The Secretary annually reviews allowances for legal fees in connection with
the termination of single-family housing loans, including foreclosure,
deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, and bankruptcy-related services, issued by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the Federal National Mortgage
Association (Fannie Mae), and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
(Freddie Mac). Based on increases in bankruptcy attorney fees announced over the
past year by these entities, the Secretary has deemed it necessary to publish in
the Federal Register a table setting forth the revised amounts the Secretary now
determines to be reasonable and customary for bankruptcy attorney fees. The
table reflects the primary method for foreclosing in each state, either judicial
or non-judicial, with the exception of those states where either judicial or
non-judicial is acceptable. The use of a method not authorized in the table will
require prior approval from VA. This table will be available throughout the year
at: http://www.benefits.va.gov/homeloans/.

  There has been no change to the amounts VA will allow for attorney fees for
foreclosure termination and for deeds-in-lieu of foreclosure. VA will continue
to monitor these fees on an annual basis, as we are aware that other entities
are conducting ongoing reviews of these fees.

  The following table represents the Secretary's determination of the reasonable
and customary cost of legal services for the preferred method of terminating VA
loans in each jurisdiction under the provisions of 38 CFR 36.4314(b)(5)(ii).



    &emsp;



      Jurisdiction

      VA non-judicial foreclosure&thinsp;1&thinsp;2

      VA judicial foreclosure&thinsp;1&thinsp;2

      Deed-in-lieu of foreclosure





      Alabama

      $1,325

      N/A

      $350



      Alaska

      1,600

      N/A

      350



      American Samoa

      1,600

      N/A

      350



      Arizona

      1,350

      N/A

      350



      Arkansas

      1,400

      N/A

      350



      California

      1,350

      N/A

      350



      Colorado

      1,650

      N/A

      350



      Connecticut

      N/A

      $2450

      350



      Delaware

      N/A

      1,800

      350



      District of Columbia

      1,200

      2,300

      350



      Florida

      N/A

      2,800

      350



      Georgia

      1,325

      N/A

      350



      Guam

      1,600

      N/A

      350



      Hawaii

      N/A

      2,950

      350



      Idaho

      1,150

      N/A

      350



      Illinois

      N/A

      2,300

      350



      Indiana

      N/A

      2,050

      350



      Iowa

      1,275

      1,880

      350



      Kansas

      N/A

      1,800

      350



      Kentucky

      N/A

      2,250

      350



      Louisiana

      N/A

      1,900

      350



      Maine

      N/A

      2,300

      350



      Maryland

      2,400

      N/A

      350



      Massachusetts

      N/A

      2,550

      350



      Michigan

      1,425

      N/A

      350



      Minnesota

      1,450

      N/A

      350



      Mississippi

      1,200

      N/A

      350



      Missouri

      1,350

      N/A

      350



      Montana

      1,150

      N/A

      350



      Nebraska

      1,150

      N/A

      350



      Nevada

      1,525

      N/A

      350



      New Hampshire

      1,350

      N/A

      350



      New Jersey

      N/A

      2,975

      350



      New Mexico

      N/A

      2,000

      350



      New York--Western Counties&thinsp;3

      N/A

      2,675

      350



      New York--Eastern Counties

      N/A

      3,475

      350



      North Carolina

      1,575

      N/A

      350



      North Dakota

      N/A

      1,750

      350



      Ohio

      N/A

      2,250

      350



      Oklahoma

      N/A

      2,000

      350



      Oregon

      1,350

      2,600

      350



      Pennsylvania

      N/A

      2,350

      350



      Puerto Rico

      N/A

      2,050

      350



      Rhode Island

      1,725

      N/A

      350



      South Carolina

      N/A

      2,200

      350



      South Dakota

      N/A

      1,800

      350



      Tennessee

      1,200

      N/A

      350



      Texas

      1,325

      N/A

      350



      Utah

      1,350

      N/A

      350



      Vermont

      N/A

      2,250

      350



      Virgin Islands

      N/A

      1,800

      350



      Virginia

      1,350

      N/A

      350



      Washington

      1,350

      N/A

      350



      West Virginia

      1,150

      N/A

      350



      Wisconsin

      N/A

      2,000

      350



      Wyoming

      1,150

      N/A

      350





  Signing Authority

  The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, or designee, approved this document and
authorized the undersigned to sign and submit the document to the Office of the
Federal Register for publication electronically as an official document of the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Gina S. Farrisee, Acting Chief of Staff,
approved this document on January 27, 2017, for publication.


   Approved: January 27, 2017.

   Jeffrey Martin,

   Office Program Manager, Office of Regulation Policy & Management, Office of
the Secretary, Department of Veterans Affairs.

 [FR Doc. 2017-02474 Filed 2-6-17; 8:45 am]
 BILLING CODE 8320-01-P


 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              123 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                            February 3, 2017 Friday

Explicit federal guarantee is key to ending GSE conservatorship

BYLINE: Rodrigo Lopez

SECTION: Vol. 1 No. 23

LENGTH: 998  words


Change has come to Washington, and for some time our industry has been preparing
for a new administration - which means a new approach, different personnel and a
chance to revisit important issues. For the real estate finance industry, this
change is an opportunity to settle the long conservatorship of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.

For years this issue has been a priority for lenders around the country. On
their behalf, the Mortgage Bankers Association has developed a model to end the
conservatorship of the government-sponsored enterprises and establish a new,
durable foundation for the secondary mortgage market.

The MBA presented this model in a white paper, "GSE Reform Principles and
Guardrails," which begins to address how to move forward with secondary mortgage
market reform. The paper reflects the collective views of a diverse group of
lenders - referred to as the task force - representing all business models from
both the single-family and multifamily markets.

MBA's task force considered many models in developing its recommendation and
built on recommendations previously suggested by past efforts. Several key
features stood out as critical to ensuring the long-term health of the secondary
mortgage market:

     ·    Leveraging the benefits of competition and strong regulation;
     ·    Ensuring equal market access for lenders of all sizes and business
          models;
     ·    Preserving a strong public mission; and
     ·    Maintaining a deep, liquid market for long-term, single- and
          multifamily financing options.


These are the bedrock principles on which a durable housing finance system
should be built for future generations.

In order to properly reform the secondary mortgage market, we must recognize
congressional action is required and embrace the critical role an explicit
federal guarantee plays in housing. Learning from lessons that led to
conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, our proposal focuses on the core
need for liquidity, stability and demand in the global markets for mortgage
debt.

An implicit guarantee that leaves taxpayers holding the bag when things go
sideways will no longer suffice. An explicit government guarantee is imperative
but needs be carefully circumscribed - covering only the securities (and not the
issuers) and invoked only after multiple, significant layers of private capital
have been exhausted.

Therefore, in times of extreme duress, the federal government's role would be to
ensure liquidity for continued investor purchases of mortgage-backed securities.

Only Congress can create an insurance fund to support an explicit government
guarantee for eligible mortgage backed securities; any discussion of reform
without congressional action is unrealistic.

So, what would an end-state resemble? In short, MBA supports an end-state that
would encourage multiple guarantors, organized as privately owned utilities with
a regulated rate of return and overseen by a strong, world-class regulator. They
would have a public purpose of providing sustainable credit availability to the
conventional mortgage market to lenders of all sizes and business models.
Guarantors would also be responsible for executing on an affordable-housing
strategy to ensure broad access to credit, preserve and develop affordable
housing options, and address underserved markets nationwide.

These guarantors could be rechartered versions of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, as
well as newly chartered competitors to acquire eligible single-family and
multifamily mortgages and issue mortgage-backed securities wrapped with an
explicit guarantee provided by the federal government. The explicit guarantee of
the MBS would ensure the timely payment of principal and interest in the event
one or more of the guarantors failed during a crisis and became unable to remit
scheduled pass-through payments to investors.

In many critical ways, this end-state would build from the significant
administrative progress already undertaken by the GSEs under the FHFA's
direction. For instance, the Common Securitization Platform and Single Security
are key elements of our envisioned infrastructure. In addition, the GSEs' credit
risk transfer programs would be expanded upon and form an important source of
private capital.

Also, the GSEs' multifamily businesses remain strong and have performed well in
financing rental housing across the country.

And finally, the expanded seller/servicer base that has been achieved through
the FHFA's requirement for guarantee fee parity regardless lender size would be
preserved to ensure competition. Security structures and operational processes
around loan delivery, servicing and remittance would be preserved and maintained
to ensure a smooth transition process and minimize switching costs to the new
secondary mortgage market. The federal guarantee would be funded by insurance
premiums paid by the chartered guarantors to a dedicated, actuarially sound
Mortgage Insurance Fund. Each guarantor would be required to leverage
private-capital investors to share credit risk above and beyond the loan-level
credit enhancement provided by the primary market.

Transition to an end-state will not be easy and must minimize disruption. It
must include several components necessary to ensure a smooth process. Namely,
the existing operations of the GSEs could be reformed and repurposed to serve as
initial guarantors. Regardless, the process must be well-thought-out and
structured to help, not impede, the markets.

MBA will continue to work on its comprehensive plan, including a detailed
end-state, transition steps and a strategy for ensuring affordable access to
credit for underserved markets. The process will be completed by late April of
this year.

A vibrant real estate market is a key component of a healthy and growing
national economy. Our work is only beginning. The change brought on by a new
administration and a new Congress is the perfect opportunity to solidify a safe,
sound and sustainable secondary mortgage market. The time is now. Let's seize
the opportunity.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/opinion/explicit-federal-guarantee
-is-key-to-ending-gse-conservatorship

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              124 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 5, 2016 Friday

Washington: HOUSE PASSES HINOJOSA H.R. 3700 AMENDMENT

LENGTH: 359  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the MP Bill Ruben Hinojosa has issued the following news
release:



 "Today I spoke on the House floor to encourage my colleagues to support my
amendment to H.R. 3700 "Housing Opportunities Through Modernization Act of 2015.









 "I believe that access to safe, decent, and affordable housing can transform
lives.







 "Federal programs like the Section 502 Single Family Home Loan Program play a
critical role in expanding homeownership and opportunity for our rural
communities.  This federal program has helped over 2 million families build
wealth through the equity in their home and encourages lenders to provide loans
to those who cannot usually obtain conventional financing.  Through this
program, lenders are enabled and encouraged to serve borrowers they might
typically reject without the guarantee, increasing borrowers' access to
homeownership opportunities.







 "We owe it to our rural communities to provide the Section 502 program with the
resources it needs to modernize and to continue expanding home ownership and
opportunity in our most underserved, rural communities.







 "My amendment will cover the cost of developing and maintaining the Guaranteed
Underwriting System (GUS) and enable the Single Family Home Loan Program
(SFHGLP) to be administered in a more effective manner, despite recent staffing
reductions. The nominal fee authorized by my amendment will be used to enhance
and maintain a GUS, and bring it into the 21st Century, including in technology
and enhanced loan and lender oversight, metrics, and programmatic controls. It
is expected that a fee ranging between $25 and $50 will generate approximately
$4 million a year starting in 2018.







 "This efficiency upgrade will allow USDA staff to allocate the necessary time
and resources to the most complex underwriting decisions.







 "I am proud that this amendment passed, as it will enhance H.R. 3700 and expand
housing opportunities for our rural families in South Texas and throughout the
United States."





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              125 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Mecklenburg Times (Charlotte, NC)

                            October 8, 2013 Tuesday

Government shutdown: Impact small so far on Charlotte housing, banking

BYLINE: Graziella Steele

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 752  words


It might be roiling Washington, D.C. and its suburbs, but, so far, the
government shutdown is having little effect on Charlotte's real estate and
banking markets.

David Stevens, the president and CEO of the Mortgage Bankers Association, called
for a resolution to the government shutdown so lenders and borrowers can return
back to business. In a statement, he said, "Lenders processing loans that need
tax transcripts (and) social security number verification, or FHA home loans
face longer delays and reduced functionality from HUD, IRS, and the Social
Security Administration. "

"These disruptions impact lenders in different ways, leading to confusion and
fear among borrowers about whether they will be able to close on a home purchase
or refinance. "

But on the streets of Charlotte, that impact is evidently not being felt as
strongly.

John Wines, a senior mortgage banker with Atlantic Bay Mortgage in Ballantyne,
said he's seeing a few delays in processing mortgages. One area where he knows
he'll experience delays is in issuing USDA- backed loans because the rural
housing field officers who issue conditional commitments and loan guarantees
have been furloughed. Wines said he handles a few of these types of mortgages a
month, mostly in rural York County.

However, he said, every single loan he processes needs an IRS tax transcript
verification. Without the verification performed by furloughed IRS personnel,
the loan won't be approved by the lender.   He believes that this will mostly
impact buyers who are closing in the next few days.   "I have had borrowers
email me concerned about the status of their loans," he said.

According to the National Association of Realtors, some loan originators are
revising their policies allowing for processing and closings to go ahead with
income verification to follow when the IRS is back on the job. Borrowers still
have to sign a form requesting an eventual IRS tax verification.

The same is true for the Social Security verification service which is also
suspended at the moment. Some lenders are not requiring it for closing, but
these modifications add to the complication and risk in the loan process.

Eric Locher, President of the Charlotte Regional Realtor Association, said his
organization has been hearing different things coming from federal agencies.
Housing and Urban Development's Federal Housing Administration is continuing to
endorse new single-family home loans, but the agency is not taking on any new
commitments in the multifamily area.

Veterans Affairs is continuing its loan program to eligible veterans, but Locher
said he was told to expect delays in processing them. Third-party appraisers can
be found to replace federal workers who perform that function, but ultimately
government employees have to approve the loans.

"There's really nothing the private residential community can do," Locher
warned. Buyers seeking new mortgage commitments from government programs should
seek out alternate sources in the private lending sector.

Banks of all sizes say the shutdown hasn't affected them.   Terry Francisco,
senior vice president at Bank of America, the second-largest U.S. lender, said
the company's mortgage processing has not been negatively affected.

Charlotte Metro Credit Union Chief Operating Officer Nicol Morris issued this
statement: "The partial federal government shutdown has not impacted our lending
ability in the least. It is business as usual here. We are always ready to serve
our members' financial needs and are always ready to welcome new members. "

National Association of Homebuilders Chairman and Charlotte homebuilder Rick
Judson sent out a memorandum updating builders about how the shutdown would
affect them.   He noted that the Small Business Administration will not initiate
new loan guarantees during this time. The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration will not conduct or enforce investigations during the shutdown.
Businesses seeking permits from the Department of the Interior should expect
delays as new permits or applications currently under review will not be
processed.

It may be too soon to feel the full effect of the shutdown on the Charlotte
housing market.   If the stalemate in Washington continues, there may well be
more ripple effects in Charlotte's market. But Locher has this caution: "We're
in uncharted waters; it's been so long this has happened. "

http://www.mecktimes.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from this
resource.

© 2013 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Government activity

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              126 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                                January 31, 2017

Explicit Federal Guarantee Is Key to Ending GSE Conservatorship

BYLINE: Rodrigo Lopez

SECTION: VOICES Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 1010  words


Change has come to Washington, and for some time our industry has been preparing
for a new administration - which means a new approach, different personnel and
achance to revisit important issues.For the real estate finance industry, this
change is an opportunity to settle the long conservatorship of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.

For years this issue has been a priority for lenders around the country. On
their behalf, the Mortgage Bankers Association has developed a model to end the
conservatorship of the GSEs and establish a new, durable foundation for the
secondary mortgage market.

The MBA presented this model in a whitepaper, GSE Reform Principles and
Guardrails,which begins to address how to move forward with secondary mortgage
market reform. The paper reflects the collective views of a diverse group of
lenders - referred to as the task force - representing all business models from
both the single-family and multifamily markets.

MBA's task force considered many models in developing its recommendation and
built on recommendations previously suggested by past efforts. Several key
features stood out as critical to ensuring the long-term health of the secondary
mortgage market:

     ·    Leveraging the benefits of competition and strong regulation;
     ·    Ensuring equal market access for lenders of all sizes and business
          models;
     ·    Preserving a strong public mission; and
     ·    Maintaining a deep, liquid market for long-term, single- and
          multifamily financing options.


These are the bedrock principles on which a durable housing finance system
should be built for future generations.

In order to properly reform the secondary mortgage market, we must recognize
congressional action is required and embrace the critical role an explicit
federal guarantee plays in housing. Learning from lessons that led to
conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, our proposal focuses on the core
need for liquidity, stability and demand in the global markets for mortgage
debt.

An implicit guarantee that leaves taxpayers holding the bag when things go
sideways will no longer suffice. An explicit government guarantee is imperative
but needs be carefully circumscribed - covering only the securities (and not the
issuers) and invoked only after multiple, significant layers of private capital
have been exhausted.

Therefore, in times of extreme duress, the federal government's role would be to
ensure liquidity for continued investor purchases of mortgage-backed securities.



Only Congress can create an insurance fund to support an explicit government
guarantee for eligible mortgage backed securities; any discussion ofreform
without congressional action is unrealistic.

So, what would an end-state resemble? In short, MBA supports an end-state that
would encourage multiple guarantors, organized as privately owned utilities with
a regulated rate of return and overseen by a strong, world-class regulator. They
would have a public purpose of providing sustainable credit availability to the
conventional mortgage market to lenders of all sizes and business models.
Guarantors would also be responsible for executing on an affordable-housing
strategy to ensure broad access to credit, preserve and develop affordable
housing options, and address underserved markets nationwide.

These guarantors could be rechartered versions of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, as
well as newly chartered competitors to acquire eligible single-family and
multifamily mortgages and issue mortgage-backed securities wrapped with an
explicit guarantee provided by the federal government. The explicit guarantee of
the MBS would ensure the timely payment of principal and interest in the event
one or more of the guarantors failed during a crisis and became unable to remit
scheduled pass-through payments to investors.

In many critical ways, this end-state would build from the significant
administrative progress already undertaken by the GSEs under FHFA's direction.
For instance, the Common Securitization Platform and Single Security are key
elements of our envisioned infrastructure. In addition, the GSEs' credit risk
transfer programs would be expanded upon and form an important source of private
capital. Also, the GSEs' multifamily businesses remain strong and have performed
well in financing rental housing across the country. And finally, the expanded
seller/servicer base that has been achieved through the FHFA's requirement for
guarantee fee parity regardless lender size would be preserved to ensure
competition. Security structures and operational processes around loan delivery,
servicing and remittance would be preserved and maintained to ensure a smooth
transition process and minimize switching costs to the new secondary mortgage
market. The federal guarantee would be funded by insurance premiums paid by the
chartered guarantors to a dedicated, actuarially sound Mortgage Insurance Fund.
Each guarantor would be required to leverage private-capital investors to share
credit risk above and beyond the loan-level credit enhancement provided by the
primary market.

Transition to an end-state will not be easy and must minimize disruption. It
must include several components necessary to ensure a smooth process. Namely,
the existing operations of the GSEs could be reformed and repurposed to serve as
initial guarantors. Regardless, the process must be well-thought-out and
structured to help, not impede, the markets.

MBA will continue to work on its comprehensive plan, including a detailed
end-state, transition steps and a strategy for ensuring affordable access to
credit for underserved markets. The process will be completed by late April of
this year.

A vibrant real estate market is a key component of a healthy and growing
national economy. Our work is only beginning. The change brought on by a new
administration and a new Congress is the perfect opportunity to solidify a safe,
sound and sustainable secondary mortgage market. The time is now. Let' s seize
the opportunity.

Rodrigo Lopez is the executive chairman of NorthMarq Capital and chairman of
Mortgage Bankers Association.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              127 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                  COURIER-MAIL

                            April 14, 1990 Saturday

PAYPACKET PRESSURE EASES FOR HOMEBUYER

SOURCE: QNP

BYLINE: LARKIN J / THORNHILL A

LENGTH: 629 words


Paypacket pressure eases for homebuyer From JOHN LARKIN and ALAN THORNHILL in
Canberra STRUGGLING homebuyers were given renewed hope yesterday with figures
showing homes had become more affordable for the first time in nearly two years.
The survey, conducted by the Real Estate Institute of Australia and the Mortgage
Guarantee Insurance Corporation, showed mortgage repayments fell nationally last
December quarter from 36.5 percent to 36.4 percent of average family income.
Although the drop was small, it was the first fall since the 1988 March quarter.
The Master Builders Housing and Construction Association executive director, Mr
John Murray, said the home-building downturn would end soon. However, the relief
is yet to flow through to Queensland homebuyers. The survey showed Queenslanders
paid one-third _ 33.3 percent _ of their total income to the mortgage. This was
up 1.8 percent in the December quarter. Home prices in Brisbane rose 2.7 percent
in the same period. The percentage of income needed for mortgage repayments fell
in Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory and
rose in New South Wales, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory. The Real
Estate Institute of Queensland president, Mr Dave Allen, said last night it was
too early to feel the effects in Queensland. He said the national affordability
fall was not enough to draw significant conclusions yet. However, Mr Allen said
the housing market had started to recover. ""The worst is over. From now it will
be a slow incline upwards," he said. The Housing Industry Association executive
director, Mr Ron Silberberg, said larger builders had reported a 19 percent rise
in sales in January and 12 percent in February. The major banks cut their
variable home-loan rates by up to 0.75 percentage points from the 17 percent
peak last week. However, Australians have been rushing into fixed-interest home
loans and this stampede could further delay cuts in variable home-loan interest
rates. The Statistics Bureau reported a fresh explosion of housing finance in
January, when Australians took out housing loans worth more than $1.4 billion.
That was a leap of almost 21 percent on the relatively low December result,
although it was still well below the $1.8 billion in loans in December 1988,
when the housing boom was nearing its peak. But these figures will still worry
the Treasury officials who advise the Federal Government. They may suspect that
another housing boom could be about to start, financed by a new kind of
low-interest lending. If they do, they are likely to advise the Federal
Government to delay further cuts to home-loan interest rates, to keep a lid on
the housing industry. The new, fixed-interest deals have given young Australians
a chance to get into a new home without being hit by interest rates of 17
percent or more. Some of the fixed-interest deals being offered were, and still
are, being made below the 15 percent mark, although a 15.5 percent rate is the
most common. The Mortgage Guarantee Insurance Corporation managing director, Mr
Peter Bradford, said the levelling out of home-buying costs provided relief for
hundreds of thousands of Australian families. But home-buying costs were still
unacceptably high. ""The ratio of home-loan costs to incomes remains at an
historically high level in several States," he said. The national average
monthly loan repayment was $1008 _ a jump of 1.5 percent over the September
quarter. The most expensive capital in which to buy an average-priced home was
Sydney ($200,400), followed by Melbourne ($135,300), Canberra ($115,000), Perth
($103,000), Adelaide ($95,200), Brisbane ($94,300) and Hobart ($82,600). "Greedy
banks' blamed, Page 10

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: CML

                   Copyright 1990 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              128 of 998 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2017 World Market Intelligence Private Limited,
                              All Rights Reserved


                              WMI - SWOT Analysis

                  * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *
            World Market Intelligence company reports are based on a
             core set of research techniques which ensure the best
            possible level of quality and accuracy of data. The key
             sources used include: Company Websites Company Annual
            Reports SEC Filings Press Releases Proprietary Databases
          Notes Financial information of the company is taken from the
           most recently published annual reports or SEC filings The
           financial and operational data reported for the company is
           as per the industry defined standards Revenue converted to
          US$ at average annual conversion rate as of fiscal year end.

                                January 27, 2017

                     Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

                              8200 Jones Branch Dr
                               Mclean 22102-3107
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

OVERVIEW


Freddie Mac is a provider of financial services based in the US. Government
sponsored enterprise, comprehensive offerings of mortgage loans and wide
customer base are its major strengths, even as its geographic concentration and
decline in cash position remain areas of concern. In future, interest rates,
regulations, and competition may affect its business performance. However,
economy in the US, initiatives and mortgage market in the US will provide ample
growth opportunities to the company.

* * * * * * * * * * SWOT ANALYSIS * * * * * * * * * *

STRENGTHS:


GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISE


Freddie Mac is a government sponsored enterprise (GSE) with a mission to provide
liquidity, stability, and affordability to the US housing market. Post, the
sub-prime crisis, Freddie Mac was put under conservative approach with Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). The company and the government play mutual role
in the housing finance market, without which mortgage rates would rise sharply
and most homeowners would be unable to obtain mortgage credit. Since the
beginning of 2009, the company has helped American families rent or own a home,
and prevent foreclosures. Such strategic importance of Freddie Mac to the
economy enables it to gain huge support from the government.

COMPREHENSIVE OFFERINGS OF MORTGAGE LOANS


The company's comprehensive offerings of mortgage loans help it efficiently
cater to the diverse needs of its customers. The company provides credit
guarantee for residential mortgages originated by mortgage lenders and invests
in mortgage loans and mortgage-related securities across the US. It principally
invests in mortgage-related securities and single-family performing mortgage
loans, which are funded by other debt issuances and hedged derivatives. The
company is focused on the investment, sale, purchase, securitization, and
guarantee of multifamily mortgage loans and securities. Such a comprehensive
offerings of mortgage loans allow it to garner higher market share and increase
its revenues.

WIDE CUSTOMER BASE


The company caters to a broad range of customers, which provides it with
competitive advantage over its competitors. For instance, the company's Single
Family Guarantee division caters to the requirements of loan prospector, loan
quality advisor, and home value explorer. Its Investment division offers its
solutions to insurance companies, money managers, central banks, depository
institutions, and pension funds. Freddie Mac's multifamily division caters to
the requirements of its two largest multifamily sellers: CBRE Capital Markets,
Inc. and Berkadia Commercial Mortgage LLC that accounted for 15% and 13%,
respectively, of its multifamily new business volume for 2015. Such diversified
customer base enables the company to enhance its revenue generating model and
further strengthen its operational performance.


WEAKNESSES:


CASH POSITION


The decline in the company's cash position may be a concern, as it may affect
its ability to meet its short-term obligations. Freddie Mac's cash and
equivalents declined from US$10,928 million in FY2014 to US$5,595 million in
FY2015, representing a decline of 48.8. The performance of the company largely
depends upon the cash position and its ability to generate cash from operations.
Lack of sufficient liquidity may affect the working capital requirements of the
company negatively, which might hamper its operations.

GEOGRAPHIC CONCENTRATION


Overdependence on the US market for its revenue may be a cause of concern for
the company during any political or economic adversity in the region. The
company generates its revenue from the US. Overdependence on a single geographic
region puts the bank at risk, as any adverse development in the political,
economic or climatic environment of the region might have an adverse impact on
the company's business. It also restricts its market share and growth options.


OPPORTUNITIES:


MORTGAGE MARKET IN THE US


Booming mortgage market in the US offers significant opportunities to the
company. The US is the most active mortgage market in the world and is expected
to register substantial growth in future. According to the Mortgage Bankers
Association (MBA), the commercial and multifamily mortgage originations are
expected to reach US$1,320 billion in 2016. This is likely to enhance the demand
for mortgage products and services offered by the company, in turn driving its
top-line performance.

ECONOMY IN THE US


The company stands to benefit from the growing economy in the US. According to
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the GDP growth rate of the US stood at 2.6%
in 2015. It is expected to reach 2.8% in 2016. Positive growth in the economy
keeps a balance between exports and imports in the country, further bolsters
individual consumption and investment, and strengthens government spending.
Growing economic activities will increase prices on the face of stimulating
demand that is likely to save the US from tipping into deflation. Such economic
growth is likely to enable favorable market conditions in the country. Freddie
Mac, which offers financial solutions in the US, is likely to benefit from such
positive economic growth.

INITIATIVES


The company is taking various strategic initiatives to drive its business. In
this direction, in 2015, the company introduced a new online Real Estate
Professionals Resource Center, to keep agents, counselors, brokers and other
house dealers and practitioners updated of mortgage products. In the same year,
the company collaborated with Quicken Loans Inc., to enable home financing
accessible for new buyers. Strategic initiatives will enable the company to
better serve its customers.


THREATS:


INTEREST RATES


Fluctuations in interest rates may affect the company's results of operations
and net worth. The company's credit guarantee and investment activities in
single family and multifamily mortgage assets expose it to interest rate and
other market risks. Changes in interest rates occur mainly due to changes in the
monetary and fiscal policies of the federal government and its agencies, as well
as due to geopolitical events or changes in general economic conditions.
Fluctuations in interest rates may affect the prepayment rate on assets and cash
flows generated by the company. With decrease in interest rate, the borrowers
may prepay their loans by refinancing them at a lower rate. Increased chances of
prepayment on the loans underlying its mortgage-related securities may
negatively affect the value of these securities. The increase in interest rates
increases the borrower's risk of default. Such volatile interest rates may
impact the company's operating performance, as its income and investment returns
depend on the level of interest rates.

COMPETITION


The mortgage sector in the US is highly competitive. The company competes mainly
with banking and non-banking institutions such as Federal Agricultural Mortgage
Corporation, Federal Home Loan Banks, Federal National Mortgage Association and
Government National Mortgage Association. It also competes with financial
institutions that contain and securitize loans, including commercial and
investment banks, insurance companies, dealers, and thrift institutions. The
company competes with other companies based on factors such as price, products,
service, and securities structure. Intense competition in the market could
negatively affect the company's results from operations and its financial
position.

REGULATIONS


The company's businesses are regulated by various governmental and regulatory
authorities. Changes in government policy, legislation or regulatory
interpretation may adversely affect the company's product range, distribution
channels, capital requirements and, consequently, reported results and financing
requirements. These changes include the regulation of selling practices and
solvency requirements. Thus, the changes in government policies and regulations
may have a negative impact on the company's growth and expansion strategies.



* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *












LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2017


                              129 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   February 13, 1988, Saturday, Final Edition

Congress May Reverse VA Loan Law

BYLINE: Ann Mariano, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; PAGE E1

LENGTH: 729 words


Congress is moving to reverse a recently enacted law that already has slowed
sales of houses the Veterans Administration acquires when veterans default on
their mortgages.

The law, which went into effect Jan. 21, requires buyers of the foreclosed
properties to make a down payment of 5 percent of the purchase price.

Bids on the first group of VA-owned houses offered for sale in Houston after
Jan. 21 dropped to about one-third of the usual number of offers, according to
an aide to Sen. Frank Murkowski (R-Alaska), the ranking Republican on the
Veterans Affairs Committee.

Alarmed by the prospect of declining sales while the number of foreclosed houses
in the VA's inventory is mounting, the Senate last week passed a bill permitting
the agency's administrator to waive the down payment and offer 100 percent
financing to buyers when it is necessary to compete with other sellers. The
legislation was approved on the same day it was introduced, and the House is
expected to act on the measure soon after it reconvenes next week.

A slowdown in sales could be "catastrophic" to the VA's loan guarantee program,
which has cost the government $ 3 billion in the last several years, according
to Murkowski, who sponsored the legislation along with Veterans Affairs
Committee Chairman Sen. Alan Cranston (D-Calif.) and two Texas senators,
Republican Phil Gramm and Democrat Lloyd Bentsen. The amount needed for the loan
guaranty fund in fiscal 1988 "is likely to be far greater than $ 389.8 million"
that already has been appropriated, Cranston said last week.

Under the program, the VA guarantees home loans to veterans for up to 50 percent
of a loan for $ 45,000 or less. For loans over $ 45,000, the agency guarantees
40 percent of the total loan or $ 36,000, whichever is less. The legislation
passed by the Senate last week also makes a correction in last year's home loan
improvement act, which prevents veterans from using the full amount of the
guarantee. When the change is made, borrowers who do not use all of the
guarantee to which they are entitled will be able to use the remaining amount if
they buy another house.

The VA and other government agencies -- including the Federal Housing
Administration -- and private lenders have accumulated hundreds of thousands of
foreclosed homes in recent years and the rate of defaults is rising, spokesmen
said. In economically depressed states like Texas, Oklahoma and Colorado, the
competition to sell the foreclosed homes is fierce, and many private lenders do
not require down payments from the buyers of their properties, according to the
Murkowski aide.

The FHA asks for down payments as low as $ 100 and the Federal National Mortgage
Association, a federally chartered secondary market agency that buys loans and
sells securities, asks for a 3 percent down payment of the loan amount.

Congress passed the 5 percent down payment requirement on the VA's portfolio of
foreclosed homes last year because between 20 percent and 25 percent of the
buyers of foreclosed properties themselves defaulted on their VA loans,
Murkowski said.

The agency provided nearly $ 1 billion for 22,563 loans to buyers of foreclosed
properties during fiscal year 1987, which ended last Sept. 30.

About one-third of the estimated 24,000 foreclosed homes in the VA's inventory
are in economically devastated Houston, where the foreclosed properties of all
agencies and lenders has swelled to more than 200,000 in the last three years,
according to Cranston.

Cranston introduced another bill last week to provide ways of tackling the VA's
home loan problems. The measure would permit the agency to offer loans at
interest rates that are less than the prevailing rates when selling homes in
depressed areas and would tighten credit standards buyers must meet.

It also would establish an independent national commission to study reasons for
the increase in VA foreclosures and associated costs, and propose solutions.

The FHA, which ended fiscal 1987 with more than 38,000 foreclosed properties on
its hands, expects to acquire another 70,000 homes this year, according to James
C. Nistler, HUD's deputy assistant secretary for single-family housing. The
agency has noted "a fairly steady rise" in foreclosed property sales recently
and hopes to sell 70,000 homes this year, he said. More than 52,000 were sold
last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1988 The Washington Post


                              130 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               MortgageDaily.com

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             August 2, 2016 Tuesday

Sequential Rise in Freddie Earnings, Business

BYLINE: Mortgage Daily

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 317 words


Aug. 02--The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. saw quarter-over-quarter gains in
earnings and business, though things slowed from a year prior.

During the three months that ended on June 30, the secondary lender financed
540,000 housing units, more than 522,000 in the first quarter.

But the level of business activity retreated compared to the same three-month
period last year, when the total came to 620,000 housing units.

McLean, Virginia-based Freddie Mac detailed the metrics in its second-quarter
2016 earnings report.

The latest volume included 210,000 refinances, 182,000 home purchases and
148,000 multifamily units.

The report indicated that new single-family funding volume climbed to $91
billion in the second-quarter 2016 from $69 billion three months earlier.

But volume slipped from $101 billion a year earlier.

The most-recent total included $48 billion in refinances and $43 billion in
purchases.

Multifamily funding volume came to $27 billion for the first-half 2016.
Full-year 2015 multifamily activity was $47 billion.

Freddie said its total multifamily portfolio finished June 2016 at $198 billion,
up from $188 billion at the end of last year.

The government-controlled enterprise reported pre-tax income of $1.5 billion
during the latest period.

Earnings swung from an $0.5 billion first-quarter loss but plummeted from a $6.1
billion second-quarter 2015 profit.

Second-quarter 2016 earnings included $0.6 billion from single-family guarantee,
$0.3 billion from multifamily and $0.3 billion from investments.

Including a planned $933 million payment in September, Freddie has paid $99.1
billion in dividends to the Department of the Treasury.

Dividends paid are well in excess of the $71.3 billion in draws it has taken
since being thrown into conservatorship in September 2008.

___ (c)2016 Mortgage Daily Visit Mortgage Daily at www.mortgagedaily.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160802-1MG-Sequential-Rise-in-Freddie-Earnings-Business-0802-20160802

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1MG


                                 Copyright 2016


                              131 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2013 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                           GlobalData - SWOT Analysis

                               December 11, 2013

                     Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

                            8200 Jones Branch Drive
                             McLean,  VA 22102-3110
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * SWOT ANALYSIS * * * * * * * * * *
Strengths:

Government Sponsored Enterprise Status

   Freddie Mac is a government sponsored enterprise (GSE) with a mission to
provide liquidity, stability, and affordability to the US housing market. Post,
the sub-prime crisis, Freddie Mac was put under conservatorship with Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) acting as conservator. The company and the
government play an outsized role in the housing finance market, without which
mortgage rates would rise sharply and most homeowners would be unable to obtain
mortgage credit. Since the beginning of 2009, the company has helped over 8.9
million American families rent or own a home, and another 785,000 avoid
foreclosure. Such strategic importance of Freddie Mac to the economy enables it
to gain huge support from the government.

Diverse Business Operations

   The company conducts its business in the US secondary mortgage market and
works with national network of mortgage lending customers. It operates through
three business lines, namely, Single Family Credit Guarantee business;
Multifamily business; and Investment business. Freddie Mac under its Single
Family Credit Guarantee business line uses mortgage securitization to fund
millions of home loans every year. The company's Multifamily business works with
a network of lenders to finance apartment buildings around the country. Freddie
Mac's Investment business invests in mortgage-related securities that are
guaranteed by it and other financial institutions. It also invests in individual
loans that are guaranteed by Freddie Mac but not immediately securitized. Such
diverse business operations enables the company to fulfill its objectives to
ensure that financial institutions have mortgage money to lend, allow consumers
to afford a decent house or apartment, and stabilize residential mortgage
markets in times of financial crisis.

Increasing Operational Efficiency

   The company reported strong operational efficiency with decreased cost and
increased margins. The company's operating margin to 11.71% for the fiscal year
ended 2012 as compared to (6.42%) in 2011. The increased operating margin may
indicate efficient cost management or a strong pricing strategy by the company.
The company's gross margin increased to 21.73% in 2012 from 20.76% in 2011.
However, the company's net profit margin increased to 13.61% in 2012 from (5.9%)
in 2011. Furthermore, the company reduced its operating cost as percentage of
sales to 88.28% in 2012 from 106.42% in 2011. The company also reduced its
administration cost as percentage of sales to 4.35% in 2012 from 14.5% in 2011.
The decreasing cost structure improves the margin position of the company.
Weaknesses:

Decline in Net Interest Income

The company reported a decline in its net interest income. During the fiscal
year ended December 2012, the net interest income decreased by $786m to $17.6
billion compared to $18.4 billion in 2011. The decrease in net interest income
was due to reduction in the balance of higher-yielding mortgage-related assets
due to continued liquidations. Net interest income is an important metric for
the company and its decline indicates weak performance on behalf of the company.

Opportunities:

U.S. Stimulus Package

   The US government announced third stimulus package plan to boost the growth
of the country's economy in December 2012. The government would spent money to
purchase mortgage backed securities to keep interest rates low, encourage
lending and support the slow recovery of the housing sector. It would spend $40
billion per month on bond purchases to boost the weak economy. The U.S. Federal
Bank would continue to purchase long-term bonds under its twist program, leaving
them buying a total of $85 billion per month for the balance of the year under
the two programs. The bank also illustrated that it would keep buying bonds
until employment rate shows substantial improvement. The Federal bank also
lowered its economic growth to 2% down from a 2.4% forecast in June. However,
the bank also expects that the growth will accelerate 2.3% to 2.8% in 2013
against its December projection of 2.3% to 3%. For 2014, the Fed projected the
growth between 3% and 3.8%. The company could benefit from such positive
developments in the economy.

Housing and Mortgage Market

   According to Freddie Mac's March 2013 U.S. Economic & Housing Market Outlook,
continued low mortgage rates, increasing house prices, and gradually improving
consumer confidence will help support increased home sales. Accordingly, home
sales are expected to be up by 8-10% for 2013. In 2013, housing starts are
expected to increase to 950,000 units as compared to 780,000 in 2012. In
February 2012, Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHA) unveiled a plan that could
lead to gradual reduction in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's market dominance by
simplifying and abridging their operations and transferring mortgage credit risk
to private sector. Reduction in the market shares of major players such Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac could result in growth opportunities for other mortgage
insurers and enable them to increase their market share in the mortgage
insurance market.
Threats:

Secondary Market Liquidity

   The US sub-prime mortgage crisis has led to a decrease in demand for
mortgage-backed securities (MBS), subsequently decreasing Freddie Mac's ability
to issue and sell its bonds. The high default rate has put investors away from
this market. Moreover, such MBS' being primary business for Freddie Mac has
significantly affected its revenue generation. A lower demand decreases the
sales prices of these bonds and the company will be forced to sell them at a
lower price, thereby directly affecting its profits. Any continuation of
decreased confidence in the mortgage market and lack of liquidity in the
secondary mortgage market might have an adverse effect on Freddie Mac's
profitability.

Stiff Competition

   Freddie Mac faces tough competition from Fannie Mae, The Federal Housing
Administration (FHA), Ginnie Mae (which primarily guarantees securities backed
by FHA-insured loans), the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs), and other financial
institutions, securities dealers, insurance companies, pension funds, investment
funds, and investors. Competition to acquire mortgage assets is significantly
affected by pricing and eligibility standards. Post the severe market downturn
the competition from non-agency issuers has decreased but agency issuers -
Fannie Mae and Ginnie Mae still post immediate threat in terms of competition.

Subdued Global Economic Growth

   Sluggish growth of the global economy may impact the performance of
businesses across the world. Growth of the world economy weakened considerably
in 2012 and is expected to remain subdued in the coming two years, according to
the United Nations â[#x20ac][#x2dc]World Economic Situation and Prospects 2013'
report. It indicates that Europe is trapped in high unemployment, financial
sector fragility, heightened sovereign risks, fiscal austerity and low growth.
The US economy slowed significantly in 2012 and growth is expected to remain
meager at 1.7% in 2013. In Japan, deflationary conditions continue to prevail.
With existing policies and growth trends, it may take at least another five
years for Europe and the US to make up for the job losses caused by the Great
Recession of 2008-2009. The economic woes in Europe, Japan and the US are
spilling over to developing countries through weaker demand for their exports
and heightened volatility in capital flows and commodity prices. According to
the report, the global economy is expected to grow at 2.4% in 2013 and 3.2% in
2014, indicating a significant downgrade from the UN's forecast of half a year
ago.
* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Business Description                    Corporate Strategy
Company Overview                        Company Statement
Events                                  Financial Ratios
History                                 Key Employee Biographies
Key Employees                           Key Facts
Locations and Subsidiaries              SWOT Analysis
Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013


                              132 of 998 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2017 World Market Intelligence Private Limited,
                              All Rights Reserved


                       WMI - Major Products and Services

                  * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *
            World Market Intelligence company reports are based on a
             core set of research techniques which ensure the best
            possible level of quality and accuracy of data. The key
             sources used include: Company Websites Company Annual
            Reports SEC Filings Press Releases Proprietary Databases
          Notes Financial information of the company is taken from the
           most recently published annual reports or SEC filings The
           financial and operational data reported for the company is
           as per the industry defined standards Revenue converted to
          US$ at average annual conversion rate as of fiscal year end.

                                January 27, 2017

                     Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

                              8200 Jones Branch Dr
                               Mclean 22102-3107
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *

Freddie Mac is a financial services company focused on mortgage purchasing,
credit guarantee and related portfolio investment products and services. The key
products offered by the company include:

PRODUCTS:

   Single-Family Mortgages, Securitizations, Credit
GuaranteeMultifamily:Fixed-rate Mortgages, Adjustable-rate Mortgages, Targeted
Affordable Products , Structured Finance Facilities, Student Housing Product,
Capital Markets Execution (CME)Mortgage-Backed Securities Products:, Gold PCs,
ARM PCs, Multifamily PCs, Giant PCs, Strip PCs, REMICs, Modifiable and
Combinable REMICs, Reference REMIC SecuritiesDebt Products:, Reference Bills
Securities, Reference Notes Securities, Callable Medium-Term Notes,
FreddieNotes, Discount Notes



* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *












LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2017


                              133 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (England)

                            September 8, 2008 Monday

U.S. bails out home loan pair

BYLINE: Emily Smith, US Editor

LENGTH: 195 words


THE US government has taken control of mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac in the largest state bailout in history.

The troubled firms - which account for nearly half of America's home loans -
have lost billions of dollars due to the housing crash and credit crunch.

They are being placed in a government "conservatorship" - a situation similar to
Northern Rock in the Britain. The bailout could cost the US taxpayer £
12.5billion.

The move, approved by George Bush's administration, is intended to keep the
firms afloat amid fears they could go bankrupt as borrowers default on loans.

It should also cushion the effects of the credit crunch in the UK and around the
world.

US Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said: "A failure of either of them would
create great turmoil in financial markets here and around the globe." If the
firms had gone bust it would have caused carnage in the US housing market.

A crash would have sent the US dollar into freefall, intensifying the credit
crisis.

The companies buy mortgages and sell them on. They own or guarantee about £
3trillion in home loans.

The US Treasury said it was prepared to invest £ 50billion each to shore up the
firms.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved


                              134 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 July 28, 1997

VA in '96 Did 5,000 Loans in NY State

BYLINE: BY NORMA JEAN-JACQUES

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 587 words

DATELINE: New York


The Department of Veterans Affairs' regional office here last year processed
almost 5,000 home loans to veterans in New York state, totaling $ 466 million.

"Rent is expensive in downstate New York," says Robert Rudolph, chief loan
processor at the regional office, explaining the attractiveness of the program
to area vets.

"Rent for an apartment can be as high as a monthly mortgage payment, which makes
it hard to save if you have a family and your spouse doesn't work.  You wouldn't
be able to get a conventional mortgage.

"Few programs I know of provide 100% financing," says Mr. Rudolph.

The veteran can borrow up to $ 230,000 and receive a VA guarantee on 25-50% of
the loan.

If foreclosure results, the VA reimburses the lender the guarantee amount,
thereby encouraging banks to provide more mortgage loans.

"Our purpose is to make housing available for veterans and their families," says
Keith Boerner, a Buffalo VA regional-office loan guarantee officer for Western
New York.  In addition, the program offers competitive negotiable interest rates
which often hover around 8%, while the few non-VA no-money-down programs offer
rates as high as 13 or 14%.

Since its inception, the VA Home Loan Program has facilitated over 18 million
loans across the nation and over 800,000 in New York State.

"The program has had a great impact on the housing industry.  One-third of our
borrowers couldn't have bought a house at all without the VA," says Mr. Boerner.
"By adding buyers to the market there is a builder building a house from scratch
that wouldn't have otherwise or a seller who can sell a house to a veteran.
That affects the national economy."

According to Mr. Boerner, many of the veterans in the program are relatively
young, first-time homebuyers.  Older veterans who tend to have savings, utilize
the program to buy a second home or tap into their home's equity to pay for
their children's education or starting a business; veterans of all ages have
refinanced mortgages through the VA.

By paying off a first mortgage through the VA Home Loan Program, these veterans
lower their interest rates and monthly payments.  The VA program can guarantee a
portion of a loan up to 90% of the veteran's current home's value, while
conventional refinancing usually only provides 70 to 80%.

Another subtle benefit of the program is that more and more sellers are willing
to pay closing costs, which must be paid up front.  "In New York, closing costs
are as high as 5-7% of the sales price," says Mr. Boerner.  "The weaker the
market, the more likely a seller will pay closing costs."

Not all veterans are eligible for the program: generally speaking, he or she
must have been in active duty for two years to qualify.  A veteran must have a
good credit history and show that he or she has the necessary income to meet
monthly payments.

"If a veteran buys a home he or she can't afford, it's worse than being rejected
for a loan," says Mr. Boerner.  Perhaps these requirements explain why the
program has paid off for the VA and lenders as well as veterans.  For instance,
the foreclosure rate in Western New York is only 3-4%.

"Through the years the program has been one of the most successful government
programs," says Mr. Boerner.

"And, it is low cost to taxpayers."

Veterans pay a funding fee to support the program: 2% of the loan for first-time
users and 3% for other participants.  There is no fee for disabled veterans.
Nationally, veterans finance 61% of the cost of the program.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1997 Faulkner & Gray


                              135 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 27, 2009

Not Much Good News at MBA Secondary Market Conference

BYLINE: Lew Sichelman

SECTION: Pg. 6 Vol. 33 No. 30

LENGTH: 884  words


CHICAGO-Lenders hoping to hear some good news here last week at the Mortgage
Bankers Association's National Secondary Market Conference went away
disappointed.

First, Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae told the meeting there would be no retreating
from what lenders consider excessive guarantee fees. Then, former Federal
Reserve Board governor Randall Kroszner said the Fed has no particular strategy
in mind when it comes to exiting the mortgage-backed securities market.

And as if to top off the somber gathering, the MBA's chief economist said seven
out of every 10 mortgages originated this year will be replacing loans already
on the books. If that forecast proves accurate, it means servicing "runoff" will
accelerate dramatically over the coming months.

The MBA said more than 700 people registered for the conference. But the
truncated exhibition hall was largely empty, save for lunchtime when the gratis
buffet was served. And plenty of seats were available at the general and
concurrent sessions.

The first "downer" came during the conference's opening session, when MBA
chairman-elect Rob Story asked panelists representing the GSEs whether they are
considering lowering the fees they charge lenders for insuring payments on the
securities they issue.

Donald Bisenius, Freddie Mac's senior vice president of single-family credit
guarantee business, responded pointedly. "The short answer is 'no,'" he said.
"No, we're not going to lower our fees."

Since the guarantee fees are typically passed on to borrowers as part of their
interest rate, Mr. Story was hoping that because the companies now have a lower
level of risk, they might be amenable to lowering the fees.

But Mr. Bisenius said the fees need to remain at their current levels because
"the housing market is very, very fragile. Prices at best are flat and still
falling in many places. We need to balance against that risk."

Thomas Lund, executive vice president of single-family mortgage business at
Fannie Mae, took a more politically expedient posture with his response, saying
that his company is always assessing its fee structure.

But he also said the current charges strike a fair balance between providing
liquidity to the mortgage market and protecting taxpayers against footing the
bill for loans that go sour. And he pointed out that the guarantee fee is "still
far below" that charged in the jumbo market by non-agency investors.

Mr. Kroszner, who returned to the University of Chicago in January after a
three-year stint at the Fed, also took the politically correct route when asked
by Jay Brinkman, the MBA's chief economist, what plans the Fed has for
extricating itself from the MBS market when it reaches the $1.25 trillion in net
purchases it has targeted for 2009.

The Fed and Treasury are essentially the secondary market these days, and the
MBA is concerned that when they leave the field, mortgage rates will shoot
upwards. In this year's first quarter, the Fed's net purchases alone hit nearly
$400 billion.

Mr. Kroszner, who was a member of the President's Council of Economic Advisors
from 2001 to 2003, said the central bank will "do whatever it takes" to keep
mortgage rates in check until the MBS market returns to some semblance of
normalcy.

"Whether the Fed will purchase more or less will depend on the facts and
circumstances at the time," the economics professor said. It will do "whatever
it takes" to keep rates in check until the MBS market returns to some semblance
of normalcy.

If the central bank is satisfied by 2010 that the market is coming back, it will
reduce it purchases and "mortgage rates should rise at a normal pace," he said,
adding that the challenge that lies ahead is "to thread the needle" between
backing the mortgage markets and keeping a lid on loan rates.

Later, Mr. Brinkman mused about Mr. Kroszner's diplomatic response. "He said
what he could say," the MBA economist told National Mortgage News, indicating
that the former Fed governor probably still has a little Fed blood in his veins.

Meanwhile, in his forecast to the MBA's Peer Group Roundtable, Mr. Brinkman said
refinancings would account for 70% of all loans originated this year.

Total refi volume will almost triple from what it was in 2008, he said, rising
from $765 billion last year to $1.925 trillion in 2009.

The volume of purchase money mortgages, on the other hand, is expected to
decline nearly 6%, from $855 billion in 2008 to $806 billion this year.

The MBA economist said some $1.5 trillion worth of loans would be the result of
"plain old rate-term refis," while the remainder would come from mortgages
refinanced under the GSEs' refi program for borrowers who are current on their
loans but owe more than their homes are worth on today's market.

The number of purchase money loans will fall only 1%, he also said. But because
of shrinking loan sizes, the dollar volume will be down 5.7%.

If there was a positive note to his latest forecast, it's that overall the MBA
is projecting a banner year for mortgage finance. The association is looking for
a total originations to reach $2.73 trillion, which would be the fourth highest
year on record, bested only by 2003, 2002 and 2005 volumes and "slightly ahead"
of 2004.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              136 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 24, 1995
                              Correction Appended

Fannie Starts Indian Effort

SECTION: AFFORDABLE HOUSING; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 390 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Federal National Mortgage Association has formally announced the opening of
its Native American Housing Initiative to increase homeownership opportunities
for people living on tribal lands.

Fannie Mae also has named its first Native American seller/servicer for mortgage
loans, a public housing authority in the Pacific Northwest.

Fannie Mae said the national initiative will provide a framework for the
company's future efforts to meet the needs of underserved Native American
populations nationwide.  Products currently under discussion include a low down
payment mortgage in Oklahoma for the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw and Absentee
Shawnee nations.

NMN already has reported that the Chickasaw nation has signed the first separate
tribal pact with Fannie Mae.

Under the initiative, Fannie Mae will begin by purchasing single-family home
loans secured by ground leases on Native American trust lands that are
guaranteed by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

The loans will be fixed-rate mortgages with terms not exceeding 30-years.

Fannie Mae said its involvement will make it easier for local lenders to
participate in the HUD home loan guarantee program.

Under the program, eligible borrowers may finance closing costs as part of the
loan, lowering the amount of money needed at the closing table.  HUD has made up
to $ 22.5 million of financing available in the first year of the Native
American Housing Initiative.

The program was authorized by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992.

Meanwhile, in the Pacific Northwest, a Native American organization has been
approved as a Fannie Mae seller/servicer.

Sound Development Association, a wholly owned subsidiary of the South Puget
Sound Inter-tribal Housing Authority in Shelton, Wash., was named a
seller/servicer.  The public housing authority represents six tribes.

Continental Savings Bank of Seattle will act as the subservicer for mortgages
originated by Sound Development Association.

Fannie Mae said it hopes to work with other Native American nations as well.

Fannie Mae officials said they hope eventually to expand their program beyond
purchasing only government guaranteed loans.

The initial program will help them learn about the performance of loans of
tribal lands and resale values of the homes used as collateral.

LOAD-DATE: May 05, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 1, 1995

CORRECTION: Membership in the Chickasaw Nation was incorrectly reported in a
recent NMN story on the tribe's housing pact with Fannie Mae, at about 8,000.
In fact, there are approximately 34,000 card holders with certified Chickasaw
blood origins and 11,000 registered voters in the tribe.

                         Copyright 1995 Faulkner & Gray


                              137 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              138 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              139 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              140 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              141 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              142 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              143 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              144 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              145 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              146 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              147 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              148 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              149 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              150 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              151 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              152 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              153 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              154 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              155 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              156 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              157 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              158 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              159 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                The Berkshire Eagle (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              160 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2013 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              161 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                Sentinel & Enterprise (Fitchburg, Massachusetts)

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Mid-States Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              162 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Whittier Daily News (California)

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              163 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                The Berkshire Eagle (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              164 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2013 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              165 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                Sentinel & Enterprise (Fitchburg, Massachusetts)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Mid-States Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              166 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Whittier Daily News (California)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              167 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                The Berkshire Eagle (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              168 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2013 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              169 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                Sentinel & Enterprise (Fitchburg, Massachusetts)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Mid-States Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              170 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Whittier Daily News (California)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              171 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                The Berkshire Eagle (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              172 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2013 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              173 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                Sentinel & Enterprise (Fitchburg, Massachusetts)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Mid-States Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              174 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Whittier Daily News (California)

                              July 5, 2013 Friday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              175 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                The Berkshire Eagle (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              176 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2013 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              177 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                Sentinel & Enterprise (Fitchburg, Massachusetts)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Mid-States Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              178 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Whittier Daily News (California)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 573 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace. And
although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes being
sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way financial
matters are handled within real estate deals.

Financing

Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

Insurance

Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.
The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's
topRealtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found
atwww.tennesseedreamhomes.com . He is also a regular contributor ofreal estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              179 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday

Budget 2013: Loan of your own: Osborne looks to building boom to lift economy:
New cash and guarantees startle property industry Construction companies' shares
rocket after budget

BYLINE: Patrick Collinson, Nicholas Watt and Rupert Jones

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 953 words


Hundreds of thousands of people will get government help to buy a new home, in a
plan to reignite the property market and trigger a construction boom.

The chancellor set out in his budget plans for interest-free loans and
guarantees to support £130bn worth of new mortgages from 2014. The surprise
announcement sent shares in housebuilders soaring, but sparked fears of a new
house price bubble and drew comparisons with the failed state-sponsored US
mortgage corporations Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Critics said that George Osborne was falling back on the housing market to lift
the economy after failing to boost manufacturing and business.

Aimed at middle- and lower-income workers who are being priced out of the
housing market by the large deposits required by lenders, Help to Buy will allow
people to obtain a 20% interest-free loan from the government, as long as they
put down a 5% deposit and buy a newly built property.

The government also launched a £12bn guarantee scheme, starting in January 2014,
that will support anyone buying a home up to the value of £600,000.

Osborne hopes to reverse the dramatic decline in home ownership, from a high of
71% in 2003 to 65% now, and boost the construction industry. Mortgage lending
has also flagged, with figures yesterday revealing an 8% slump in new home loans
in February compared with January.

The scale of the government's intervention startled the property industry and
delighted developers. The guarantee scheme will support mortgages together worth
£130bn - not far short of the £140bn lent in 2012, although the scheme will be
spread over three years. Up to 300,000 households will benefit.

Within minutes of the budget announcement, shares in Barratt Developments jumped
7% and Persimmon rose 5%. Linden Homes, one of the five biggest developers in
the UK, said it "warmly welcomed" the package of measures, "which now open up
the options for even more people to get on the ladder, or make that
all-important next step up".

But there are fears that taxpayers' cash will be squandered in renewed house
price inflation. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors warned:
"Government need to be careful this doesn't create another housing bubble -
pushing prices up at the expense of buyers."

Nick Pearce of the thinktank IPPR said: "It continues a strategy based on
propping up - indeed inflating - prices rather than getting additional homes
built. This suggests that the lessons from the housing bubble that contributed
to the financial crisis have not been learned and that orthodox thinking on
housing policy remains entrenched in Whitehall."

Priced Out, the group that campaigns on behalf of "Generation Rent" - those shut
out of the property market by high prices - said Help to Buy "should be called
'Help to Developers'". Spokesman Duncan Stott said: "It means a massive bung of
taxpayers' money to developers. It will mean more debt pumped into our
overpriced housing market and will keep house prices out of reach of first-time
buyers."

When the 20% interest-free loans become available on 1 April, they are likely to
spark a scramble among first-time buyers. The government has set aside £3.5bn to
underwrite the loans, which will typically mean that a buyer receives an
interest-free amount of around £50,000, saving nearly £300 per month in
repayments.

The government says the scheme will remain open for three years, but demand will
almost certainly outstrip supply. It is expected that the £3.5bn will help
around 74,000 more homebuyers on to the ladder, but unless the scheme is
replenished with more government cash, buyers at the back of the queue may lose
out.

The announcement goes some way to answering the concerns raised by Vince Cable
in a recent New Statesman article in which the business secretary called for an
increase in borrowing to revive housebuilding.

Cable regards the chancellor's announcement as a step in the right direction,
though he believes it will mainly boost residential, rather than social,
housing. He will also be looking carefully to see whether the announcements help
boost the construction sector.

Ed Balls welcomed the announcement but said it amounted to little after the fall
in the building of affordable housing: "We are pleased they have done something
around housing and housing starts. But it is tiny numbers compared to the scale
of the challenge in terms of getting housebuilding moving."

The shadow chancellor questioned the "big guarantee" for first mortgages. He
said that the £1.5bn a year for the Help to Buy scheme and the Build to Rent
scheme were listed in the budget red book as "below the line", meaning they are
not recorded in government borrowing.

Balls said: "Essentially it is an off-budget transaction because it is a
government guarantee which doesn't go into the borrowing numbers. I am not
necessarily against these kind of things. But I thought George Osborne was."

Mortgage lenders are now hurriedly working out how the guarantee scheme will
affect the availability and pricing of home loans. The idea is that the
government will underwrite the portion of a mortgage between 80% and 95% of the
loan-to-value ratio (LTV) of a property, making it less risky for banks and
building societies to offer buyers a loan.

That should also enable lenders to narrow the gulf between the pricing of
high-LTV mortgages, where interest rates are typically 4% to 5%, and the 2.5% to
3% paid by people able to put down deposits of 40% or more.

Lenders remain guarded in their response until more details emerge about how
much they will have to pay to access the scheme. "We don't yet know the size of
the commercial fee that lenders will have to pay," said Sue Anderson of the
Council of Mortgage Lenders.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              180 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Daily Camera (Boulder, Colorado)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 576 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers



 Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace.
And although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes
being sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way
financial matters are handled within real estate deals.



 Financing

 Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

 The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

 Insurance

 Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

 So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.

 The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

 Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's top
Realtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found at
www.tennesseedreamhomes.com. He is also a regular contributor of real estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Prairie Mountain Publishing
                              All Rights Reserved


                              181 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Daily Camera (Boulder, Colorado)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers

BYLINE: Zillow

SECTION: REAL ESTATE

LENGTH: 576 words


By Monte Mohr

How the New Financial Climate Is Impacting Home Buyers



 Housing markets across the country are recovering at a slow and steady pace.
And although recent reports point to the rising number of single-family homes
being sold, buyers need to be aware of the fundamental change in the way
financial matters are handled within real estate deals.



 Financing

 Buyers in today's housing market are finding it much more challenging to get
approved credit for their loan needs and it is certainly much harder than it was
during the housing boom. While a good credit score is absolutely critical in
obtaining a loan, it is no longer enough to secure a loan by itself. Nor, is it
enough to guarantee the best interest rate. Lenders are now requiring much more
documentation throughout the loan process; they want substantiated incomes and
down payments along with in depth information about a buyer's debt-to-income
ratio. Buyers should be prepared to furnish months' worth of bank statements and
payment stubs as well as provide documentation for any recent credit inquiries.
Lenders are looking at every installment loan (i.e., car payments, student
loans, etc.) as well as open lines of credit (i.e., store credit cards, major
credit cards, etc.) that have been issued in a buyer's name.

 The lack of these constraints played a major role in the housing collapse felt
in the mid-2000s. And while nobody wants to repeat the market crash, buyers are
still struggling a bit with incorporating these new financial guidelines into
their personal real estate experiences. But the fact is, these heightened credit
restrictions have become a new reality, or a new normal, for home buyers.

 Insurance

 Ninety-five percent of all mortgages carry with them some sort of guarantee or
insurance. Have you ever heard the term PMI (Private Mortgage Insurance) before?
This simply means that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't want to lose money by
granting bad loans. And, the only way to prevent such a loss is by tightening
the requirements for borrowers.

 So what does all this mean if you are looking to buy your dream home? Well, if
you are in the market to buy a house, you should not stop your quest out of
financial fear. But you should absolutely take the time to get your financial
portfolio in good shape before you try to qualify for a loan. There are many
people within the financial industry who are qualified to help you accomplish
this task. Start by speaking with a certified mortgage specialist as they are
well versed in the ever-changing mortgage rules. There are also people who
specialize only in credit scores; these people can guide you through the
necessary steps to increase your credit score.

 The bottom line is that home buyers in today's market must have realistic
expectations about how much money they can borrow, and they must be prepared to
do some legwork when the time comes.

 Monte Mohr has sold more than 2,500 homes, making him one of America's top
Realtors for the last 25 years. This experience has given him a unique
perspective on the Nashville real estate market where he can be found at
www.tennesseedreamhomes.com. He is also a regular contributor of real estate
information to Nashville's NBC affiliate station, WSMV Channel 4. To learn more
about Monte Mohr's experience as a real estate agent, to get free advice about
your biggest real estate challenges or to request an interview, contact him at
Info@TennesseeDreamHomes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Prairie Mountain Publishing
                              All Rights Reserved


                              182 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 27, 1991

SECTION: AFFORDABLE HOUSING; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: FRANKFORT, Ky.


The Kentucky Housing Corp. is offering $ 10 million in loan financing at
interest rates ranging from 8% to 8.45% for a term of 25 to 30 years.

At least 200 individuals and/or families will be able to achieve homeownership
through participation.

Home loans will finance the purchase of existing single-family homes costing $
60,000 or less, or new properties costing $ 63,000 or less.

All loans will require either Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance
or a Veterans Administration guarantee and will require downpayments of less
than 5%.

Additionally KHC is offering a mortgage assistance program called Equity
Partners Investing in the Commonwealth (EPIC).

Homebuyers can borrow up to 60% of their downpayment and closing costs (up to $
3,000) at a 6% interest rate for a term of 7 years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              183 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Anson Record, Wadesboro, N.C.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

Manufactured home business offers resources to low-income families

BYLINE: Abby Cavenaugh, The Anson Record, Wadesboro, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 460 words


June 17--Davis Family Homes, a manufactured and modular home dealer located in
Peachland, has begun to offer valuable resources to low-income families looking
to purchase their first home.

Salesperson Robin Davis said that since the business opened about a year ago,
the number of people coming in who qualify for low-income assistance has been
staggering. "I have learned that there's a big need for low-income families to
get some help," she said.

So she contacted the USDA to set up some programs to help low-income families be
able to purchase homes. "I believe we've spoken to 400 people about it in the
past year," she said. "We were probably three to four months into the business
in Anson County when we realized we had a lot of people coming in who needed
assistance."

Davis said that many families who visit the modular and manufactured home center
have no idea how to get started in the home buying process. "We've seen so many
people that have walked away, and have gone to banks, we think, and never came
back because they didn't hear good news."

Through the USDA's Rural Development and Rural Housing Service, Davis Family
Homes offers three specific programs to help low-income families realize their
dream of owning a home: Single Family Housing Repair Loans & Grants, Rural Home
Loans (Direct Program) and Single Family Home Loan Guarantees.

Applicants must meet income guidelines in order to qualify for the programs, and
must live in an eligible rural area. The paperwork and application process can
be confusing and daunting, Davis said, so she and the rest of the staff at Davis
Family Homes, often offer to help families in need.

"I would encourage everyone to go to the USDA website and look at some of the
information," she said. "But then a lot of people in these rural areas don't
have access to the Internet."

She encourages those who might be interested to call Davis Family Homes at
704-272-7327. Business hours are Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 7 p.m., and
Saturday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. but other hours are available by appointment.

"They walk in a bit intimidated, but always leave with smiles and hugs," Davis
said.

She added that she's also looking into other programs, such as partnering with
local organizations to provide classes for potential homeowners.

Arthur Davis, the 96-year-old patriarch of Davis Family Homes, is very
passionate about the housing business. "He's been doing this for a long time,"
Davis said. "He -- and I -- feel that everyone deserves to live in a decent
home."

Editor Abby Cavenaugh may be reached at 704-694-2161, ext. 2301 or on Twitter
@TheAnsonRecord.

___ (c)2015 The Anson Record (Wadesboro, N.C.) Visit The Anson Record
(Wadesboro, N.C.) at www.ansonrecord.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150617-1AN-Manufactured-home-business-offers-resources-to-low-income-families-
0617-20150617

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1AN


                Copyright 2015 The Anson Record, Wadesboro, N.C.


                              184 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Advertiser

                            March 29, 1986 Saturday

Home-loan subsidy extended

BYLINE: KYM TILBROOK

LENGTH: 378 words


The SA Government has extended its subsidy to building societies by four weeks.

The subsidy, which gives an average benefit of $25 a month, will now end on
April 30. It originally was planned to end on Monday.

The Minister of Housing and Construction, Mr Hemmings, said the subsidy had
helped about 25,000 borrowers.

The subsidy pays the cost of the 0.75 p.c. interest-rate increase on society
home loans announced in October.

Mr Hemmings said the total cost of the subsidy, including the extension, would
be $2.6m. The extension would cost about $378,000.

The Government originally had earmarked $3m for the scheme, which was aimed at
cushioning the impact of the rise.

A spokesman for Mr Hemmings said the $3m costing had been a "guesstimate."

The move played a key role in the State election by defusing the interest-rate
issue for the Government, particularly in the mortgage-belt suburbs covered by
the marginal Labor seats of Fisher, Florey, Todd and Newland.

Mr Hemmings said the subsidy had proved an important short-term measure to help
borrowers while more equitable programs to help all home buyers in difficulty
were developed.

"It was a fast-track beginning of a longer-term strategy being developed by the
State Government in response to sudden and sharp rises in interest rates," he
said.

The Government now had in place its Home Guarantee program aimed at home buyers
in difficulties.

Home Guarantee was a key plank of the Bannon Government's election policy and
was officially announced two weeks ago.

Two major sections of Home Guarantee are an interest rate protection plan and a
mortgage-relief scheme.

The Leader of the Opposition, Mr Olsen, said the mortgage-assistance scheme to
building-society borrowers was nothing more than a pre-election bribe.

"It was an outrageous and cynical display from a Premier who provided a section
of the community with short-term help, knowing full well that he would be
withdrawing it once the ballot boxes were firmly closed," Mr Olsen said.

"Those building-society customers will now be faced with payment of an extra
2.25 p.c. on their mortgages, meaning a monthly increase from an average of $81
up to as much as $126 for some borrowers."

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV

                   Copyright 1986 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              185 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 4, 2014 Saturday

Washington: FHFA: $8 billion in recoveries in 2013

LENGTH: 327  words

DATELINE: Washington


The National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the following news
release:

The Federal Housing Finance Agency on Thursday announced that it has secured
nearly $8 billion from settlements in 2013 with financial institutions that sold
private-label securities to the government-sponsored entities Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac between 2005 and 2007.

The government-sponsored entities remain a topic of discussion for Congress,
which hopes to put together a housing finance reform package this year. NAFCU
will continue to monitor actions within FHFA and Congress in its work to ensure
preservation of credit unions' guaranteed access to the secondary mortgage
market and fair pricing based on loan quality, not volume, in any iteration of
housing finance reform.

Rep. Mel Watt, D-N.C., recently confirmed as the next FHFA director, is due to
be sworn in to his new post Monday. Confirmed by the Senate on a vote of 57 to
41, Watt will fill the post Ed DeMarco has held in acting capacity since 2009.
As FHFA director, Watt will exercise direct control over the regulation,
supervision and conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. He will also
oversee the regulation and supervision of the Federal Home Loan Banks.

Watt has already announced that he will delay the implementation of planned
mortgage-fee increases until he can "evaluate" the plan further; NAFCU strongly
supports the delay.

FHFA announced a 10-basis-points increase in guarantee fees, or g-fees, last
month and said it also planned to increase its loan-level price adjustment,
which is typically passed onto borrowers, for certain single-family loans with
maturities greater than 15 years.

NAFCU objected strongly to the planned fee increases. Watt later said he planned
to hold off on the fee hikes for further review. His announcement was reported
in The Wall Street Journal, which also cited NAFCU's opposition to the
increases.

For more information please visit: http://www.nafcu.org/

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              186 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    April 30, 1986, Wednesday, Final Edition

FHA Authority Expires, Credit Limit Reached

BYLINE: By Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: Business; G1

LENGTH: 588 words


A government agency whose mortgage guarantees help funnel billions of dollars to
millions of home buyers ran out of money and authority yesterday, a situation
that lenders estimate will prevent 10,000 families a day from getting federally
backed home loans.

The Federal Housing Administration, caught under an avalanche of homeowners
seeking to refinance mortgages as interest rates fall, reached its loan credit
limit of $57.4 billion by early afternoon and told lenders to stop taking
applications for mortgages insured by the agency.

But even if the FHA had not reached its credit limit, the agency would have been
forced to issue the same order because its authority to guarantee loans was due
to expire at midnight last night.

FHA's sudden inability to conduct business comes just three weeks after another
key federal housing agency, the Government National Mortgage Association, better
known as Ginnie Mae, hit its credit limit of $65.3 billion and had to stop
issuing guarantees to owners of mortgage-backed securities.

Ginnie Mae is a key link between lenders and the markets that provide cash for
home loans backed by the FHA and the Veterans Administration. It guarantees
payment on FHA and VA-backed mortgages that have been bundled into
mortgage-backed securities, which are bought and sold by investors.

FHA and VA loans, which account for 20 percent of all home loans in the United
States, are especially important to first-time and moderate-income home buyers.

The Senate worked into the evening to pass an emergency measure extending the
authority of FHA and Ginnie Mae. But the measure differs from a House bill
passed last week, and working out a compromise could take weeks.

And even if Congress passes legislation in the next several days, it cannot take
effect without President Reagan's signature, and he will not return to
Washington from an economic summit in Japan until May 9.

The delay could cost consumers. Industry trade groups say it could add 30 days
to the wait for obtaining financing and one-half percentage point to the price
of borrowing money to buy a house.

The Mortgage Bankers Association of America said that FHA and VA loans now take
about 60 days to process and are running about 9.5 percent.

Warren Lasko, executive vice president of the association -- a trade group that
represents the largest group of home loan lenders outside of the savings and
loan industry -- said the exhaustion of FHA's credit authority could drive up
rates for government-backed loans by half a percentage point.

He said it also could push up interest rates for conventional mortgages, which
now are running about 9 1/2 to 10 percent.

An official at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, which oversees
the FHA, said, however, that FHA authority ran out for several days in March and
"there was no real effect on rates going up."

Silvio DeBartolomeis, acting FHA commissioner, said the agency will insure any
mortgages that already have been committed to prospective home buyers, but no
new applications will be accepted.

The House last week passed an emergency measure to extend the credit authority
of Ginnie Mae to $100 billion through Sept. 30, the end of the government's
fiscal year, and to extend the credit authority of FHA to $95 billion.

The Senate version would raise Ginnie Mae's limit to $125 billion through Sept.
30. But it would grant FHA an additional $17 billion through June 6, when the
Senate hopes to have a more comprehensive housing bill ready.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1986 The Washington Post


                              187 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Fed Home Loan Bank Of N.Y. Gets Approval For Risk-Split Pilot

                            August 20, 1999, Friday

By KATHARINE FRASER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Federal Home Loan Bank of New York won approval Thursday for a pilot program
that will split the credit and interest rate risk between private-sector
mortgage lenders and the government-sponsored entity.

The Home Loan bank will package into pools single-family mortgages bought at
market value from member banks and thrifts. For the first seven years members
will receive 97% of the principal payments and 48.5% of the interest payments.
After seven years the Home Loan bank will take on 97% of the risk as well as
collect that much of the cash flow. Member banks and thrifts will collect just
3%, but will only be liable for 3% of any losses.

The pilot, dubbed Community Mortgage Asset, would qualify as an acceptable
investment by Home Loan banks under a July 28 proposal by their regulator, the
Federal Housing Finance Board. That plan would limit Home Loan banks'
investments and curtail purchases of mortgage-backed securities by 2005.

Long before the Finance Board's proposal, Home Loan banks began expanding beyond
their traditional advances to member banks and thrifts. The best-known
alternative is the Mortgage Partnership Finance, which the Federal Home Loan
Bank of Chicago started three years ago. The Chicago Home Loan bank has
generated $1.4 billion of loans under the program.

The Chicago pilot was expanded in September 1998 when the Finance Board raised
the cap on the program to $9 billion from $750 million. The Chicago Home Loan
Bank pays origination and servicing fees to a member bank or thrift for creating
the pools, but retains ownership. The member banks and thrifts guarantee that
they will cover some losses in pools, but usually no more than 2% of unpaid
balance.

George E. Scharpf, president of Amboy National Bank, a $1.4 billion-asset bank
in Old Bridge, N.J., said the New York Home Loan Bank's pilot is better.

Chicago's program is a "substitute for a Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac transaction -
sell the whole loan," he said. But with the New York pilot, "I'm going to get
half of the (principal and) interest."

Alfred A. DelliBovi, president of the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York, said
the program was designed to satisfy the Finance Board's proposal. The intent,
according to agency chairman Bruce A. Morrison, is to get the Home Loan banks
focused on their mission of financing affordable housing.

"Aside from serving our customers, it also will meet the regulatory needs that
Bruce Morrison is promoting,'' Mr. DelliBovi said. "The biggest challenge of
that is finding mission-related assets -- you're not going to find them on the
side of the road, you have to create them. This is one example."

He said he expects to see many alternatives proposed that provide a middle
ground between traditional advances and selling loans immediately into the
secondary market. These alternatives will all help the Home Loan banks meet the
proposed regulatory definition of "mission mortgage asset."

Mr. Morrison said returns on direct investments in member bank and thrift
mortgages could generate returns comparable to mortgage-backed securities.
However, he acknowledged that start-up costs are likely cut into yields in the
short run.

Yet, there is some skepticism that alternatives can replace the amount and the
return of investments in mortgage-backed securities, which currently is about
$60 billion.

"You need the broad mix," said John von Seggern, executive vice president of the
Council of Federal Home Loan Banks, which includes 10 of the 12 banks.

Last month the Cincinnati, Indianapolis, and Seattle Home Loan banks proposed
another possibility. The three institutions would buy fixed-rate, single-family
mortgages from member banks and thrifts and then create an account that would
assign part of the credit risk to members. Members would cover additional credit
risk carried by the Home Loan banks with mortgage insurance.

Copyright c 1999 American Banker, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.americanbanker.com

SECTION: WASHINGTON; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 665 words

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1999 American Banker, Inc.


                              188 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           November 10, 2011 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

Congress weighs the upper end of home-loan limits

BYLINE: T.W. Farnam

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 747 words


The debate over setting new limits on government support for the housing
industry is facing a crucial test in Congress this week as lawmakers decide
whether to extend federal guarantees for home loans up to $729,750.

The National Association of Realtors has been pushing hard for the extension and
managed to gather 60 votes for an amendment that would accomplish it, sponsored
by Sen. Johnny Isakson (R-Ga.).

The Realtors, perhaps not coincidentally, have been Isakson's biggest
benefactor, spending $604,000last year on his reelection and a total of $1.3
million, including for his first run for office in 2004.

The support for Isakson is part of an unusual strategy by the trade association
to spend large amounts not directly in donations to candidates but rather on
independent campaign advertising. The strategy is one that other large trade
associations may start to adopt in the wake of the Supreme Court's Citizens
United decision last year, which freed corporate and union spending on campaign
advertising.

The Realtors have always had a large political action committee fueled by
donations from thousands of members. The donations are capped at $5,000 under
federal law, allowing the association to spend $6 million last year helping 11
friendly lawmakers.

Those efforts got an extra boost last year with an additional $1.1 million that
the association transferred from its general treasury to a super PAC created
under the new election rules.

Isakson said he pushed to restore the higher limits that expired Sept. 30
because he thinks it is premature to withdraw government support from the
recovering housing market.

"I was in the single-family housing business for 30 years before I came to
Congress," Isakson said. "I was proud to be a Realtor. I'm proud to have their
support."

The fate of the amendment will be decided in the coming days as a House-Senate
conference committee attempts to resolve differences in spending bills passed by
the two chambers. The measure never got traction in the House, where Republicans
argue that it's time to let the free market take a bigger share of risk on
housing.

The provision would increase the maximum size of loans guaranteed by the Federal
Housing Administration and the government-controlled mortgage giants Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac.

The government limits home loans it supports to 125 percent of the median home
price in a region, up to $625,000. The higher limit of $729,750 was first passed
in 2008 and had been extended several times until this year.

Advocates for low-income home buyers say that keeping the loan limit at the
higher level will reduce the ability of the government to help the people who
need it most.

"If you expand these loan limits, what's going to happen to the people at the
bottom rung?" said John Taylor, president of the National Community Reinvestment
Coalition. The FHA's limited resources "need to be for those who have no
alternative but a government guarantee to become homeowners," he said.

Because homes are more expensive in places such as New York and California, the
expiration has had a greater impact in those regions.

Rep. Ken Calvert (Calif.) is one of the few Republican lawmakers who signed on
to a bill supporting higher loan limits. He's also one of the biggest recipients
of advertising spending by the Realtors association, receiving $606,000 in help
during his 2010 campaign.

The goal of that spending is "basically helping our friends and making sure the
folks who are good on our issues are getting elected and reelected," said Jamie
Gregory, the deputy chief lobbyist for the Realtors association.

Calvert said he has had a consistent record on the issue.

"Many people in California are precluded from qualifying for a [government] loan
simply because of the high housing prices in many areas, including in my
congressional district," Calvert said.

Under federal law, spending by the Realtors or other interest groups cannot be
coordinated with candidates or their campaigns.

Another top recipient is Rep. Dennis Cardoza (D-Calif.), who received $526,000
in assistance. In a recent speech announcing his retirement, Cardoza excoriated
the Obama administration for its housing policies, saying, "The administration's
inaction is infuriating."

Several other top recipients of the Realtors' spending are members of the
powerful House tax-writing committee. Realtors have recently been fighting
proposals to cap or eliminate the income tax deduction for mortgage interest.

farnamt@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2011 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              189 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 15, 1991

KHC Has $ 10 Million In Mortgage Finance

SECTION: AFFORDABLE HOUSING; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: FRANKFORT, Ky.


The Kentucky Housing Corp. is offering $ 10 million in loan financing at
interest rates ranging from 8% to 8.45% for a term of 25 to 30 years.

At least 200 individuals and/or families will be able to achieve homeownership
through participation.

Home loans will finance the purchase of existing single-family homes costing $
60,000 or less, or new properties costing $ 63,000 or less.

All loans will require either Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance
or a Veterans Administration guarantee and will require downpayments of less
than 5%.

Additionally KHC is offering a mortgage assistance program called Equity
Partners Investing in the Commonwealth (EPIC).  Homebuyers can borrow up to 60%
of their downpayment and closing costs (up to $ 3,000) at a 6% interest rate for
a term of 7 years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              190 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               MortgageDaily.com

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 10, 2013 Tuesday

Watt Confirmed as FHFA Director

BYLINE: Mortgage Daily

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 375 words


Dec. 10--President Barack Obama's nominee for director of the Federal Housing
Finance Agency has been confirmed by the U.S. Senate.

Rep. Mel Watt (D-N.C.) was confirmed Tuesday as FHFA director by a Senate vote
of 57 to 41.

As conservator and regulator, Watt will oversee Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
which combined guarantee or own $5.1 trillion in mortgages.

Watt was nominated by Obama in May to permanently replace the acting FHFA
director, Edward J. DeMarco.

But the nomination was held up by senate Republicans who see DeMarco as more in
line with their own principles. So senate Democrats, who hold a majority,
changed filibuster rules -- paving the way for the confirmation of Watt and a
host other Obama nominees.

Watt is expected take a softer stance on principal reduction on Fannie and
Freddie loans -- a move opposed by DeMarco.

DeMarco's position had him at odds with Obama.

The Mortgage Bankers Association, which had already endorsed Watt once it became
clear that he would be confirmed, reiterated its support for the new FHFA
director.

"MBA commends the confirmation of Mel Watt as the next director of the Federal
Housing Finance Agency," MBA Chairman E.J. Burke said in a written statement.
"Because he brings more than two decades of work on the House Financial Services
Committee, he will have a strong base of understanding on a wide variety of
public policy issues related to housing finance."

Burke also thanked DeMarco "for working hard to address the major issues facing
the real estate finance industry."

Burke added that any secondary market transition needs to provide a more stable
and competitive system for all lenders.

"Specifically included in this new system must be an explicit government
guarantee for mortgage securities, backed by a well defined class of high
quality, single-family and multifamily mortgages; protection for taxpayers
through deep credit enhancement that puts private capital in a first-loss
position, with no institution too big to fail; and fair and transparent
guarantee fees to create an FDIC-like federal insurance fund to serve as a
backstop in the event of catastrophic losses," he said.

___ (c)2013 Mortgage Daily Visit Mortgage Daily at www.mortgagedaily.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131210-1MG-Watt-Confirmed-as-FHFA-Director-1210-20131210

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1MG


                                 Copyright 2013


                              191 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               February 11, 1985

Budget Would Reduce Housing Funds $ 2B

BYLINE: By JOHN HUGHES

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 559 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The budget proposed by the Reagan Administration for fiscal 1986 would reduce
overall spending on housing by some $ 2 billion.

Many of the housing proposals are expected to face heated, bipartisan opposition
on Capitol Hill.

Future Federal responsibility for housing programs would be centralized into one
agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

The plan would eliminate most grants for housing and rural development provided
by the Farmers Home Administration (FmHA).

Also recommended is a two-year moratorium on funding for additional housing
units subsidized by HUD, which, the Administration maintains, would have only a
small impact on total Federal housing assistance.

Two popular HUD programs, "no strings attached" revenue sharing for local
governments and urban development action grants for development of distressed
areas, also would be ended.

User fees would be imposed on mortgage-backed security issues of the three
Federal mortgage agencies.

The Administration claims that the user fees would bring these agencies' debt
and securities costs closer to what borrowers in other sectors of the economy
must pay and therefore reduce the degree to which they crowd out private
borrowers and force up overall interest rates.

The guarantee fee GNMA charges mortgage-backed securities issuers would rise by
9 basis points, from 6 to 15.

Similar fees are proposed for the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and the
Federal National Mortgage Association.

The Office of Management and Budget said a variety of management reforms and
administrative consolidations are under way or planned with the Department of
Commerce and HUD that will evaluate "specific functions to determine whether
they can be accomplished more efficiently by the private sector."

The Federal government provides housing subsidies for low-income families and
individuals through several programs administered by HUD and the Department of
Agriculture.

At the end of 1984, the OMB said, 5.8 million households received housing
assistance and the number will grow to 6.2 million by the end of 1986.

This represents 4.2 million in HUD-assisted units and two million in
USDA-assisted units (through the FmHA), an increase of more than 2.4 million
units since 1980, according to the Administration.

There would be no budget authority for new HUD units in 1986.

The budget also would end FmHA housing assistance programs except for small
amounts to fund expiring rental housing assistance contracts and to repair
single-family housing units occupied by low-income FmHA borrowers.

After the two-year moratorium, HUD would provide housing assistance in rural and
urban areas and the allocation of 100,000 new assisted units would be evenly
split between these areas.

The budget proposes $ 7.8 billion in 1986 and $ 2.2 billion in estimated outlays
for commerce and housing credit.

Mortgage credit and deposit insurance programs and activities are a major
portion of the assistance, according to OMB, with $ 2.5 billion in proposed
budget authority in 1986.

The budget also proposes $ 1.9 billion in direct loan obligations and $ 33.1
billion in guaranteed loan commitments.

In 1985, Ginnie Mae's loan commitment limitation of $ 63.8 billion has been
continued and guarantees are expected to be issued on about $ 38.2 billion in
securities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              192 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 11, 2008 Tuesday

Fretting over Fannie and Freddie;
Shares fall as investors skeptical of assurances they won't need to raise more
capital

BYLINE: JAMES R. HAGERTY

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: THE WALL STREET JOURNAL; U.S. HOME MORTGAGES; Pg.
B11

LENGTH: 817 words


Shares of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac plunged as fears grew that home-mortgage
defaults eventually will force the two U.S. government-sponsored companies to
raise more capital.

Large sales of common stock by the companies would dilute the value of existing
shares. In 4 p.m. composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Fannie
shares fell 13 per cent, or $2.96 (U.S.), to $19.81 apiece, while Freddie shares
fell 12 per cent, or $2.26, to $17.39.

Anxieties over the companies' prospects have been rising for months and were
fuelled yesterday by a bearish report from a Credit Suisse analyst and a weekend
article in Barron's magazine entitled, "Is Fannie Mae Toast?"

The Bush administration and Congress are counting on Fannie and Freddie to play
a big role in propping up the housing and mortgage markets. But they recorded
losses totalling about $9-billion in last year's second half, and analysts
expect continued losses this year as house prices sink and defaults pile up.
Those losses are constraining the companies' ability to buy or guarantee
mortgages, even as other investors dump mortgage-backed securities. As a result,
mortgage interest rates for consumers have risen in recent weeks despite the
U.S. Federal Reserve's cuts in short-term interest rates.

U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson last week argued that financial
institutions generally should seek to raise capital. Both Fannie and Freddie
have said recently they don't have any immediate need for more capital, a stance
backed by their regulator, the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight.

But the two companies "would be best off by raising capital," said Frederick
Cannon, chief equity strategist at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods. That would allow
them to buy mortgage securities whose yields have soared to attractive levels,
Mr. Cannon said.

Moshe Orenbuch, an analyst at Credit Suisse, yesterday nearly doubled his
forecasted loss for Freddie this year to $2.6-billion, or $4 a share. He
forecast a slight profit of $32-million, or 5 cents a share, for 2009. For
Fannie Mae, Mr. Orenbuch forecast a loss of $3.4-billion, or $3.50 a share, this
year, and a profit of $245-million, or 25 cents a share, in 2009.

Kenneth Posner, an analyst at Morgan Stanley, sees "moderate" losses for the two
companies in the current quarter but expects both to recover to about the
break-even level for the rest of the year. He believes the companies can avoid
raising more capital this year. If needed, they could conserve capital by
cutting their dividends and buying fewer mortgages, Mr. Posner said.

The Barron's article said Fannie may need to write down the value of $13-billion
of deferred tax credits carried on its books. These credits can be used only to
the extent that the company is profitable. Fannie acknowledged in its recent
10-K securities filing for 2007 that it would need to write down the value of
the tax credits if it determines that it is unlikely to be able to use all of
them and said the effects on its capital likely would be "material."

Freddie reported $10.3-billion of deferred tax credits at the end of 2007 and
also acknowledged it would have to write them down if it can't generate
sufficient earnings.

Fannie said about 1 per cent of the conventional single-family loans it owns or
guarantees were 90 days or more overdue at the end of 2007. The Mortgage Bankers
Association reported an industry-wide rate of 3.6 per cent of all home mortgages
at the end of last year.

But the companies guarantee so many mortgages that even a relatively small rise
in defaults translates into billions of dollars of losses. At year-end, Fannie
owned or guaranteed about $2.53-trillion of single-family mortgages, around a
quarter of U.S. home loans outstanding. About 89 per cent of those loans have
fixed rates and 5 per cent involve borrowers with credit scores below 620,
generally considered subprime.

Fannie puts its overall exposure to subprime mortgages at $54.1-billion and its
exposure to Alt-A loans - a category between prime and subprime, typically
involving loans for which borrowers don't fully document their incomes - at
$350.6-billion. Most of that subprime and Alt-A exposure comes from holdings of
AAA-rated mortgage securities created by Wall Street firms. Fannie already has
had to write down the value of those securities, and some analysts say bigger
writedowns may be needed.

Freddie, which also holds subprime and Alt-A mortgage securities, is due to meet
with investors and analysts in New York tomorrow.

High Anxiety

* The Fear: Worries that home-mortgage defaults will force Fannie and Freddie to
raise more capital pushed down their shares.

* The Background: Losses are constraining their ability to buy or guarantee
mortgages.

* The Fix: Raising capital would allow the U.S. government-

backed companies to buy more mortgage securities, propping up housing markets.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              193 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             June 5, 2013 Wednesday

Comeback in Sight for Private Mortgage Bonds: Interactive Graphic

BYLINE: Harry Terris

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 178 No. 87

LENGTH: 743  words


Regulators have been trying to price Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac out of their
dominant shares of the secondary market for home loans. After a pair of giant
price increases, the strategy may soon bear fruit.

The fees Fannie charges to guarantee new mortgages have nearly doubled over the
last year, far surpassing levels that prevailed the previous decade. Prices for
private-label mortgage bonds (those without federal guarantees) already make
them a financially sensible destination for a sliver of high credit-quality
originations, some analysts reckon.A few more twists of the dial - additional
fee hikes, a reduction in the size of loans Fannie and Freddie are allowed to
guarantee - could open the way to large-scale issuance without direct government
support. (The following graphic shows guarantee rates over time. Text continues
below.)

The Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees Fannie and Freddie, is trying
to encourage greater market participation by private capital to cut the
government's exposure to defaults.

Guarantee fees on mortgages Fannie covered during the first quarter increased
25.5 basis points from the year prior to 54.4 basis points as a ratio of
principal balance. Annualized guarantee revenue divided by the average size of
Fannie's book of single-family business increased 6.7 basis points during the
same time to 33.5 basis points. (It takes time for changes in pricing policies
to filter through the portfolio since existing mortgages are subject to rates
set when they closed.)

Freddie does not provide aggregate rates for new business, but its annualized
guarantee revenue rose 7.2 basis points over the same period to 30.4 basis
points of its average book of business.

Both government-sponsored enterprises instituted two major rate increases last
year: 10 basis points in April connected with the extension of a payroll tax
cut, and another 10 basis points in the fourth quarter. The second increase was
mandated by the FHFA as a part of its effort to encourage private sector lending
under its strategic plan.

From 2004 through 2006, when issuance of private mortgage bonds surged with home
prices, guarantee revenue ranged from about 16 basis points to about 22 basis
points of outstanding mortgages. At the time, Fannie and Freddie reported
intense price competition. (Accounting recognition of guarantee fees was also
buffeted by changes in interest rates, which influence the speed at which
borrowers refinance and thus the life of loans and the period over which upfront
charges are amortized.)

In a report last month, Barclays analysts figured nonagency execution is now
"somewhat competitive" for about $30 billion of purchase originations annually,
or about 12% of the purchase mortgages Fannie and Freddie packaged into bonds in
the preceding year. The analysts compared interest rates on agency mortgage
bonds and guarantee fees, on the one hand, with rates on triple-A nonagency
mortgage bonds and the size of "credit enhancement" tranches prescribed by
ratings agency criteria for mortgages of different credit quality on the other.
Barclays estimated yields for these loss-absorbing layers with a weighted
average rate for bonds ranging from double-A to unrated, and used this piece as
a proxy for the price of credit risk - or the guarantee fee equivalent - in the
nonagency universe.

Barclays stuck with its forecast of $12 billion to $15 billion of nonagency
issuance this year, which already represents something of a comeback for a
market that came to a standstill after the financial crisis. If the ceiling for
GSE mortgages were reduced from $625,000 to $417,000, $80 billion to $90 billion
of issuance could flow into nonagency bonds, the analysts wrote. A further
increase in guarantee fees on the order of 10 to 15 basis points could prompt a
shift "on a much larger scale."

For policymakers, the big question is how much to reduce the federal role in
mortgage finance. Phillip Swagel, an economics professor at the University of
Maryland and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, has
advocated a competitive system that puts a lot of private capital in front of
government insurance. In Senate testimony last month, he argued the government
would inevitably intervene if the availability of mortgages again becomes
imperiled. "A housing finance system that is notionally fully private will
inadvertently recreate the implicit guarantee in the previous system that failed
so badly."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              194 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Asset Securitization Report

                                   July 2013

Comeback in Sight for Private Mortgage Bonds

BYLINE: Editorial Staff

SECTION: MBS REPORT; Pg. 19 Vol. 13 No. 7

LENGTH: 745  words


Regulators have been trying to price Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac out of their
dominant shares of the secondary market for home loans. After a pair of giant
price increases, the strategy may soon bear fruit.

The fees Fannie charges to guarantee new mortgages have nearly doubled over the
last year, far surpassing levels that prevailed the previous decade. Prices for
private-label mortgage bonds (those without federal guarantees) already make
them a financially sensible destination for a sliver of high credit-quality
originations, some analysts reckon.

A few more twists of the dial - additional fee hikes, a reduction in the size of
loans Fannie and Freddie are allowed to guarantee - could open the way to
large-scale issuance without direct government support. (The graphic to the
right shows guarantee rates over time.)

The Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees Fannie and Freddie, is trying
to encourage greater market participation by private capital to cut the
government's exposure to defaults.

Guarantee fees on mortgages Fannie covered during the first quarter increased
25.5 basis points from the year prior to 54.4 basis points as a ratio of
principal balance. Annualized guarantee revenue divided by the average size of
Fannie's book of single-family business increased 6.7 basis points during the
same time to 33.5 basis points. (It takes time for changes in pricing policies
to filter through the portfolio since existing mortgages are subject to rates
set when they closed.)

Freddie does not provide aggregate rates for new business, but its annualized
guarantee revenue rose 7.2 basis points over the same period to 30.4 basis
points of its average book of business.

Both government-sponsored enterprises instituted two major rate increases last
year: 10 basis points in April connected with the extension of a payroll tax
cut, and another 10 basis points in the fourth quarter. The second increase was
mandated by the FHFA as a part of its effort to encourage private sector lending
under its strategic plan.

From 2004 through 2006, when issuance of private mortgage bonds surged with home
prices, guarantee revenue ranged from about 16 basis points to about 22 basis
points of outstanding mortgages. At the time, Fannie and Freddie reported
intense price competition. (Accounting recognition of guarantee fees was also
buffeted by changes in interest rates, which influence the speed at which
borrowers refinance and thus the life of loans and the period over which upfront
charges are amortized.)

In a report last month, Barclays analysts figured nonagency execution is now
"somewhat competitive" for about $30 billion of purchase originations annually,
or about 12% of the purchase mortgages Fannie and Freddie packaged into bonds in
the preceding year. The analysts compared interest rates on agency mortgage
bonds and guarantee fees, on the one hand, with rates on triple-A nonagency
mortgage bonds and the size of "credit enhancement" tranches prescribed by
ratings agency criteria for mortgages of different credit quality on the other.
Barclays estimated yields for these loss-absorbing layers with a weighted
average rate for bonds ranging from double-A to unrated, and used this piece as
a proxy for the price of credit risk - or the guarantee fee equivalent - in the
nonagency universe.

Barclays stuck with its forecast of $12 billion to $15 billion of nonagency
issuance this year, which already represents something of a comeback for a
market that came to a standstill after the financial crisis. If the ceiling for
GSE mortgages were reduced from $625,000 to $417,000, $80 billion to $90 billion
of issuance could flow into nonagency bonds, the analysts wrote. A further
increase in guarantee fees on the order of 10 to 15 basis points could prompt a
shift "on a much larger scale."

For policymakers, the big question is how much to reduce the federal role in
mortgage finance. Phillip Swagel, an economics professor at the University of
Maryland and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, has
advocated a competitive system that puts a lot of private capital in front of
government insurance. In Senate testimony last month, he argued the government
would inevitably intervene if the availability of mortgages again becomes
imperiled. "A housing finance system that is notionally fully private will
inadvertently recreate the implicit guarantee in the previous system that failed
so badly."

By Harry Terris, American Banker

URL: http://www.structuredfinancenews.com/

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: ASR


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              195 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             March 13, 2012 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Housebuilders set to benefit from NewBuy scheme;
QUESTOR

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 598 words


Housebuilders

Questor says Buy

WITH the launch of the NewBuy Guarantee scheme yesterday, Britain's
housebuilders find themselves officially the focus of Government efforts to give
the economy a fillip.

Regardless of the rights and wrongs of the taxpayer propping up a business
sector, the question for investors is whether the scheme's arrival means now is
the time to buy into listed builders.

Under the initiative, the state and the builder will guarantee part of the
mortgage on a new build property, reducing the risks for the lender - and so
enabling the return of home loans requiring as little as a 5pc deposit.

It is important to note that the scheme, intended to support some 100,000
property sales, is very clearly aimed at boosting the housebuilding sector. If
the Government simply wanted to jump-start the housing market, it would apply to
all types of housing, not just new build.

The rationale is that stimulating housebuilding is a sensible way of boosting
wider economic growth, as it is a labour-intensive industry which by its nature
is UK-focused.

The Government has nailed its colours to the mast with this initiative which
means there is political will to make it work. The thinking is that lending to
the new build slice of the housing market could rise by 10pc.

No surprise then that seven housebuilders were part of the scheme at its launch:
Barratt, Bellway, Bovis, Linden Homes (part of Galliford Try), Persimmon, Redrow
and Taylor Wimpey. Crest Nicholson will join in soon.

The lenders, with less to gain and more regulatory and practical hoops to jump
through to launch their NewBuy products, were not out in the same force. Still,
the worry that the banks would price these new products so that even with a
small deposit required they would look unattractive to the consumer did not
materialise.

Some of the products unveiled offer interest rates under the 5pc mark, below the
level at which the industry worried demand would start to suffer.

In the same vein early indications have been that demand will be strong, with
some 28,000 people registering their interest in the scheme.

The upshot is that the major housebuilders look ready to benefit from a marked
rise in sales volumes, which makes them more attractive to Questor.

It is true that the advent of the scheme has been well flagged, meaning many in
the markets were well aware that this boost was on the horizon.

However Questor believes there is long term-value in the sector, although its
volatility means it is not for the faint-hearted.

The UK is structurally short of housing, lacking the swathes of empty homes
which can be seen in areas of the US and Ireland where housing stock was
overbuilt during the boom.

Of course, the reality behind the truism that housebuilders have adapted to the
"new normal" of a stagnant housing market and are busy repairing their margins
is that the various builders are in widely different places along this journey
of recovery.

Questor remains a fan of Bovis Homes and Barratt Developments, having recently
tipped both these shares for a buy.

Persimmon, which has promised to return £1.9bn to shareholders over the next
decade, also appeals for this certainty.

NEWBUY HOUSEBUILDERS Bellway share price NewBuy Closing Move Estimated
Housebuilder share price yesterday 2012 Yield CLOSE 826p 850p Barratt 141.8p
+1.36pc 0.7pc 800 Bellway 826p +3.06pc 2.1pc 750 Berkeley £14.14p +2.84pc 0.0pc
700 Bovis 502.5p +0.3pc 1.2pc 650 Persimmon 670p -0.07pc 0.0pc 600 Redrow 132.9p
+1.45pc 0.8pc 550 Taylor Wimpey 49.96p +1.2pc 0.0pc 500 M MJJ A S O A DJNF
SOURCES: REUTERS | LIBERUM CAPITAL

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2012 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              196 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                          November 21, 2007 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Freddie Mac expects deeper losses

BYLINE: Noelle Knox

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 445 words


Stunning Wall Street with a $2 billion quarterly loss, Freddie Mac on Tuesday
warned that the worst is yet to come: It said its mortgage losses will deepen
through 2009, and it's considering slashing its dividend in half and issuing a
"large" amount of preferred stock to raise cash.

Wall Street reacted by pounding the company's shares, which lost nearly 29% of
their market value. The stock closed at $26.74, off $10.76.

Freddie, the nation's second-largest buyer and guarantor of mortgages, blamed
eroding credit quality and falling home prices, which have caused more
homeowners to fall behind on their loans.

Concern that the housing market is still deteriorating was echoed by one of the
nation's largest home builders, D.R. Horton. The company reported a $50 million
loss in the July-through-September quarter and said that despite home price
cuts, nearly half of its prospective buyers had canceled their contracts.

In many parts of the country, builders are axing construction plans. In October,
construction of single-family homes slumped to the lowest point in 16 years, the
Commerce Department said Tuesday.

The pain, though, is spread unevenly. Home sales in parts of the Dakotas and
Carolinas, for instance, remain healthy. At the same time, many cities in
California, Florida, Arizona and Nevada have seen double-digit drops in sales
and prices and a spike in foreclosures.

California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger announced an agreement Tuesday to help
several thousand of the 500,000 borrowers in the state whose adjustable-rate
loans will reset to higher rates. The plan will effectively freeze the rates at
their current levels for two to five years, he said, to allow property prices to
recover.

Among Freddie Mac's darkest projections is that up to 5% of the loans it holds
or guarantees could go into default. It says losses could hit nearly $17
billion, and it expects the worst hit to come in 2009.

Two weeks ago, Fannie Mae, a larger rival, reported a $1.4 billion quarterly
loss, and it's also raised money by selling preferred stock.

Freddie and Fannie were created by Congress to foster homeownership by buying
and packaging mortgages. Together, the two own or guarantee 40% of the U.S.
mortgage market.

Congress is considering legislation to raise the current loan limits for Freddie
and Fannie, which mainly serve people with solid, or "prime," credit.

"What is most alarming is that Freddie's earnings announcement provides
confirmation that the foreclosure crisis has officially spilled over into the
prime market," says Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., who has introduced one such
bill. "The administration must act to use all of the tools at its disposal."

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Robert W. Ahrens, USA TODAY, Source: Freddie Mac (MAP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              197 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                               February 15, 2017

There's a Better Way for Fannie to Join the Rental Market

BYLINE: Julia Gordon

SECTION: VOICES Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 848  words


Recently, initial public offering documents for Invitation Homes disclosed that
it had reachedan agreement with Fannie Maefor a $1 billion debt guarantee for
its single-family rental portfolio. Invitation Homes is a subsidiary of one of
the world's largest private equity funds, the Blackstone Group, which currently
manages $367 billion in assets. Instead of backing private equity giants with no
strings attached, Fannie Mae should instead target its efforts to make the
single-family-rental market safer and more affordable for America's families.

To understand what's at issue here, it's important to note thatmore than half of
all renters reside in single-family homes(defined as properties with one to four
living units). The market has grown dramatically since the foreclosure crisis,
as it appears many families who lost their homes during the crisismoved into
another single-familyhome rather than an apartment.

But the single-family rental market is not just large; it is also troubled.
Current record-high rents and a shortage of units enable investors to rent out
distressed properties without any market pressure to repair them.In some
instances, owners of distressed properties pass off their responsibility to
maintain rental units onto the tenants under the guise of predatory products
such as"rent-to-own" schemes or land installment contracts.
Unscrupulousinvestors are further aided by online auction sites, which enable
people around the globeto source low-value propertieson the cheap, either
collecting rent paymentsuntil the home fallsapart or simply waiting until home
values rise to flip them.

Like many other single-family rental companies, Invitation Homes got its start
after the foreclosure crisis caused national home values to crash. It was
created as a vehicle for Blackstone to buy up thousands of homes at
bargain-basement prices, oftencrowding out aspiring owner-occupantsby paying in
cash. Among other sources of financing, the company has pioneered
thesecuritization of single-family rentalhomes. Invitation Homes currently owns
close to 50,000 homes, most of which it rents out, and it has pioneered the
securitization of rental homes.

Given its ready access to inexpensive capital and its track record of purchasing
thousands upon thousands of homes, Invitation Homes hardly needs the taxpayer
subsidy that is baked into any guarantee from a government-sponsored enterprise.
With that in mind, Fannie Mae should consider taking the following three steps
to make the single-family market safer and more affordable.

First, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac should make it their first priority to help
finance those single-family rental operators whose core organizational mission
is to provide affordable housing and advance community development.

The National Community Stabilization Trust works with hundreds of mission-based
nonprofits and developers who purchase and rehabilitate distressed properties.
Like potential homebuyers, these groups lose properties to cash investors who do
not work to improve either the house or neighborhood. But more to the point,
these groups also would like to scale up their work in the single-family rental
market - but only if they can access capital at a price that makes their good
work achievable.

Additionally, Fannie Mae should include conditions regarding responsible market
behavior alongside any support for investors in single-family rental portfolios.
Deals should prohibit predatory products such as land contracts or sham
"rent-to-own" arrangements and require landlords to accept housing vouchers from
families fortunate enough to have them, as well as otherprovide other
protections.

For example, in itsrecently finalized Duty-to-Serve rule, the Federal Housing
Finance Agency, offered credit conditionally under the rule ensuring appropriate
tenant protections when guaranteeing blanket loans on manufactured home
communitiesand on individual chattel loans- categories notorious for consumer
abuses. A similar approach should be taken here.

Finally, Fannie Mae should limit its involvement in the single-family rental
market to deals that will provide affordable rental housing to the low- and
moderate-income people who need it the most. While rents are high across the
board, with about half of all renters paying more than the 30% of their income
for rent that is typically considered "affordable," the situation is far worse
for lower-income families, the majority of which spendmore than half of their
incomeon rent.

Fannie Mae should not double down on strategies that funnel wealth straight from
Main Street to Wall Street. Instead, the GSEs should help support mission-based
organizations working to strengthen neighborhoods, set standards for the vast
single-family rental sector, and enable new opportunities for America's families
to find affordable housing. The FHFA should step in immediately to ensure that
additional involvement in this market is appropriately targeted and all
consequences are fully considered.

Julia Gordon is the executive vice president of National Community Stabilization
Trust.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              198 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                               February 15, 2017

There's a Better Way for Fannie to Join the Rental Market

BYLINE: Julia Gordon

SECTION: VOICES Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 848  words


Recently, initial public offering documents for Invitation Homes disclosed that
it had reachedan agreement with Fannie Maefor a $1 billion debt guarantee for
its single-family rental portfolio. Invitation Homes is a subsidiary of one of
the world's largest private equity funds, the Blackstone Group, which currently
manages $367 billion in assets. Instead of backing private equity giants with no
strings attached, Fannie Mae should instead target its efforts to make the
single-family-rental market safer and more affordable for America's families.

To understand what's at issue here, it's important to note thatmore than half of
all renters reside in single-family homes(defined as properties with one to four
living units). The market has grown dramatically since the foreclosure crisis,
as it appears many families who lost their homes during the crisismoved into
another single-familyhome rather than an apartment.

But the single-family rental market is not just large; it is also troubled.
Current record-high rents and a shortage of units enable investors to rent out
distressed properties without any market pressure to repair them.In some
instances, owners of distressed properties pass off their responsibility to
maintain rental units onto the tenants under the guise of predatory products
such as"rent-to-own" schemes or land installment contracts.
Unscrupulousinvestors are further aided by online auction sites, which enable
people around the globeto source low-value propertieson the cheap, either
collecting rent paymentsuntil the home fallsapart or simply waiting until home
values rise to flip them.

Like many other single-family rental companies, Invitation Homes got its start
after the foreclosure crisis caused national home values to crash. It was
created as a vehicle for Blackstone to buy up thousands of homes at
bargain-basement prices, oftencrowding out aspiring owner-occupantsby paying in
cash. Among other sources of financing, the company has pioneered
thesecuritization of single-family rentalhomes. Invitation Homes currently owns
close to 50,000 homes, most of which it rents out, and it has pioneered the
securitization of rental homes.

Given its ready access to inexpensive capital and its track record of purchasing
thousands upon thousands of homes, Invitation Homes hardly needs the taxpayer
subsidy that is baked into any guarantee from a government-sponsored enterprise.
With that in mind, Fannie Mae should consider taking the following three steps
to make the single-family market safer and more affordable.

First, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac should make it their first priority to help
finance those single-family rental operators whose core organizational mission
is to provide affordable housing and advance community development.

The National Community Stabilization Trust works with hundreds of mission-based
nonprofits and developers who purchase and rehabilitate distressed properties.
Like potential homebuyers, these groups lose properties to cash investors who do
not work to improve either the house or neighborhood. But more to the point,
these groups also would like to scale up their work in the single-family rental
market - but only if they can access capital at a price that makes their good
work achievable.

Additionally, Fannie Mae should include conditions regarding responsible market
behavior alongside any support for investors in single-family rental portfolios.
Deals should prohibit predatory products such as land contracts or sham
"rent-to-own" arrangements and require landlords to accept housing vouchers from
families fortunate enough to have them, as well as otherprovide other
protections.

For example, in itsrecently finalized Duty-to-Serve rule, the Federal Housing
Finance Agency, offered credit conditionally under the rule ensuring appropriate
tenant protections when guaranteeing blanket loans on manufactured home
communitiesand on individual chattel loans- categories notorious for consumer
abuses. A similar approach should be taken here.

Finally, Fannie Mae should limit its involvement in the single-family rental
market to deals that will provide affordable rental housing to the low- and
moderate-income people who need it the most. While rents are high across the
board, with about half of all renters paying more than the 30% of their income
for rent that is typically considered "affordable," the situation is far worse
for lower-income families, the majority of which spendmore than half of their
incomeon rent.

Fannie Mae should not double down on strategies that funnel wealth straight from
Main Street to Wall Street. Instead, the GSEs should help support mission-based
organizations working to strengthen neighborhoods, set standards for the vast
single-family rental sector, and enable new opportunities for America's families
to find affordable housing. The FHFA should step in immediately to ensure that
additional involvement in this market is appropriately targeted and all
consequences are fully considered.

Julia Gordon is the executive vice president of National Community Stabilization
Trust.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              199 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  July 7, 2008

Murin ApprovedFor GNMA Post

BYLINE: BRIAN COLLINS

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 384 words


WASHINGTON-The Senate has confirmed Joseph J. Murin to be the new president of
Ginnie Mae at a time when the secondary market agency is having a banner year.

The federal agency is on track to guarantee more than $200 billion in
mortgage-backed securities by the end of this calendar year and it just
guaranteed $1.1 billion worth of jumbo MBS in June.

Mr. Murin has 35 years experience in the mortgage and banking business. He was
the owner and managing partner of Mortgage Settlement Network, a Pittsburgh
company that provides title, appraisal and closing services. He sold the company
in August 2007 just before his nomination by President George Bush to the Ginnie
Mae post.

Before establishing the settlement services company, Mr. Murin served as the
chief executive of Basis 100, a Toronto-based mortgage technology company.

The Senate also confirmed Elizabeth Duke as a member of the Federal Reserve
Board just before lawmakers adjourned for the July 4 recess.

Ms. Duke is a Virginia commercial banker and former chairman of the American
Bankers Association.

At his confirmation hearing, Mr. Murin expressed support for housing legislation
that would expand the Federal Housing Administration loan program to refinance
at-risk homeowners and prevent foreclosures. The nominee pledged that Ginnie Mae
would "act diligently" to securitize those FHA loans and achieve best execution.

"If it is enacted, I think the investor community will embrace it from what I am
told and what I see," Mr. Murin told the Senate Banking Committee. The Senate is
expected to continue its consideration of the housing reform and FHA foreclosure
rescue bill this week.

Ginnie Mae guarantees single-family and multifamily MBS issued by private
lenders that originate FHA, Department of Veterans Affairs and Rural Housing
Service loans.

During the first five months of this year, Ginnie guaranteed the issuance of
$79.8 billion in MBS, up 150% from the same period in 2007.

And Ginnie Mae's business is expected to get a boost in the second half of this
year as the origination of FHA jumbo takes off.

In February, Congress temporarily raised the loan limits for FHA, Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac as part of an economic stimulus package to provide liquidity for the
jumbo loan market.In June, Ginnie jumbo MBS issuance exceeded $1 billion.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com/

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: NM



                       Copyright 2008  SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              200 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                             January 9, 2009 Friday

Freddie, Fannie extend foreclosure suspensions

BYLINE: The Monterey County Herald

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 301 words


WASHINGTON (AP)   Mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac said Thursday they
will extend the suspension of foreclosure sales and evictions from single-family
homes through the end of January.

The companies suspended foreclosures through the holidays, but were expected to
resume proceedings after today.

The government-controlled home loan giants said the extension will allow
borrowers facing foreclosure to keep their homes as it works with mortgage
servicers to find options for troubled mortgage holders under the Streamlined
Modification Program.

Freddie and Fannie began the modification program in December, aiming to create
more affordable mortgage payments for borrowers at risk of foreclosure.

The program applies to borrowers who have missed three payments or more, own and
occupy their homes, and have not filed for bankruptcy.

Under the program, borrowers can reduce their interest rate, extend the life of
the loan or defer payments on part of the principal.

The extended hiatus on foreclosures will give Fannie more time to launch a new
policy that will allow renters in company-owned foreclosed properties to stay in
their homes, Fannie said in a news release. Details of the new policy have not
been announced.

Fannie personnel have been reviewing seriously delinquent loans to see if
borrowers have been contacted and all options to work out their situations have
been exhausted, the company said.

Freddie Mac Chief Executive David Moffett said in a statement the mortgage giant
is "committed to pursuing every responsible opportunity to reduce foreclosures
and accelerate the return of stability to the U.S. housing market."

Fannie and Freddie own or guarantee about half of the $11.5 trillion in U.S.
outstanding home loan debt. The government seized control of the sibling
companies in September.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              201 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                February 1, 1988

FSLIC Security Is Expected Soon

BYLINE: By PAUL MUOLO

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: ANAHEIM, Calif.


The Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. may soon come to market with a
mortgage security backed by commercial loans culled from S&Ls in receivership.

The first offering may come in the first quarter of this year, said FSLIC
director of loan marketing and servicing Stephen R. Lowe.

Mr. Lowe, in an interview with National Thrift News here, said the first
offering would probably involve the sale of a $ 20 million to $ 25 million
security backed by performing commercial loans made by failed thrifts.  But the
insurer has more than $ 1.3 billion in product that could be sold.

FSLIC has talked to about five Wall Street firms about the plan, he said.  He
specified that the loans used for the deals would be taken from thrifts that are
in receiverships, and not thrifts that are in the Federal Home Loan Bank Board's
management consignment program.

Mr. Lowe, a former housing official at the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, has been working on the plan since he joined FSLIC four months ago.

The plan awaits Bank Board approval and "has not yet been signed off on," he
said.

Under the proposed plan, Wall Street issuers would package and sell the
securities for FSLIC.

Bank Board chairman M. Danny Wall as reported in NTN, first announced the
concept of such securities in Congressional testimony in October.

"The idea is to get the cash flow out of these mortgages," Mr. Lowe said.  "We
can get more for these loans if they're packaged and sold as securities.  Once
we can do a commercial deal it'll be easier to do a single-family security."

He noted that any securities sold by FSLIC would not carry a Federal guarantee.

If the plan is approved, he said, it is likely FSLIC would then try and sell
securities backed by single-family performing loans that are pulled out of
thrifts that are under receiverships.

Mr. Lowe said that one of the biggest problems facing the project is the "legal
implications that come in tandem with issuing securities.  I'm told there can be
some real headaches."

He added "there are also political considerations.  Congress may not like the
idea that Wall Street will be making money off these securities, but still it
looks like this could be the best alternative."

He added that "I'm to the point now that if we can't do a deal in the next
couple of months we're going to have to stop working on the idea for the rest of
the year.  I just can't spare the staff."

Mr. Lowe and a staff of nine are responsible for servicing of receivership loans
and marketing the performing loans for sale.

According to the latest Bank Board statistics FSLIC has $ 1.3 billion in
performing loans available for sale.  About $ 871 million of these loans, or
65%, consist of residential loans; $ 377 million, or 28% in commercial product;
and $ 85 million, or 7% in consumer loans.

It is in the process of evaluating all of the performing loans that are in
receivership institutions.

With additional funds provided by the recapitalization FSLIC has expanded its
staff to try and sell these loans.

"When everyone thinks of FSLIC trying to sell loans they think it's all REO
(real estate owned)," he said.  "Most people don't realize we have performing
loans for sale."

Prospective buyers include the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., the Federal
National Mortgage Association, thrifts and "other investors," he said.

Echoing views expressed by Bank Board chairman M. Danny Wall, Mr. Lowe said the
agency hopes to sell about $ 1 billion of the $ 1.3 billion in loans by March
31.

"We hope to get to the point where we're selling more than we're taking in," he
said.

FSLIC has a pool of about 50 receiverships to chose from.  Failed S&Ls that have
loans in the $ 1.3 billion pool include Bohemian Savings and Loan Association,
St. Louis, Mo.; First South, F.A., Pinebluff, Ark.; Vernon (Texas) Savings and
Loan Association; and Centennial Savings and Loan Association, Guerneville,
Calif.

According to a Bank Board circular that Mr. Lowe was carrying with him at the
U.S. League's national secondary mortgage market conference here, the defunct
Vernon has $ 75 million in performing one-to-four family loans; $ 1.9 million in
installment loans and $ 36 million in commercial loans.

The sale of any loans, the circular notes "is typically conducted on an as is
basis."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, Performing Loans by Category total - $ 1,334,725,468, The
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. plans to sell loans culled from thrifts
under Federal receivership.  The $ 1.3 billion total includes $ 871 million in
residential, $ 377 million in commercial product and $ 85 million in consumer
loans.

                   Copyright 1988 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              202 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 12, 2012

GSEs' MF Businesses May Be Spun Off by FHFA

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 36 No. 24

LENGTH: 539  words


The apartment market is recovering nicely and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are
enjoying the ride.

Multifamily loan production at both GSEs grew by at least 30% in 2011 from the
previous year with Fannie reporting a $583 million profit on its multifamily
guarantee business-more than double what it earned the year prior.

While Fannie and Freddie's single-family businesses continue to lose money
overall, the GSEs still have a profit center that has been contributing to their
bottom line. And this profit center has not gone unnoticed by their regulator,
the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which recently issued a strategic plan for
operating the GSEs in conservatorships over the next few years. As part of that
plan, the FHFA advanced the idea of possibly spinning off and privatizing their
multifamily businesses.

"Unlike the single-family credit guarantee business, each enterprise's
multifamily business has weathered the financial crisis and generated positive
cash flow," the strategic plan says.

Fannie Mae, of course, is quite aware that its MF business is thriving. In an
interview with NMN, GSE vice president for multifamily loan production Manny
Menendez noted that the GSEs and Federal Housing Administration dominated the MF
market immediately after the financial crisis.

However, last year life insurance companies and certain commercial banks and
thrifts increased apartment lending. "We believe the life insurance companies
originated $11 billion last year," the Fannie VP said, which would be one of
their biggest years since 2007.

Fannie-approved lenders (known as Delegated Underwriting Servicers) originated
$24.2 billion of MF loans last year, up from $17.1 billion in 2010. The GSEs
also issued $10 billion in new multifamily MBS in 2011, compared to $8.7 billion
in 2010.

The only precrisis player that has not staged a comeback is the commercial
mortgage-backed securities market. The 30-day delinquency rate on CMBS
multifamily loans is 14.6%, according to the latest Trepp LLC report.

The 60-day delinquency rate on Fannie-guaranteed MF loans is 0.59%.

Menendez attributes this performance to the DU lender/servicers and risk-sharing
arrangement Fannie has with its 25 DU lenders. Under this arrangement, the
lender assumes one-third of the credit risk on a loan and Fannie assumes the
remaining risk. When losses occur, the lender and Fannie share the loss
proportionately.

"We think we have a unique business model because we share risk with our
lenders," Menendez said. "We have gotten through the cycle very well from a
delinquency prospective."

The FHFA's strategic plan also notes that this risk-share feature makes the
multifamily business an attractive candidate for privatization.

The GSEs are "much further along in terms of risk sharing with multifamily
lenders and investors than on the single-family side," the plan says.

FHFA acting director Edward DeMarco has ordered Fannie and Freddie to conduct an
analysis of how much capital would be required for the multifamily units to
survive as standalone entities-and how such a move might impact loan pricing.

"This is really meant to be an assessment process. We don't have a predetermined
outcome," DeMarco told NMN last month when the strategic plan was issued.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              203 of 998 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday
                                National Edition

Fannie, Freddie to relax mortgages

BYLINE: Janet Whitman, Financial Post

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. FP1

LENGTH: 653  words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


NEW YORK - As the weakening economy threatens to push millions more Americans
into foreclosure, the U. S. government is dramatically stepping up efforts to
keep homeowners from defaulting by making their monthly mortgage payments more
affordable.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the two ailing mortgage-finance giants seized by the
U. S. government in September, yesterday were given the authority to modify
hundreds of thousands of home loans.

The new drive to keep Americans in their homes comes as U. S. government
officials recognize that the ballooning foreclosure rate is putting the
already-slumping economy in much greater peril.

It also follows mounting pressure on the government to help out homeowners since
the authorization of a controversial US$ 700-billion, taxpayer-funded bailout
for banks hurt by the housing crisis.

"Stabilizing our financial system will require not only strengthening our
financial institutions so they are able to lend to our communities, but also
helping homeowners avoid preventable foreclosures," Neel Kashkari, the interim
U. S. Treasury official in charge of the bailout, said yesterday afternoon
during a televised Washington briefing announcing the new program.

The plan is less aggressive than a proposal pushed for by Sheila Bair, the
outspoken chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.

The proposal offered by the FDIC, a government agency that insures bank
accounts, could have helped as many as three million of at-risk homeowners,
instead of the hundreds of thousands under yesterday's plan, by getting the
government to provide a partial guarantee for bank losses on modified mortgages.

The plan from Ms. Bair, a Republican who has been cited as a contender to take
over as U. S. Treasury Secretary in the Barack Obama administration, would have
required about US$50-billion from the US$700-billion bailout fund.

Ms. Bair, who didn't attend yesterday's press briefing, said in a statement the
program unveiled was a step in the right direction but doesn't go far enough to
achieve wide-scale modifications of distressed mortgages.

"As we lend and invest hundreds of billions of dollars to help institutions
suffering leveraged losses from defaulting mortgages, we must also devote some
of that money to fixing the front-end problem: too many unaffordable home loans
," she said in the statement.

Officials at the briefing said their mortgage-relief program would complement
workout offerings from banks such as Bank of America Corp., Citigroup Inc. and
JPMorgan Chase & Co. It is targeting high-risk borrowers who are at least three
months behind on their mortgage payments because of financial hardship, such as
a lost job.

Homeowners who qualify could see their mortgage payments trimmed to 38% of their
monthly income, a reduction achieved by cutting the interest rate, extending the
life of the loan or putting off payment on part of the principal. Monthly
interest rates for some borrowers could fall as low as 3%.

"As housing prices have fallen, delinquencies on mortgages have tripled ...
[hurting] families, their neighbours, whole communities and the overall housing
market," said James Lockhart, director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, an
independent federal agency that now oversees Fannie and Freddie. "We need to
stop this downward spiral."

Fannie and Freddie, which own or guarantee about 58% of all single-family
mortgages across the United States, could end up offering less-burdensome
mortgage payments for hundreds of thousands of homeowners.

With Fannie and Freddiebacked mortgages representing only 20% of serious
delinquencies, government officials are hoping for a broad adoption of the new,
streamlined mortgage-workout process to come to the aid of the millions more
Americans facing foreclosure over the next couple of years.

As an incentive, servicers, the companies that handle monthly mortgage payments,
would be paid US$800 for each modified loan.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Black & White
Photo: Karen Bleier, AFP, Getty Images; Fannie Mae headquarters in Washington,
D. C. Less-burdensome mortgages possible. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2008 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              204 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                January 11, 1993

FHA 1-Family Short on Capital

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Federal Housing Administration's single-family mortgage insurance fund is
far from meeting its capital requirement, according to the Office of Management
and Budget.

OMB's concerns are detailed in the Bush Administration's parting budget proposal
which was released last week.

The budget summary provides a detailed list of areas where the government is
susceptible to financial losses.

OMB classified nine Housing and Urban Development program as "high risk,"
including programs covered by the Federal Housing Administration and the
Government National Mortgage Association.

FHA's Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund has a capital ratio of .28%, well below the
1.25% goal set by the 1990 housing bill.

Moreover, FHA is supposed to achieve a 2% capital ratio by the year 2000.

OMB officials had "reservations" about the ability of the FHA single-family
insurance fund to withstand adverse economic conditions.  The fund is required
by law to actuarially sound.

The FHA fund had $ 300 billion of insurance in force during 1992, and the
Administration estimates it could face $ 1.4 billion in claims in 1993.

Brian Chappelle, staff vice president for residential finance at the Mortgage
Bankers Association said MBA disagrees with HUD's conclusion that the fund will
be hurt by changes mad in the 1992 housing bill which allow homebuyers to
finance more of their closing costs.

He said MBA still is concerned that the insurance fund could suffer from
"adverse selection" as less risky borrowers increasingly turn to private
mortgage insurance.

MBA will propose a "more reasonable" premium structure to retain low-risk
borrowers in the FHA program, he said.

FHA's multifamily loan servicing also was criticized by OMB.

Shortcomings in FHA's multifamily loan servicing efforts have caused an increase
in multifamily foreclosures and noncompliance with housing quality standards,
according to the budget summary.

FHA has $ 44 billion of multifamily mortgage insurance in force.  Again, OMB had
reservations about HUD's progress to improve the multifamily programs.

The present value of future losses under the FHA multifamily programs is between
$ 2 billion and $ 3 billion, according to the budget.

OMB also said the Title I manufactured home and home improvement loans
originated with FHA insurance have caused excessive claims against GNMA's
mortgage-backed securities program.

In 1992, HUD implemented reforms that included raising the qualification
standard for dealers and lenders that participate in the Title I program.

More than $ 3 billion in manufactured home loans and $ 2 billion in home
improvement loans are outstanding.

OMB anticipate that GNMA will receive about $ 100 million in additional
defaults.

The budget summary comes on the heels of a HUD inspector general's report that
admonished both Congress and the Administration for failing to provide HUD with
adequate staffing to oversee the Department's many loan, grant and loan
guarantee programs.

Industry groups also have called for HUD to devote more staff to its loan
guarantee programs.

"Increased staffing, particularly in the multifamily area, always had been an
issue and a need at HUD," said Bronwyn Morgan, director of multifamily housing
for MBA.

In addition, a reallocation of HUF staff would alleviate a bottleneck that has
affected both servicing of multifamily mortgages and processing of applications
for insurance, she said.

Once again, HUD's financial management systems were frequently cited by OMB as a
cause for concern.

"HUD lacks an integrated financial management system and existing systems suffer
from inefficiencies, incompatibilities, and internal control problems," OMB
notes.

Late in 1991, HUD proposed replacing about 100 separate financial systems with
nine integrated systems.

HUD has organized a management committee and hired a contractor to begin
planning.

However, OMB still cited HUD's financial systems as an area where it has
reservations about the department's progress.

HUD's fiscal 1993 budget includes $ 16.7 million for implementation of a
financial systems integration plan.

OMB also said that FHA's single-family property disposition program is
inadequate, though OMB said "significant progress" has been made toward
improving it.

Public and Indian Housing programs, Section Eight rent subsides, and management
of public housing authorities also were cited as areas of risk.

The Administration budget is not binding and likely will be jettisoned by the
Clinton team.

However, the budget cuts proposed by President Bush give a glimpse of what areas
might be sacrificed in a deficit reduction plan.

The Bush budget proposes maintaining a revision in the Veterans Home Loan
program "no-bid" formula.

The change, which was included in legislation passed in 1992, may increase the
cost to lenders when VA guaranteed mortgages go into default.

The Administration also proposed charging a higher loan guaranty fee when
veterans use the program a second or subsequent time.

It also proposed $ 2.5 billion in funding reduction for HUD programs in fiscal
1994 and elimination of $ 759 million in program.

Public housing and certain grant programs bore the brunt of the suggested cuts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart, Chart G-2.  NEW HUD ASSISTED HOUSING UNITS (PRESIDENTS PROGRAM
VS. CURRENT PROGRAM)

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              205 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 June 17, 2013

Comeback in Sight for the Private Mortgage Bond Market

BYLINE: Harry Terris

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6 Vol. 37 No. 38

LENGTH: 619  words


Regulators have been trying to price Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac out of their
dominant shares of the secondary market for home loans. After a pair of giant
price increases, the strategy may soon bear fruit.

The fees Fannie charges to guarantee new mortgages have nearly doubled over the
last year, far surpassing levels that prevailed the previous decade. Prices for
private-label mortgage bonds (those without federal guarantees) already make
them a financially sensible destination for a sliver of high credit-quality
originations, some analysts reckon.

A few more twists of the dial-additional fee hikes, a reduction in the size of
loans Fannie and Freddie are allowed to guarantee-could open the way to
large-scale issuance without direct government support.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees Fannie and Freddie, is trying
to encourage greater market participation by private capital to cut the
government's exposure to defaults. Guarantee fees on mortgages Fannie covered
during the first quarter increased 25.5 basis points from the year prior to 54.4
bps as a ratio of principal balance. Annualized guarantee revenue divided by the
average size of Fannie's book of single-family business increased 6.7 bps during
the same time to 33.5 bps. (It takes time for changes in pricing policies to
filter through the portfolio since existing mortgages are subject to rates set
when they closed.)

Freddie does not provide aggregate rates for new business, but its annualized
guarantee revenue rose 7.2 bps over the same period to 30.4 basis points of its
average book of business. Both government-sponsored enterprises instituted two
major rate increases last year: 10 basis points in April connected with the
extension of a payroll tax cut, and another 10 basis points in the fourth
quarter. The second increase was mandated by the FHFA as a part of its effort to
encourage private sector lending under its strategic plan.

From 2004 through 2006, when issuance of private mortgage bonds surged with home
prices, guarantee revenue ranged from about 16 basis points to about 22 basis
points of outstanding mortgages. At the time, Fannie and Freddie reported
intense price competition. (Accounting recognition of guarantee fees was also
buffeted by changes in interest rates, which influence the speed at which
borrowers refinance and thus the life of loans and the period over which upfront
charges are amortized.)

In a report last month, Barclays analysts figured nonagency execution is now
"somewhat competitive" for about $30 billion of purchase originations annually,
or about 12% of the purchase mortgages Fannie and Freddie packaged into bonds in
the preceding year. The analysts compared interest rates on agency mortgage
bonds and guarantee fees, on the one hand, with rates on triple-A nonagency
mortgage bonds and the size of "credit enhancement" tranches prescribed by
ratings agency criteria for mortgages of different credit quality on the other.
Barclays estimated yields for these loss-absorbing layers with a weighted
average rate for bonds ranging from double-A to unrated, and used this piece as
a proxy for the price of credit risk-or the guarantee fee equivalent-in the
nonagency universe.

Barclays stuck with its forecast of $12 billion to $15 billion of nonagency
issuance this year, which already represents something of a comeback for a
market that came to a standstill after the financial crisis. If the ceiling for
GSE mortgages were reduced from $625,000 to $417,000, $80 billion to $90 billion
of issuance could flow into nonagency bonds, the analysts wrote. A further
increase in guarantee fees on the order of 10 to 15 basis points could prompt a
shift "on a much larger scale."

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              206 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           November 19, 2009 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

FHA-BACKED LENDING IS A 'TRAIN WRECK,' TOLL SAYS

BYLINE: JOHN GITTELSOHN, BLOOMBERG NEWS

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-6

LENGTH: 402 words


The Federal Housing Administration, the agency that insures home purchases made
with down payments as small as 3.5 percent, may create another lending crisis,
Toll Brothers Inc. CEO Robert Toll said.

"Yesterday's subprime is today's FHA," Mr. Toll said yesterday at a New York
conference for builders sponsored by UBS AG. "It's a definite train wreck and
the flag will go up in the next couple of months: Bail us out. Give us more
money." Toll Brothers is largest U.S. luxury homes builder.

The FHA's insurance reserve ratio fell to 0.53 percent, the lowest level in
history, and more steps are needed to shore up the agency that guarantees one of
every five single family loans, Housing and Urban Development Secretary Shaun
Donovan said Nov. 12.

While the insurance fund's capital ratio is at an all-time low, Mr. Donovan said
those who say FHA is the next subprime-mortgage crisis are "dead wrong." The
quality of the loans FHA insures is "actually very good," Mr. Donovan said.

FHA's total reserves are more than $31 billion, giving it an overall capital
resource ratio of 4.5 percent, according to statement by FHA Commissioner David
Stevens.

The 0.53 percent net capital loan insurance ratio takes into account projected
losses and is the yardstick Congress uses to determine the health of the fund.
Congress requires the FHA to maintain a loan reserve ratio of at least 2 percent
to protect the insurance fund from default.

The FHA said 456,000 of its loans, or 8.2 percent, were in default as of
September. That was up from 5.6 percent in September 2008.

The default rate for loans tracked by the Mortgage Bankers Association was a
record 9.24 percent for the three months through June, the most recent period
for which data is available. That was up from 6.41 percent a year earlier.

FHA loans accounted for about 8 percent of the mortgages Toll Brothers closed in
the past quarter, Mr. Toll said. About 80 percent of the company's financing is
loans guaranteed by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, he said. Those
government-supported agencies require larger down payments and better credit
than loans insured by the FHA.

Toll Brothers has seen strong sales at its urban high-rise developments in New
York City, Jersey City and Philadelphia, Mr. Toll said.

"We started doing over $1 million product even in Hoboken and Jersey City," he
said. "We expect to expand to Washington, D.C., and perhaps some other strong
markets."

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.


                              207 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                               Irish Independent

                             July 24, 2008 Thursday

Oversupply killing US lender giants and house prices

SECTION: BUSINESS; Irish Business

LENGTH: 766 words


FANNIE Mae, the largest US mortgage finance company, couldn't find a buyer who
would pay $6,900 (EUR4,300) for a three-bedroom house in Flint, Michigan. So
broker Raymond Megie, who is handling the foreclosure sale, advised cutting the
price to $5,000.

Mr Megie still couldn't sell it. "There's oversupply,'' he said. The home sold
in 2005 for $110,000.

Together, Fannie and Freddie Mac, the two biggest US mortgage finance companies,
owned a record $6.9bn of foreclosed homes on March 31, compared with $8.56bn
held by all 8,500 US commercial banks and savings and loans.

Foreclosed houses sell at an average discount of about 20pc, according to
economists Ethan Harris and Michelle Meyer at New York-based Lehman Brothers
Holdings Inc. At that rate, the two mortgage companies stand to lose $1.39bn on
the foreclosed houses they currently own.

"It's a no-win for the housing market,'' said Ron Peltier, chief executive
officer of Berkshire Hathaway Inc's HomeServices of America Inc, the
second-largest US residential real estate brokerage. "Where there are pockets of
distressed real estate, it does have an adverse effect on the surrounding
properties."

The home on Prospect Street in Flint needs a new roof and carpeting and the
plumbing has been ripped out, said Mr Megie, who sells Fannie Mae-owned homes.
"Two years ago, I didn't have any Fannie Mae properties and now it's probably
pushing 50pc of what I have listed,'' Mr Megie said. Fannie Mae is fixing
vandalised homes instead of "just dumping them to investors", he said.

Bruce Norris, a builder and real-estate investor in Riverside, California,
estimates about 15pc of foreclosed houses have been intentionally damaged.
"Banks can't fix all the homes because they just have too many,'' he said.

The longer it takes to sell a house, the lower the profit will be, said Dean C
Williams, chief executive officer of Williams & Williams Worldwide Real Estate
Auction in Tulsa, Oklahoma. It costs creditors such as Fannie Mae 2pc of the
value of the property every month in taxes, insurance, utilities, lost revenue,
maintenance, management and cleanup after vandalism, Mr Williams estimates.

"This problem is not just how it affects the credit markets, it's how it affects
neighbourhoods," Mr Williams said. "We use the word 'blight'. It becomes a
reinforcing vicious circle in terms of the value of ownership. Now the value of
ownership is increasingly a negative return."

Freddie Mac's inventory of foreclosed homes is alsorising. The value of
single-family properties that Freddie Mac held in the first quarter rose to
$2.2bn from $871m a year earlier, according to a regulatory filing.

The company acquired 9,939 homes in the quarter, sold 5,914 and owned 18,419
properties at the end of March.

Freddie Mac-owned properties spend an average of 152 days on the market and
typically sell for 92pc of the listed price -- which is usually about 30pc less
than the peak prices of 2006, said Ingrid Beckles, vice president of servicing
and asset management.

Part of the difficulty for all owners of foreclosed property, and not just
Fannie Mae, is a shortage of qualified agents in the field who can sell the
homes efficiently, said Jesse Ramirez, a broker associate at Re/Max Partners
Real Estate in Corona, California.

Overwhelmed

"They are all recent college grads without experience," Mr Ramirez said. "They
have 300 files each and they're overwhelmed. They don't understand how the
typical transaction goes. These people didn't have jobs two years ago, not doing
this.''

Fannie Mae, founded as part of President Franklin D Roosevelt's plan to
resuscitate the US economy in 1938, and Freddie Mac, started in 1970, were
chartered by Congress. They bundle home loans into securities to sell to
investors and use cash from the sales to fund mortgage lenders. Together, Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac own or guarantee about half of the $12trn of mortgages in
the US.

Securitisation of residential mortgages by underwriters outside of Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac has almost stopped. Banks bundled $1.15trn of home loans into
so-called private-label securities in 2006, Inside Mortgage Finance reported.

The number fell to $46bn in the first half of 2008, according to the Bethesda,
Maryland-based industry publication.

The two government-sponsored enterprises own or guarantee 81pc of US mortgages
originated this year, data compiled by the Washington-based Office of Federal
Housing Enterprise Oversight show.

The company acquired 9,939 homes in the quarter, sold 5,914 and owned 18,419
properties at the end of March. (Bloomberg)

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2008 Independent News and Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              208 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Credit Union Journal

                                August 16, 2010

Washington Watch

SECTION: GENERAL NEWS; Pg. 10 Vol. 14 No. 33

LENGTH: 945  words


THE CARDS ARE STARTING TO IMPROVE FOR LAS VEGAS CUS

LAS VEGAS-In another sign of a potential economic turnaround, CUs throughout
Nevada, one of the worst-hit states in the recession, are starting to report
better financials.

Losses are continuing for the biggest credit unions in Nevada, home to several
big failures last year, albeit at much smaller rates. Silver State School CU,
the one-time $1-billion credit union under a special assistance regime with
state regulators, reported mid-year losses of $13.4 million, compared to losses
of $50.9 million for 2009. Clark County CU reported a mid-year loss of $4.1
million, compared to a $25.3-million loss last year. Nevada FCU a $2.8-million
loss, compared to a $32-million 2009 loss. Greater Nevada FCU a $900,000 loss,
after a $10.9-million 2009 loss. Boulder Dam CU reported a first have loss of
$538,000, after a $2.3-million 2009 loss.

The numbers would have been better still for all the federal charters were it
not for the second quarter NCUA assessment for the corporate bailout. Nevada FCU
had a $790,000 operating net for the second quarter but was pushed into the red
by an $880,000 NCUA charge. Greater Nevada had a $480,000 second quarter net
erased by a $620,000 NCUA charge.

But one analyst cautioned about the precarious condition of the state's economy.
"Unfortunately, the global recession and the extent of the domestic financial
problems has taken a big toll on conventions and the gaming industry," said
Daniel Penrod, economic analyst for the Nevada CU League, asserting that a
recovery in Nevada will have to wait for the recovery in California and other
western states.

"Nevada is so gaming dependent, so tourism dependent that until the situation
picks up in the surrounding states, Nevada is not expected to see a full
recovery," said Penrod.

LOSSES ARE MOUNTING ATCONSTITUTION CORPORATE

WALLINGFORD, Conn.-Troubled Constitution Corporate FCU reported another $1.2
million of losses for June, pushing its NCUA-subsidized prior undivided earnings
deficit up to $24.5 million at mid-year.

The so-called PUED is an extraordinary guarantee issued by NCUA that enables
credit unions to continue operating without any capital. NCUA has issued similar
guarantees for U.S. Central FCU and WesCorp FCU.

Like those two failed corporates and several others, Constitution's projected
losses are increasingly growing into actual credit losses. Constitution began
experiencing actual credit losses of principal on its residential mortgage
related securities beginning in March. The credit loss of principal is measured
as a reduction of par value of an investment without receiving a corresponding
cash payment. Total loss of principal through June has amounted to $3.7 million.

Based on third party projections it is currently estimated that five bonds may
incur actual credit losses during 2010 aggregating approximately $14 million.

Budget-cutting and other moves have returned Constitution to an operating
profit-$639,000 for the first six months of the year. But huge investment
losses, $184.2 million for 2009 and $142.4 million for the first half of 2009,
have erased all of its member capital, rendering the $1.2 billion corporate
insolvent-despite the NCUA subsidy.

SELF-HELP FUND TAPS INTO FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK

DURHAM, N.C.-The Center for Community Self-Help, parent of two leading community
development credit unions, said yesterday its Self-Help Ventures Fund has been
accepted as a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta, the Bank's first
CDFI-affiliated organization allowed under the 2008 Housing and Economic
Recovery Act.

The FHLB membership will provide access to low-cost funding for the group's
secondary mortgage market program. Previously, only banks, CUs or insurance
companies were eligible for membership in the 12 FHLBs. Both of the group's CUs,
North Carolina's Self-Help CU and California's Self-Help FCU, are already
members of the Atlanta Bank.

Self-Help plans to use the FHLB advances to finance the Ventures Fund's
affordable housing home loan program and to spur other types of community
development lending.

We have worked for more than ten years to make this partnership possible, and
together with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta, we believe we can provide
the financing that will enable thousands of well-qualified homeowners to buy
their first homes," said Martin Eakes, head of the Self-Help group.

MORE BIG LOSSES AT BOTH FANNIE MAE, FREDDIE MAC

WASHINGTON-Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continued deep in the red for the second
quarter, setting the stage for congressional debate on the future of the two
government sponsored enterprises this fall.

Freddie Mac reported a $6-billion loss for the second quarter, prompting it to
request another $1.8 billion of government aid, while Fannie Mae had a
$3.1-billion second quarter loss and requested an additional $1.5 billion in
government aid. The two requests will make almost $150 billion in government aid
for the secondary mortgage market giants since they were taken into
conservatorship.

The two companies, which own or guarantee about half of all single family
mortgages in the country, are critical partners for CUs because they buy more
than half of all CU mortgages, providing key liquidity to the market.

Credit unions are especially concerned about the future of the two companies,
which traditionally buy the majority of single-family mortgages originated by
credit unions.

The absence of a resolution on the two failed mortgage giants prompted
Republican lawmakers in the House and Senate to mass against the recently passed
financial reform bill. Congress has scheduled hearings on the two companies for
the fall.

URL: http://www.cujournal.com/

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: CUJ


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              209 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             April 2, 2013 Tuesday

Fannie Mae record profit: How long until it pays back bailout money?;
Fannie Mae, the mortgage giant, made a record $17.2 billion in 2012. So far, it
has paid back $36 billion of the $116 billion it received in a US bailout.

BYLINE: Mark Trumbull Staff writer

SECTION: USA

LENGTH: 673 words


The mortgage giant Fannie Mae said it racked up its highest profit ever during
the 2012 calendar year - a signal of housing-market recovery that raises hopes
that US taxpayers will recover billions of dollars in bailout funds from the
company.

Fannie Mae on Tuesday reported earnings of $17.2 billion for the year.

The firm, along with a sibling corporation named Freddie Mac, is at the heart of
a US mortgage market that imploded during the financial crisis. The two firms
received some of the biggest taxpayer bailouts in 2008.

But now, as housing markets are recovering, so are their fortunes.

Fannie Mae has drawn some $116 billion in financial support from the US Treasury
since the firm was taken over in a federal conservatorship in 2008. Some $35.6
billion of that has, in effect, been paid back through dividend payments to the
Treasury since 2009.

The company has paid a $4.2 billion dividend to the Treasury in the first
quarter of 2013.

"We expect to remain profitable for the foreseeable future and return
significant value to taxpayers," said Susan McFarland, the firm's chief
financial officer, in releasing the new profit numbers.

In February, Freddie Mac gave a similar progress report of its own, banking $11
billion in net income for 2012. The firm has paid dividends totaling some $23.8
billion to the Treasury - or 33 percent of the company's cumulative bailout draw
- since conservatorship.

Paying back the full bailout funds is still a long way off for both firms.

And even if they achieve that goal, that doesn't mean the bailouts would be
cost-free. For one thing, economists say the rescues come with "moral hazard"
attached. That term refers to the risk that the behavior of large financial
firms will be guided somewhat that they can expect bailouts in future crises.

Still, the rescue of Fannie and Freddie symbolize policies that worked, in the
view of many economists, to quell a spreading panic in financial markets that
could have made the recession much deeper.

And, in the housing market in particular, Fannie and Freddie (along with the
Federal Housing Administration) have acted as bulwarks of mortgage underwriting
during the past five years, when other sources of credit had largely dried up.

Fannie and Freddie provide mortgage guarantees to private lenders, or purchase
loans, when the loans conform to their standards.

The goal of helping to ensure a reliable flow of mortgage credit, even during
hard times, is the reason Fannie and Freddie were created in the first place.
Until the conservatorship, they operated with an unusual hybrid identity as
investor-owned companies serving a Congress-created purpose.

Their futures remain in doubt. Congress must consider what role the government
should play in providing Fannie- and Freddie-style loan guarantees in the
future.

With the example of the bailouts in mind, many argue for downsizing any implicit
taxpayer underwriting of the risk that home loans will go bad, as occurred in
dramatic fashion in recent years. At the same time, other lawmakers say the
market for home loans shouldn't be left completely to soar and plunge on its
own.

For their part, executives at Fannie and Freddie are touting the role they've
played in buoying the housing market since the recession ended.

"Actions [by the company] have helped ... to support the housing recovery by
enabling families to buy, refinance, or rent a home even during the housing
crisis," Timothy Mayopoulos, Fannie's chief executive officer, said in the
company's statement Tuesday.

Fannie Mae was involved in some 4 million new or refinanced mortgages in 2012,
and Freddie Mac accounted for another 2 million.

With the housing market stabilizing and starting to recover since 2010, the
share of Fannie-backed loans where borrowers are seriously delinquent on
payments has been declining.

Some 3.3 percent of its single-family loans were in serious delinquency as of
December, down from 5.5 percent in March 2010. The improvement stems partly from
completing foreclosures, and partly from preventing foreclosures.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2013 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                              210 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 21, 1986

News Analysis: GNMA Furor -- Mountain or Molehill?

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 1052 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The closing of the commitment window at the Government National Mortgage
Association raised the spectre of housing credit problems for
low-and-middle-income buyers over the past couple of weeks, but most market
participants viewed it as a non-event.

As Ginnie Mae reached its statutory ceiling of $ 65.3 billion in fiscal 1986
commitments, it sought a substantial increase from Congress.

The Reagan Administration hoped to keep the program to $ 80 billion, while
industry groups, let by the Mortgage Bankers Association of America were
attempting to get the ceiling raised to $ 125 billion.

Wahington observers expect fairly quick Congressional action that come down a
little closer to the Administration proposal than to the MBA request.

Wall Street and mortgage banking sources said that the enormous warehousing of
commitments that has taken place as rates declined and volume increased has left
lenders with some $ 35-to-$ 40 billion in unused authority to form Ginnie
Mae-guaranteed pools.

In addition both the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and the Federal National
Mortgage Association said they will accept new FHA-and VA-insured mortgages as
collateral for the securities programs.

Normally neither agency pools new government-insured loans because their
securities cannot compete in the marketplace with the Ginnie Mae's certificates
which carry the full faith and credit of the Federal government.

Normally Freddie Mac will purchase only seasoned FHA and VA loans while FNMA
will buy newly originated government-insured mortgages but not for its
passthrough program.

Freddie Mac said it will continue its new policy until Congress acts to extend
Ginnie Mac's authority to guarantee loan packages.

The FHLMC said its purchases would be made in minimums of $ 1 million.

Although Ginnie Mae used up its guarantee authority earlier than most observers
had anticipated, the ironic fact is that its outstanding level of certificates
actually has declined this year.

In January, 1986, Ginnie Mae said, it issued $ 5.3 billion in certificates.
Last month, the figure had declined to $ 5.1 billion.

In October, 1985, Ginnie Mae issued a total of $ 5.8 billion in certificates.
Its output steadily declined, however, to $ 5.3 billion in November and $ 4.5
billion in December.

The level of refinancings has been extraordinarily heavy and many users of the
FHA-and-VA programs likely refinanced into conventional mortgages.

In fiscal 1985, Ginnie Mae issued $ 36.3 billion in certificates.

According to the agency, the amount of certificates outstanding has risen
steadily since October 1985, when the total was $ 205.2 billion.

In December 1985, Ginnie Mae had $ 212.1 billion in certificates outstanding.
The figure rose to $ 215.6 billion in January and $ 218.5 billion in February,
the last month for which figures are available.

But there was a significant outcry from two housing industry groups that said
that unless Congress acts swiftly to restore the guarantee authority new home
production will decline and prices will escalate.

Kent Colton, executive vice president of the National Association of Home
Builders, said unused commitments are "not perfectly distributed" because some
lenders had the foresight, or the ability, to obtain them while others did not.

In any event, he said normal loan demand, plus "overwhelming" requests for
refinancing soon will exhaust the bulk of the commitments, although he admitted
that some lenders "will okay for the rest of the year."

Mr. Colton said unless the ceiling authority is increased, it could mean an
annual decline in new single family housing starts of as much as 100,000 to
200,000.  He predicted also that the "shutdown" could "cut off the route to
refinancing for millions of verterans and moderate-income homeowners."

The NAHB believes that the ceiling on the program should be raised to at least $
100 billion for fiscal 1986.  If this does not happen, he said, mortgage rates
will not continue to decline over the next six-to-nine months as forecast, and
may start raising.

In fact, he said rates already have "notched up" as a result of the shutdown.

Mr. Colton argued that the current high levels of refinancing do not represent a
significant increase in Federal credit activity, noting that if they were
subtracted from a proposed $ 100 billion ceiling, the level of new credit would
be within the original limit.

Warren Lasko, executive vice president of the Mortgage Bankers Association, said
that permitting GNMA to go out of business is a "tragic circumstance" and means
that "housing is being fitted with concrete boots."

He said that, failing quick Congressional action, as many as 250,000 persons
would be denied the opportunity to buy homes with Federally insured mortgages
during the next month alone.

Mr. Lasko said an MBA survey of lenders that are among the nation's largest GNMA
issuers showed that some have stopped making new FHA and VA loans and others are
making them only on the contingency that the ceiling is raised.

In the meantime, he said the government "has slammed the door on builders,
investors and mortgage bankers."

At a joint MBA-NAHB conference, Mr. Lasko said the disruption of the GNMA
program would raise the interest rates on FHA and VA mortgages as much as 50
basis points and possibly mean higher loan down payments "as lenders work to
find investors interested in funding these loans."

Mr. Lasko said that the group "welcomed" the announcement that the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corp. would begin purchasing newly-originated FHA and VA mortgages
until GNMA's authority is increased.

But, he said Freddie Mac has a more limited purchasing capacity and higher fee
requirements than GNMA.

The latter, he said, would mean an additional cost of $ 750 for a borrower
seeking a $ 75,000 loan.

Further, he said "Wall Street already is "nudging down" the price it will pay
for Freddie Mac participation certificates in the expectation of greater volume.

Mr. Lasko said MBA believes the GNMA program needs a ceiling increase up to $
125 million "in order to maintain a smooth flow of mortgage credit."

Both spokesmen said they believed Congress would eventually act to increase the
GNMA ceiling, but not until the situation had reached some sort of "crisis"
stage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph 1, Ginnie Mae Certificates Issued; Graph 2, Ginnie Mae
Certificates Outstanding

                   Copyright 1986 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              211 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               November 15, 1993

FHA Will Boost Rehab

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Federal Housing Administration is aiming for a substantial increase in
business for its purchase and rehabilitation loan program.

Under the 203k program, homebuyers can obtain a loan to cover both the purchase
price and the repair costs to fix up a property.

The program is designed to promote affordable housing and improve the housing
stock, especially in inner-city areas.

Last year, the FHA insured 3,400 loans through the 203k program.  The FHA has
established an internal goal of raising participation in the program to an
annual level of 10,000 loans by next year.

The average loan size nationally is about $ 70,000.

Morris Carter, an FHA single-family housing official, said during a conference
last week that the 203k program will be revised to streamline regulations and
make them more "user friendly" for lenders and borrowers.

For instance, the department may drop a dual appraisal requirement.  Currently,
lenders must obtain an "as is" appraisal and an appraisal of the property's
anticipated value after rehabilitation.

New HUD guidelines may drop the "as is" appraisal.

HUD hopes to issue a mortgagee letter early next year outlining changes designed
to make the program more popular.

Deborah Williams, deputy assistant secretary for single-family housing, said the
program is an existing vehicle to offer affordable housing to families.

Billed as the "dreambuilder" mortgage, the program reflects the administration's
overall emphasis on expanding opportunities for first-time home buyers.

"There really is not another vehicles out there to do a purchase and
rehabilitation at the same time," Mr. Williams said.

She said HUD hopes to cooperate with industry groups to make lenders and real
estate brokers more familiar with the 203k loan guarantee.

HUD officials recently held two conferences to meet with participating lenders
and secondary marked officials.

The loans can be securitized through GNMA.  The Federal National Mortgage
Association also purchases the loans, and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation may get into the businesses.

However, the enthusiasm of the government-sponsored enterprises has been
tempered by a HUD ruling that the loans will not count toward the affordable
housing requirements of the GSEs.  Many of the 203k program loans are made in
central cities to low- and moderate-income borrowers.

HUD decided the 203k loans will not count toward affordable housing goals
because the government, not the GSEs, carries all the risk on the loans.

However, some HUD officials would like to see the decision reviewed, believing
that increased GSE participation will encourage efficient funding for the loans.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mae interest in the program is considered important
because some lenders, particularly small community banks, do not have experience
using Ginnie Mae.

They may be more comfortable if they have Fannie Mae and Freddie Mae available
as outlets for the loans.

Currently, condominiums, cooperatives and vacation homes are not eligible for
the 203k program.

Fannie Mae also is tapping into the home-improvement market with its HomeStyle
program.  Through HomeStyle, Fannie Mae is purchasing conventional home
improvement loans and 203k FHA insured loans.

Herb Moses, assistant director of product initiatives at Fannie Mae, said he
hopes that 203k lenders will consider adding Fannie Mae's initiative to their
loan products.  About 20 lenders now participate in HomeStyle.

"Remodelers continue to think that HomeStyle seconds are a great product," Mr.
Moses said.

The home improvement industry has grown to a $ 100 billion annual business.

The median age of existing homes now is more than 25 years, indicating that the
remodeling industry should continue to grow, according to Fannie Mae.

Fannie Mae has allocated $ 500 million to purchase first and second mortgages
issued for remodeling existing homes.

Through HomeStyle, Fannie Mae offers a purchase-rehabilitation loan similar to
the FHA product.  The loan has the same limit as conventional, conforming loans.
Fannie Mae also offers a renovation loan and a combination refinance-renovation
loan.

LOAD-DATE: December 01, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              212 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                             July 9, 2016 Saturday

Fitch Rates Indiana Housing & Community Development Auth's 2016A Single Family
Mortgage Revs 'AAA'

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: New York



 New York: Fitch Ratings has assigned a 'AAA' rating to the Indiana Housing and
Community Development Authority's (the authority) single family mortgage revenue
bonds, $30 million 2016 series A-1 and $49.51 million 2016 series A-2.





 Fitch has also affirmed the following outstanding 1980 master indenture Single
Family Mortgage Bond Program debt at 'AAA':



 --$19.2 million single family mortgage bonds, 2006B-1, B-2& B-3;

 --$18.5 million single family mortgage bonds, 2006C-1;

 --$22.7 million single family mortgage bonds, 2006D-1 & D-2;

 --$18.4 million single family mortgage bonds, 2007A-1 & A-2;

 --$8.4 million single family mortgage bonds, 2008A-2 & A-3;

 --$45.8 million single family mortgage bonds, 2010 08A-2.



 The Rating Outlook is Stable.



 SECURITY

 The bonds are special obligations of the authority secured solely by the
revenues and assets pledged under the amended and restated master indenture that
primarily consist of mortgage backed securities (MBS) guaranteed by the
Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA or Ginnie Mae), mortgage
pass-through certificates guaranteed by the Federal National Mortgage
Association (FNMA or Fannie Mae) and MBS guaranteed by the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC or Freddie Mac) and cash reserves.



 KEY RATING DRIVERS



 LOAN PORTFOLIO: The loan portfolio consists of MBS guaranteed by Ginnie Mae and
Freddie Mac and the Fannie Mae mortgage pass through certificates (MBS).



 ASSET QUALITY: Ginnie Mae, Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae guarantee the full and
timely payment of principal and interest on the respective MBS regardless of
actual performance of the underlying loans.



 ASSET TO DEBT RATIO: The program asset-to-debt ratio is 212.5% as of April 1,
2016.



 PROGRAM OVERSIGHT: Indenture allows surplus funds in excess of 103% to be
withdrawn from the indenture. However, the history of the authority and its
single family mortgage program strongly suggests that management is unlikely to
withdraw the indenture's surplus funds.



 RATING SENSITIVITIES



 U.S. SOVERIGN LINK: As the ratings of Fannie Mae, Ginnie Mae and Freddie Mac,
as government sponsored entities (GSEs) are currently linked to the U.S.
sovereign rating, any rating action on the U.S. Sovereign rating may directly
impact the rating on the bonds.



 CHANGE IN FNMA or FHLMC LINKAGE: Should Fitch's view of the U.S. government's
direct level of financial support for Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac change, the
rating of the two GSEs may be delinked from the U.S. sovereign rating and may
result in negative pressure on the bonds.



 BANKRUPTCY REMOTE: Fitch considers the authority to be bankruptcy remote based
on its public purposes, predominantly limited recourse debt and its inability
under current law to commence a voluntary proceeding under Chapter 9 without
legislative or executive approval. A change in this status could lead to a
rating change and limit the rating on the single family program to that of the
authority's general obligation debt.



 CREDIT PROFILE

 The authority was established in 1978 as a public body and corporate of the
State of Indiana. It is empowered to purchase loans from lenders to provide
permanent financing for the rehabilitation, acquisition or construction of
single-family residential housing made to persons of low and moderate income.



 The 1980 Indenture's assets are of sound quality as MBS payments are guaranteed
by the GSE and do not rely on the performance of the underlying mortgages.
Mortgages permitted to be placed into MBS must be fully documented and follow
strict underwriting requirements to qualify. All loans packaged into the MBS are
for first time homebuyers in the state.



 In conjunction with the issuance of the 2016A bonds the master trust indenture
will be amended and restated to incorporate all of the amendments and
restatements of the original 1980 master indenture in a single document. The
amended and restated master indenture removes provisions that applied only when
whole mortgage loans were held under the indenture rather than GNMA, FNMA and
FHLMC MBS.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              213 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Plan to Restructure FHA Raises Concerns About Guarantees on Loans to Poorer
People

                          December 15, 1994, Thursday

By JONATHAN S. HORNBLASS


Lenders reacted with caution to news that the Clinton administration may seek to
reshape the Federal Housing Administration.

They are mainly worried about how severely the housing agency's guarantee
program for home loans to borrowers with low and moderate incomes may be
reduced.

"From an overall view, this change could be a good one, depending on the extent
of the government involvement in the guarantee process," said Thomas C. Brown,
president and chief executive of Centerbank Mortgage Co. in Waterbury, Conn.

At Source One Mortgage Services Corp. in Farmington Hills, Mich., James A.
Conrad, president and chief executive, said, "For those that are big lenders in
the FHA business, I would think it would be a kind of a traumatic impact. There
are people that have that niche. It would be shocking" to them.

But some lenders say there might be advantages. Richard M. Duncan, executive
vice president of Resource Bancshares Mortgage Group Inc., Columbia, S.C., said
that he would be in favor of a change if it would result in streamlining the
origination process for loans.

He also said an adjustment period would be necessary if the elimination of the
Federal Housing Administration as a backer of single-family loans is to work.

"In general, it is hard to believe that you can overnight wipe out a program
that has impacted so many Americans favorably," said Mr. Conrad of Source One.

Lenders seem most concerned about how the change would affect servicing income
from FHA loans. Lenders currently enjoy revenues of 44 basis points from FHA
loans. Conventional loans generally pay about 25 basis points.

A cut in servicing income for FHA-type loans under the new system "would be
cause for alarm," said Centerbank's Mr. Brown.

He said the new system would have to make allocations in servicing income for
the riskier loans.

But most lenders thought that politically the FHA could not be dissolved
completely.

The proposal "is going to start off like an Empire State Building and it will
end up like something else," said Robert Garman, senior vice president of
Directors Mortgage Loan Corp. in Riverside, Calif. "I have very serious doubts
that it will ever get done in our lifetime."

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 369 words

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1994 American Banker, Inc.


                              214 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             June 14, 2003 Saturday
                                  Late Edition

Freddie Mac woes blow ill wind on Wall Street;
Global growth engines stuck in low gear THE WORLD ECONOMY

BYLINE: Marian Wilkinson

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 1222 words


One of the country's biggest home loan companies is under investigation, writes
Marian Wilkinson, Herald Correspondent in Washington.

The bad news for US investors and home buyers began with almost no warning on
Monday after the release of a letter from a US government regulatory agency to
the board of the second-largest home loan funding company in America.

By week's end, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Company, popularly known as
Freddie Mac, had lost its three top executives and confirmed it was under
investigation by the US Securities and Exchange Commission, federal prosecutors,
the FBI and Congress over flaws in its accounting practices and "misconduct" by
a senior employee.

That employee was the group's president and chief executive, David Glenn , who
was fired for allegedly destroying his notes of company board meetings.

By then, Freddie Mac's woes had punctured the good news coming out of the US
stockmarket after the company's shares dropped by a fifth. While relatively few
Australians may have heard of Freddie Mac, it is one of the most important
financial institutions in the US. Together with its counterpart, Fannie Mae, the
two companies guarantee more than 40 per cent of the US$7 trillion ($10.5
trillion) home mortgage market, one of the few bright spots in the US economy.

Everyone from members of the US Federal Reserve to Freddie Mac's big investors
assured the public that there was nothing to be concerned about "right now".

But the disturbing news rattled investors and members of Congress in a week in
which the country was anxiously looking for positive news on the very flat US
economy.

"Congress needs to get the true story about what was happening at Freddie Mac
and what top management was really doing to resolve questions about the
company's books," the chairman of the House Capital Markets subcommittee,
Richard Baker, insisted.

Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, he said, had "too great a role in financial markets
for Congress not to make sure adequate oversight is in place to protect
investors, home buyers and taxpayers from missteps like this ever happening
again".

One year since the climax of the disclosures on Wall Street, corporate scandals
were back on the front pages and Freddie Mac was just one of them.

America's home decorating icon, Martha Stewart, arrived at FBI headquarters in
Manhattan to be photographed and fingerprinted after she was charged, with her
stockbroker, for conspiracy to obstruct the insider trading investigation that
has dogged her for more than a year.

Across town her former friend, Sam Waksal, who is at the centre of the same
insider trading case as Ms Stewart, was sentenced to more than seven years'
jail. Waksal pleaded guilty to tipping off his daughter before shares in his
biotech company, ImClone, plunged. The company was about to be sunk by a
negative announcement affecting the future of its chief asset, a supposed wonder
drug for cancer.

"I want to apologise to all the people who may have had confidence in me and
whose confidence I betrayed," Waksal told the court.

His lawyer asked that Waksal be allowed to serve his prison time in a minimum
security jail in Florida, one that also houses US shoe designer Steve Madden,
another insider trader.

The wave of damaging corporate scandals was supposed to be over. With end of the
Iraq war and the passing of President George Bush's tax cuts, the US economy was
supposed to be on the mend.

But recent news that unemployment had hit a nine-year high of 6.1 per cent,
predictions of a record projected US budget deficit of US$400 billion, a record
trade deficit of US$500 billion and a drifting US dollar is fuelling anxiety
once again about the stalled US economy.

The drifting dollar, in particular, is bad news for Australian exporters and its
economy.

While Mr Bush insists he is still backing a "strong dollar policy", US analysts
believe that in the long term the trend is down.

"We have a half trillion-dollar trade deficit, a record for the last century",
says Professor Robert Blecker of American University . "Our international debt
is growing and that's not sustainable. The dollar's going to have to make an
adjustment".

He said that would hurt countries such as Australia and Canada but insisted that
"the US dollar can't stay high".

While it has fallen a lot, Professor Blecker points out that the dollar is only
back to where it was in 1999. "It's lost [only] about a third of the value it
gained in the boom that's why it's got further to go," he said.

US manufacturers and unions are cheering the fall in the US dollar, hoping some
of the jobs lost since its soaring rise in 1995 will return.

But the Economic Policy Institute in Washington is not so optimistic. Advising
the Democrats in Congress, the institute pointed to some bleak long-term trends.
Private sector jobs in the US have fallen more than 3 million since the US
recession began in March 2001, the largest private sector employment fall of any
post-war recession.

"The US economy is in dire straits, undergoing a lengthy downturn, high
unemployment, a fall in real wages, declining family incomes and extensive job
losses," the institute concluded. Not even the slowdown in unemployment claims
this week restored much cheer.

The answer on both sides of the political divide has been to push through a
federal stimulus package.

President Bush finally got his Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation package
through Congress last month. But critics say the bulk of this package, the Bush
tax cuts, will do little to grow jobs. Instead it will saddle the government
with a US$400 billion deficit that will force huge spending cuts in health,
education and welfare.

The Citizens for Tax Justice advocacy group says the greatest beneficiaries from
the tax cuts are the top 1 per cent of Americans. They will get on average a cut
in taxes of almost US$100,000. The bottom 60 per cent of taxpayers will get an
average of less than US$100 over four years.

But the real problem, say critics, is that by skewing the bulk of the tax cuts
to the super wealthy, the economy will not get the boost in consumer spending it
needs.

As well, the savage cuts to government spending needed to fund the deficit will
force big cutbacks in government employment as state governors and mayors are
forced to cut payrolls.

Many Americans are now pinning their hopes on another interest rate cut by the
US Federal Reserve later this month to revive the economy, along with whatever
limited impact the Bush tax package produces.

In its monthly survey of the US economy, the Fed this week noted some weak signs
of improvement in economic activity, but said that "conditions remained sluggish
in most districts".

This was read as yet another sign that the Fed will cut rates.

Federal Reserve chief Dr Alan Greenspan, testifying to Congress last month,
insisted that the economic fundamentals in America "augur well for the future"
but noted that the US economy "continues to be buffeted by strong
cross-currents".

In its latest survey, the Federal Reserve reported that one of the few bright
spots in the economy, apart from the defence industries, was of course, the home
lending market. This accounted for the strongest growth in the US finance
sector.

That's why the upheavals at Freddie Mac are causing growing consternation not
only on Wall Street but in Washington.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Greg Newington

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2003 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              215 of 998 DOCUMENTS

           St. Louis Daily Record/St. Louis Countian (St. Louis, MO)

                            January 11, 2002 Friday

Veterans home loan benefits increased

BYLINE: Mike Nixon

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 425 words


For the first time in seven years, the ceiling on home loans issued with federal
guarantees through the Department of Veteran Affairs has been increased,
offering those who have served in the U.S. military an opportunity to buy more
home for their money.

Under new legislation signed by President George W. Bush, DVA-qualified
individuals can now finance a mortgage with 25 percent of the loan limited at
$60,000 being guaranteed with no money down on a single-family home. The change
represents just over a 15 percent increase from the $50,750 for purchase or
construction of a home, or rate reductions on loans in excess of $144,000 with
no money down that had been in place since 1994.

The DVA backs more than 260,000 residential real estate loans a year, with a
large majority of the nation's 24 million veterans qualifying for this
entitlement.

The National Association of Realtors has worked to sell Congress on approving
this increase for several years, and some members of that professional
organization credit the renewed focus on the needs of military personnel and
their families as the final catalyst that secured passage of the Veterans
Benefits Expansion Act.

Under this law, mortgage rate limits for borrowing from local lenders through
Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae will increase proportionally based on given real
estate markets. With this benefit, borrowers must still pay a funding fee of 2
percent of the loan amount, in exchange for the no down payment classification.
That fee can be reduced to 1.25 percent if the borrower makes a 10 percent down
payment. If the full amount of this benefit is not used in the purchase of a
given home, the balance can be used at a later date to purchase another home.

To qualify, veterans must have served at least 90 days of active duty during
World War II, the Korean War, the Vietnam War or the Gulf War. Enlistees who
began military service after Sept. 7, 1980, and officers who began after Oct.
16, 1981, are eligible once they have completed 24 months of continual active
duty. Those who served in the military for at least 181 days during peace time
may also qualify under certain guidelines. Reservists and National Guard members
who have completed six years of service are also eligible.

"I am in favor of any improved benefits for veterans," said Judy Wideman, the
newly designated president for the St. Louis Association of Realtors. "Being
able to secure higher loan amounts is always a plus. It should be very good for
veterans and the real estate market."

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Government activity

                      Copyright 2002 Dolan Media Newswires


                              216 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Colorado Housing Authority Restructures Loan Programs

                            April 18, 2000, Tuesday

By Darrell Preston

DATELINE: DALLAS



When it closed a $96.6 million issue last week, the Colorado Housing and Finance
Authority did more than accomplish its goal of transplanting a multiple-tranche
structure from the single-family mortgagebond market to its multifamily bond
program.

The agency said last week that the bond issue secured capital to maintain 4,300
units of affordable rental housing in 22 counties and generated funds and
flexibility to reduce interest rates and restructure loans for some borrowers.

Those additional accomplishments are important at a time when the state's strong
economy has driven up real estate values and eroded the supply of housing
available to lower-income residents. Being able to restructure loan programs was
one key goal, because some housing developments have seen their federal Section
8 subsidies reduced.

Agency officials also cited the generation of $10 million of capital to fund new
multifamily housing developments as another key success of the deal.

The new structure is expected to provide long-term stability and viability to
the CHFA's program.

"It went extremely well," said Roy Alexander, director of finance for the
authority. "Now, we just have to implement it and march forward. Everything we
did was to build value."

The key for reducing the agency's cost of capital was implementing a
multiple-tranche structure that is common in the single-family market, but has
rarely been used on multifamily deals, according to housing experts and rating
agency officials who track the market.

Under the structure, the authority can shift various levels of risk to different
types of bonds. That lets the CHFA allocate levels of risk to the distinct bond
classes through subordination of assets and lets it use Ginnie Mae, Freddie Mac,
and Federal Housing Administration guarantees in different combinations to
create loan programs with different credit profiles and performance
characteristics.

The new structure essentially lets the agency account for different types of
origination and prepayment scenarios with different bond structures. Differences
among bond classes will hinge on variances in levels of collateralization and
lien priorities. The first deal was divided into three tranches.

Previously, under an indenture in place since 1977, the authority couldn't
effectively work with the financial instruments and guarantee programs available
in today's multifamily housing market. Although officials said that indenture
had served the agency well, allowing it to issue $4.13 billion of securities
over 25 years and finance 76,000 units of housing for low- and moderate-income
families and individuals, they believed time had passed it by.

The recent deal was senior managed by Lehman Brothers and Newman & Associates
Inc., with U.S. Bancorp Piper Jaffray and Goldman, Sachs & Co. serving as
co-managers.

After restructuring its indentures, the agency was not only able to adopt the
multi-tranche structure but also to use it to its best advantage by combining it
with the sale of adjustable-rate debt. About $86.24 million of the total was
adjustable-rate bonds, and about $11.55 million of that was taxable, although
those taxable bonds can be converted to tax-exempt at some point, according to
the official statement. The deal also included another $3.64 million component
of taxable, fixed-rate debt.

Under the program, the agency is using interest rate swaps to hedge against rate
volatility and existing cash flows to absorb unhedged risk. By combining swaps
and variable-rate debt, the agency hopes to reduce its overall cost of funds.

In another first, the agency lined up the Federal Home Loan Bank of Topeka to
participate as a standby bond purchaser on the variable-rate portion of the
debt. The bank's role helped the CHFA obtain triple-A ratings on the deal.
Although the FHLB has been involved in financing affordable housing initiatives,
this was the first time it did so by providing credit enhancement for a housing
agency.

"It is gratifying to know that by lending our triple-A rating, we are helping
ensure the success of this unique bond transaction," said Frank Lowman,
president and chief executive officer of the bank, in a prepared statement. "The
bank has always admired the CHFA's ability to create and maintain affordable
housing."

The new financing structure will let the CHFA reduce its overall cost of funds
at a time when the volume of affordable housing units available to low-income
residents under the federal government's Section 8 program has been declining.
As Section 8 subsidy contracts expire, many owners of apartment complexes are
abandoning the program because the overall strength of the economy allows owners
to fill their apartment complexes at market rates.

Thus, many low- and moderate-income residents are finding they can no longer
afford the apartments they live in. The CHFA said its new program includes 1,790
apartment complex units that are in the Section 8 rental housing market.

Market participants involved with the deal said that while it took a little more
explaining, once investors understood the multi-tranche nature of the deal, the
bonds sold quite well. Besides getting individual ratings for various components
of the issue, the agency obtained an A-plus issuer credit rating from Standard &
Poor's, which cited the agency's strong financial asset management, overall
healthy fiscal condition, and low general obligation debt exposure.



Copyright c 2000 American Banker, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.bondbuyer.com

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 925 words

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2000 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              217 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 11, 2011

Public Proposals for the Housing Finance System

BYLINE: Michael Berman

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 4 Vol. 35 No. 28

LENGTH: 751  words


I have been in the real estate finance industry for over 25 years and my company
has been active in the commercial mortgage-backed securities arena as an
investor, lender, issuer of securities, servicer and special servicer. We've
also been an active Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and FHA multifamily lender and
servicer.

The current housing crisis has prompted a fundamental rethinking of the part
played by the government in the housing finance system. Certainty of the federal
role in the housing market is necessary to encourage private capital to return.

Several factors contribute to the current uncertainty and lack of private
capital in the housing market. Ongoing uncertainty on risk retention rules, GSE
reform, and the future of the conforming loan limits raises questions about the
consistency of national housing policy. While the administration's recently
released white paper on reforming the housing finance system was an important
first step, much work lies ahead and we must act in a deliberate, coordinated
and comprehensive fashion.

MBA firmly believes that a carefully crafted government role can serve to
maintain the nascent housing market recovery and preserve the availability of
affordable 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. To this end, in 2008, MBA convened the
Council on Ensuring Mortgage Liquidity, which I chair. This 23-member council
was made up of industry practitioners from the single-family, multifamily and
commercial sectors of the real estate finance industry. Its mission was to look
beyond current market conditions, to what a properly functioning secondary
mortgage market should look like. In September of 2009, MBA first articulated a
plan, outlined in my written testimony, which is based on three key principles:

First, secondary mortgage market transactions should be funded with private
capital. Private capital should take two forms: capital that takes on credit
risk on mortgages and capital from bond investors that take on interest rate
risk.

Second, to promote uninterrupted market liquidity for the core mortgage market,
the government should provide an explicit, but limited, credit guarantee on a
class of mortgage-backed securities backed by "core," well-underwritten
single-family and multifamily mortgage products. This guarantee should not be
free, but should be financed with risk-based fees to be deposited into an
FDIC-type insurance fund.

Third, taxpayers and the system should be protected through limits on the
mortgage products covered, permissible activities, portfolio size and purpose,
coupled with strong risk-based capital requirements and risk-based payments into
a federal insurance fund.

This plan has largely been mirrored in option three of the administration's
white paper, as well as in plans proposed by other industry practitioners and
trade groups.

Let me be clear, MBA's plan is not an extension of the current status quo. It
focuses on core products and enacts five significant lines of defense to protect
taxpayers.

We believe that once the transition is complete, the government footprint in the
real estate market would be much smaller than today.

The framework we have proposed is not intended to be the entire market. It's
meant to focus on a narrowly defined set of core mortgage products that are
essential to have available through all market conditions. Our proposal
recognizes the need for a wider array of products through a re-emergence of the
private market, including private-label securities and covered bonds.

We must also ensure that the transition from the current system to a new model
is as seamless as possible. As taxpayers, we have a $150 billion investment that
we need to protect. Measures such as focusing the GSEs on a narrow range of
mortgages and winding down their portfolios can be undertaken now.

While we continue to rely on the GSEs as we identify a clear path forward, we
must work to remove uncertainty and ensure that the GSEs' resources are of
service now and through the transition.

The challenge of retaining and recruiting talented professionals cannot be
understated. Without their talent, our housing finance system would be further
at risk.

MBA's recommendations combine an acknowledgement that only a government
guarantee can attract the depth and breadth of capital necessary to support the
market during times of economic stress, with a reliance on private capital,
insistence on multiple layers of protections for taxpayers and a focus on
ensuring a competitive, efficient secondary mortgage market.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2011 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              218 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 27, 1995

GNMA's MBS Role To Shrink?

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1253 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A Clinton Administration proposal to streamline the Department of Housing and
Urban Development may reduce the role of the Government National Mortgage
Association in securitizing government-insured loans.

In addition, the plan asks that HUD be given permission to divert some of Ginnie
Mae's profit to capitalize the Federal Housing Administration's single-family
mortgage insurance fund.

HUD documents say that Ginnie Mae would continue to securitize loans fully
insured by the government.

However, the FHA plans to rely increasingly on risk-sharing partnerships that
would spread risk among partners such as the government-sponsored enterprises
and the private mortgage insurance industry.  The GSEs are in a strong position
to take the lead in securitizing these loans.

HUD needs Congressional approval to implement most of its "reinvention plan,"
and its single-family risk sharing venture is not up and running yet.  As a
result, the impact of the proposed changes remains largely uncertain.

Legislation that would have given the FHA broad authority to enter into
single-family risk sharing partnerships died last year.

However, the FHA already has limited authority to test risk sharing
arrangements.  A HUD official last week said that the pilot single-family risk
sharing program is a priority, and the Department hopes to publish proposed
regulations to outline the pilot program within the next few months.

The HUD reinvention plan is designed in part to take the steam out of a
conservative effort to abolish the agency.

The "HUD Reinvention: from blueprint to action" report released last week said
that Ginnie Mae, the Treasury Department and other agencies are studying the
feasibility of having Ginnie Mae participate in the risk sharing ventures.

But the report neither endorses nor opposes the idea of allowing the GNMA, which
traditionally has guaranteed securities backed by loans with a full guarantee,
to participate in risk sharing.  To do so would require the GNMA to rethink its
potential risk exposure on securities and perhaps require a charter change.

By contrast, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and the Federal National
Mortgage Association do not need to wait for a large number of government
agencies and Congressional committees to decide whether they should participate
in risk sharing ventures or purchase loans from such partnerships.

The secondary market agencies could quickly gear up to participate in the
business.

In previously released budget documents, HUD has envisioned moving quickly into
the single-family risk sharing business.  The agency said at one point that it
may do as much as 20% of its single-family mortgage insurance business through
risk sharing efforts within the next year or two.  Eventually, HUD hopes to see
that share grow even higher.

In the reinvention report, HUD also said it will seek authority to use Ginnie
Mae revenue to help capitalize the single-family insurance fund in the new
Federal Housing Corp.

Specifically, HUD proposed that the GNMA's "excess of revenues over both
expenses and provisions for losses" be made available for transfer to the Mutual
Mortgage Insurance Fund to ensure that the fund meets its statutory capital
goals.

Nicolas Retsinas, assistant secretary for housing and federal housing
commissioner, said this is just an option that HUD would like to have as "a
potential source" of capital for the proposed Federal Housing Corp.

Under the reinvention plan, he said the reshaped FHA and the GNMA would work
more closely together.  But the Administration stopped short of recommending a
merger of the two entities.

Proposals to merge the two entities have been controversial in past debates
about the future of the FHA.  Some officials felt they made a perfect match
because their business is so intertwined; others thought it posed a conflict for
the guarantor of securities to be wedded to the insurer of individual loans.

Currently, all Ginnie Mae excess funds are put into a loss reserve.  The
Administration's fiscal 1995 budget proposal anticipates $ 539 million in Ginnie
Mae net profits in 1995 and $ 644 million in 1996.  In 1994, before the Ginnie
Mae REMIC program was fully operational, the Ginnie Mae reported net income of $
459 million.

The "HUD Reinvention" plan envisions that the FHA single-family and multifamily
programs will be incorporated into the new Federal Housing Corp., an entity that
will have greater latitude to respond to changing market conditions.

However, in contrast to the government-sponsored enterprises, the FHC would
remain government-owned and would operate under the direction of the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development.

Like the government sponsored secondary market agencies, the FHC would answer to
the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight for safety and soundness
regulation.  The FHA currently insures over $ 380 billion of single and
multifamily mortgages.

HUD would focus on the FHC's public policy mission as a source of financing for
homebuyers who might have trouble obtaining conventional financing, HUD
officials say.

However, some conservatives in Congress want to see the FHA fully privatized,
and even many moderate Republicans want to target the FHA's services more
narrowly to low and moderate income homebuyers.

Mr. Retsinas said HUD believes it is prudent to separate the safety and
soundness regulation of the FHC from the program regulation of its public policy
service.

"We think the safety and soundness regulator helps us in a very prudent way," he
said.

As the Administration proposes, the OFHEO would establish a capital adequacy
level for the Corporation similar to the OFHEO's current responsibility to
measure the capital adequacy of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and the
Federal National Mortgage Association.

Currently, the FHA's single-family program is actuarially sound, as it is
required to be under law.  However, the multifamily mortgage insurance programs
have required billions of dollars in Federal subsidies to offset losses.

The FHA's troubled portfolio may incur additional heavy losses as the
Administration implements a plan to phase out project-based subsidies.  The
Administration would like to "mark to market" multifamily debt, reducing the
mortgage debt outstanding while terminating project-based rent assistance on the
HUD insured properties.

The debt restructuring is necessary because the loss of subsidies could
otherwise lead to enormous defaults, Mr. Retsinas said.

"If the subsidy spigot were to stop abruptly, it would drive into foreclosure
thousands of properties," he told reporters last week.

The FHA has about 10,000 multifamily properties in its inventory of insured
multifamily housing.

About 75% of the inventory also receives some form of rent assistance or
interest rate subsidy from HUD.

Those properties are scheduled to receive an estimated $ 64 billion of Section
Eight project-based assistance over the remainder of the mortgage terms, though
Congress has not appropriated much of the money and pressure to reduce the
deficit makes it unlikely that Congress will appropriate fully fund the
assistance.

However, Mr. Retsinas said he believes the FHC could develop a new multifamily
mortgage insurance program that does not require a subsidy.

"Once we've dealt with the inherited liability, which is in large part the
multifamily portfolio, we believe that over time we can design this new
corporation on a self-sustaining basis."

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, California Construction Loan Volume, (Volume of recorded
construction loans in California for February 1994 through February 1995.
Percent figure represents the year-to-year change.), Source: Dataquick Info
Systems data

                   Copyright 1995 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              219 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 11, 2015

Fannie G-Fee Income Tops Investment Income in 1st Quarter

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12 Vol. 39 No. 28

LENGTH: 351  words


Fannie Mae reported net interest income of $5.1 billion in the first quarter,
over half of which came from guarantee fees rather than its investment
portfolio.

"This is the first time we have disclosed that a majority of our revenues have
come from from our guarantee fees, a trend that we would expect to continue over
time," said Timothy Mayopoulos, Fannie's chief executive officer, during a
conference call.

G-fees on single-family loans totaled $3 billion in the first quarter, up from
$2.9 billion a year ago, according to Fannie. Such income has been slowly rising
after the Federal Housing Finance Agency began hiking G-fees at the same time
that it ordered Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to reduce mortgage portfolio income.

Fannie Mae's mortgage investment portfolio dropped to $411.7 billion as of March
31 from $597.8 billion two years ago.

Overall, Fannie Mae posted $1.9 billion in net income in the first quarter, up
from $1.3 billion a quarter earlier.

"This was another quarter of strong financial performance. We continue to have
solid revenues," Mayopoulos said. In the first quarter, Fannie Mae purchased
$113.2 billion in single-family loans, up slightly from the quarter prior and a
jump of 48% from a year ago.

Mayopoulos added that Fannie is continuing to work with lenders, the Mortgage
Bankers Association and FHFA to provide more clarity on representation and
warranty risk.

The changes announced last year in that area are already having an impact, he
said. "These changes to the rep-and-warrant framework are very much welcomed and
appreciated" by lenders, Mayopoulos said. "It has encouraged many lenders to
adjust or take off their overlays."

The Fannie CEO also noted that the government-sponsored enterprise has added an
appraisal analysis application and a predelivery eligibility and data evaluation
tool into Desktop Underwriter.

"The integration of these applications has allowed lenders to effectively manage
their risk and product very solid loans," he said.

Fannie Mae is still operating in conservatorship and it will pay a $1.8 billion
dividend to the Treasury Department in June.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              220 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 27, 2015

FHA Sets Electronic Appraisal Submission Date for June 2016

BYLINE: Colin Wilhelm

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 172  words


The Federal Housing Administration will require single family home mortgage
appraisals to be submitted through an online electronic delivery portal starting
on June 27, 2016, the agency announced Thursday.

The announcement has been anticipated for some time.The FHA reveled its plan to
collect electronic appraisals in 2012but hoped to deploy the systemthis
yearinstead of next. The paperless submission is part of an administration
effort to speed appraisals through automation, a process that Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac instituted several years ago. Once appraisers upload files the FHA's
system will pull appraisal data and prefill some fields.

Some exceptions apply. Appraisals for section 184 and 184a loan guarantees
processedÂ  by the Department of Housing and Urban Development's office of
Native American programs and appraisals of HUD REO properties for FHA will not
be subject to the electronic submission requirement, nor will FHA claims without
conveyance of title property appraisals and pre-foreclosure sale properties.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              221 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2012 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Hidden Fee Is Set to Rise

BYLINE: By VICKIE ELMER

SECTION: Section RE; Column 0; Real Estate Desk; MORTGAGES; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 643 words


INSIDE the interest rate quoted on your home mortgage lies a small hidden fee
that has been charged by government-sponsored entities like Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac for more than three decades. It's an add-on rate known as the
guarantee fee.

An increase in the fee has been mandated by Congress to occur this spring, and
other increases are likely later this year and next. When they happen, interest
rates on single-family mortgages resold to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac are likely
to inch up as well.

''It's going to be silently passed through'' by lenders when it does increase,
said Richard W. Grohmann, a real estate lawyer in Paramus, N.J.

The G-fee -- as it is known -- does not show up in borrowers' mortgage documents
or good-faith estimates, and it is little known outside the industry.

''It gets incorporated into the underlying rate that the borrower pays,'' said
Andrew Wilson, a spokesman for Fannie Mae.

An interest rate is usually made up of three parts: the largest goes to the bank
or the investors who buy the loan; a smaller portion is for the mortgage
servicer that collects monthly payments; and then there's the guarantee fee.
Fannie and Freddie charge guarantee fees as a form of insurance against default
for the loans they acquire and resell to investors.

The G-fee will rise 10 basis points on April 1; the increase was included in the
two-month extension of the payroll tax reduction last December. (A basis point
is equal to one one-hundredth of 1 percent, or 0.01 percent.)

Keith T. Gumbinger, a vice president of HSH Associates, a financial publisher in
Pompton Plains, N.J., says the increase in the guarantee fee will very likely
push up mortgage rates on new loans by one-eighth of a percentage point. ''While
it is most common to build the G-fee into the loan's rate, it doesn't have to be
done that way,'' he said in an e-mail, noting that some lenders might charge a
flat fee instead.

Already, though, loans with interest-rate locks from the last 45 or 60 days have
the higher guarantee fee written into them, according to Tom Kelly, the
president of Investors Home Mortgage, a division of Investors Bank in Short
Hills, N.J. Lenders say they need the extra lead time because it may take time
to close the loan, package it and send it on to Fannie or Freddie.

One way to avoid the guarantee fee is to use a lender that does not sell off its
loans -- for instance, a community bank or a credit union.

Besides offsetting risks, the fees provide a primary source of revenue for
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Fannie, for instance, made $5.6 billion in
single-family guarantee-fee income in the first nine months of 2011, a 4.7
percent increase from the 2010 period, according to its quarterly financial
statements.

Fannie and Freddie have collected G-fees since the introduction of
mortgage-backed securities in the early 1980s. ''It was variable from the start,
based on the volume level of loans'' made by the lender, Mr. Kelly said.

Both organizations started raising fee rates in 2008 during the housing crisis,
as foreclosure costs rose. G-fees gained modestly in 2010, and also last year.

New single-family loans acquired by Fannie Mae were charged a guarantee fee of
31.1 basis points, on average, in the third quarter of 2011, the most recent
period for which data are available. That is six points higher than in the third
quarter of 2010. Rates on multifamily loans are 15 to 20 basis points higher
than on single-families.

''We expect that single-family guarantee fees will increase in the coming
years,'' Fannie Mae said in its third-quarter report to investors, ''although we
do not know the timing, form or extent of these increases.''

In a letter to Congress last month, Edward J. DeMarco, the acting director of
the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
suggested ''continued gradual increases.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHARTS: INDEX FOR ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGES: 1-year Treasury rate
(Source: HSH Associates)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                            August 22, 2013 Thursday

NCRC Pushes for Affordable Housing Provisions in GSE Reform

BYLINE: Victoria Finkle

SECTION: REGULATION & REFORM Vol. 178 No. 130

LENGTH: 321  words


WASHINGTON - The National Community Reinvestment Coalition unveiled a new white
paper Wednesday that outlines two alternative proposals for integrating
affordable housing into the larger mortgage finance reform debate.

The paper, "A Guarantee for the Guarantee: Two Proposals To Ensure that the
Future Secondary Mortgage Market Serves All Creditworthy Borrowers," comes as
momentum to overhaul Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac has surged in Washington, with
legislation pending in both the House and Senate.

The report lays out a so-called "status quo access model" that would carry over
existing affordable housing goals used by the government-sponsored enterprises,
along with a second "incentive model" that would likely prove more politically
palatable than maintaining the existing goals. The second model would apply a
variable cost paid by secondary market entities based on their commitment to
purchase and securitize a diverse supply of mortgages to groups with "unmet
housing needs." The sliding fee would be related to either the cost of a
government guarantee for the market or an affordable housing assessment.

"Little, if any, detailed attention has been paid to addressing the need to
provide affordable, conventional mortgage credit to the full spectrum of
America's creditworthy borrowers-including millenials, working-class people,
rural residents, and minorities," the paper says. "The National Community
Reinvestment Coalition believes that this omission renders the current proposals
lacking."

It adds: "The shape of the secondary market will play a significant role in
dictating access to mortgage credit for almost every household in this country.
Establishing an affirmative obligation to serve the full spectrum of
creditworthy borrowers with conventional lending is an important step for
ensuring equal opportunity for consumers and accountability for private
financial institutions that seek a federal guarantee."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              223 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               November 15, 1993

Ginnie: We Can Handle Remics

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON. --


The Government National Mortgage Association remains confident that it can begin
guaranteeing Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduit securities next year
despite a staffing shortgage.

Currently, GNMA is in the process of hiring three executives to run the REMIC
program.  In addition, it is hiring a fourth person who will be responsible for
contract overnight.  Much of the work in the REMIC program will be done by
contractors hired by GNMA.

Earlier, the General Accounting Office said that said GNMA was too short staffed
to oversee a REMIC program with billions of dollars in outstanding guarantees.
But a GNMA representative said senior management at GNMA remain confident that
they can proceed with development of the REMIC program and manage their current
obligations.

Ginnie Mae has a staff of about 70 people and guarantees $ 415 billion in
mortgage-backed securities involving government-guaranteed loans.

Dwight Robinson, nominated to be president of GNMA, told Congress he hopes to
lead "a strong, confident Ginnie Mae working to leverage capital that can be the
engine behind new initiative and ideas."

Starting a Remic program will be one of his first priorities.  After his Senate
confirmation hearing, Mr. Robinson said Ginnie Mae plans to guarantee REMIC
securities beginning in early 1994.

The Ginnie Mae recently put out a notice asking underwriters to submit proposals
for the REMIC programs.  The proposals are due Jan. 20.

The Ginnie Mae has also sent out notice seeking an accounting firm, trust
counsel and trustee for the REMIC PROGRAM.

Ginnie Mae is in the process of hiring four key officials to run the program and
oversee contractors.  Contractors will perform much of the work associated with
the REMIC program.

The REMIC will allow Ginnie Mae to slice up securities into risk groups.

The REMIC program is expected to lower interest rates for home buyers using the
Federal Housing Administration and Veterans Affairs loss guarantee programs.  A
Public Securities Association working group last year estimated that a Ginnie
Mae REMIC program would reduce the yield on FHA/VA mortgages by five to ten
basis points.

During the confirmation hearing, Mr. Robinson said Ginnie Mae will be a partner
in the overall effort to streamline and "reinvent" the Department of Housing and
Urban Development.

"This agency is poised to be a progressive technical tool supporting HUD's
lending programs, as a fully integrated partner with the FHA/VA," he said.

Currently, the Ginnie Mae guarantees mortgage-backed securities that fund over $
400 billion in FHA, VA and Farmers Home Administration mortgage loans.

"We believe Ginnie Mae is well positioned, that it's portfolio is well managed,"
Mr. Robinson said.

Over 90% of the portfolio is single-family, but Ginnie Mae will do about $ 2
billion in multifamily mortgage securities this year, he said.

He said the government-sponsored enterprises and HUD should increase their
multifamily housing activity, and predicted that a resurgence of sound
multifamily lending may be in the offing.

Mr. Robinson was previously as affordable-housing executive with the Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.  Prior to joining Freddie Mae, he worked with
the Michigan State Housing Development Authority and was a city planner.

CREDIT UNION REGULATOR ALSO HEADED FOR CONFIRMATION

Norman D'Amours, a Washington attorney and former congressman from New
Hampshire, has been nominated to lead the National Credit Union Administration.

Mr. D'Amours said he forsees continued growth for the credit union industry.
Currently, credit unions control about $ 280 billion in assets.

Mr. D'Amours defended the exemption of credit unions from Federal income tax
because of their "unique status." However, he said the credit unions should
maintain the "common bond" among members that is the basis for their status.

LOAD-DATE: December 01, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              224 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1988, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. Lowers Loan Rate

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


The Veterans Administration said today that it would lower its maximum interest
rate for federally backed home mortgages by a percentage point, to 9.5 percent.

The V.A. said it was making the change, effective Monday, to bring its rate in
line with the mortgage market, which has been moving down in recent weeks.

The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation said today that the national average
for 30-year conventional mortgages, those without Government guarantees, had
fallen to 10.16 percent this week from 10.34 percent last week. It was the
lowest level since last April.

The lower V.A. rate will reduce the monthly payment on a typical home loan of
$70,000 by nearly $52.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               New York Observer

                               September 15, 2009

Whither Fannie Mae?

LENGTH: 964 words


Editor's note: The Lead Indicator is a new weekly column in the Commercial
Observer by economist Sam Chandan of the Wharton School. This is the first
column.

In New York City and across the country, multifamily and commercial real estate
investment activity has plummeted since the onset of the credit crisis. The
absence of an independently functioning securitization market and banks&rsquo;
unremitting tightening of lending standards have robbed investors of low-cost
credit&rsquo;s vital spark. In their stead, a paucity of credit has sundered
buyers&rsquo; and sellers&rsquo; gauges of value.

The bid-offer spread that can narrow almost instantly in a liquid securities
market has resisted closing in the less efficient arena of commercial real
estate. Real Capital Analytics reports that, amid this environment of patient
buyers and willful sellers, transaction volumes have fallen to their lowest
levels in 18 years and are rising only gradually from the trough earlier this
year. In the face of the market&rsquo;s cooling, inquencies and defaults have
necessarily grown in number and severity.

While private capital flows to commercial real estate have ebbed, the resulting
strains on apartment investors have been tempered by the intercession of the
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Known
commonly for their shared role in facilitating single-family homeownership, both
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are also crucial sources of liquidity for the
multifamily market. Through programs including Fannie Mae&rsquo;s Delegated
Underwriting and Servicing, private lenders are able to make mortgages in
risk-sharing partnership with the larger enterprises.

As of the second quarter, Fannie Mae&rsquo;s multifamily book of business was
$177 billion, up 12 percent from a year earlier. The serious inquency rate for
Fannie Mae&rsquo;s multifamily loans was just 0.5 percent; Freddie Mac reported
a multifamily inquency rate of just 0.2 percent. As other sources of credit have
vanished, these quasi-governmental institutions have evolved into the keystones
of apartment mortgage financing. Together, the GSEs accounted for 34 percent of
multifamily activity in 2006. In 2008, that share had grown to 84 percent.

Notwithstanding their importance, Fannie Mae&rsquo;s and Freddie Mac&rsquo;s
continued participation in the multifamily market is not assured. Rather, the
old consensus around the fundamental role of the GSEs in the nation&rsquo;s
mortgage markets has been upended by the housing crisis.

In the minds of many policy makers and politicians, both firms are culpable, at
least in part, for the inflation of the housing bubble and its painful
aftermath.

But it is at the intersection of policy and politics that the future of these
institutions will be determined, as both now operate under the full purview of
the government. The Department of the Treasury and the Federal Housing Finance
Agency (FHFA) announced last September that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were
being placed under the conservatorship of the FHFA. The FHFA&rsquo;s assumption
of operational control of the GSEs followed a protracted period of stress in
secondary mortgage markets and a government review of both institutions&rsquo;
prospective financial health.

In explaining the decision to assume control, former Treasury Secretary Henry
Paulson and the former director of FHFA, James Lockhart, cited the impact of
deteriorating mortgage performance on the GSEs&rsquo; earnings, capital and
capacities to meet their policy goals, as well as threats to broader economic
and financial market stability stemming from the potential for additional losses
at the two firms.

These losses have been prodigious. On account of their net worth deficits, both
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have received billions of dollars in funds from
Treasury to avoid receivership.

The future of the GSEs is unclear. For the time being, they are playing a vital
policy role in stabilizing single-family and multifamily housing markets.
Administrators have offered assurances that the multifamily lines of business
remain integral to Fannie Mae&rsquo;s and Freddie Mac&rsquo;s missions.

In a July 30 address before the National Press Club, Mr. Lockhart said that the
GSEs must "continue to buy and guarantee single-family and multifamily mortgages
in a safe and sound manner. &hellip; The Enterprises are working to stabilize
the multifamily market by keeping it liquid, supporting affordable rental
housing, and keeping to clear and consistent credit principles." But he added
that "the old hybrid mo of private, for-profit ownership underwritten by an
implicit government guarantee" was no longer tenable.

Any substantive effort to alter the relationship of the GSEs to its regulator
and guarantor implies that fundamental reform is in the offing.

The White House has indicated that it will address the issue of Fannie
Mae&rsquo;s and Freddie Mac&rsquo;s future structure with the next fiscal year
budget proposal to Congress in February 2010. In the meantime, what shape the
GSEs will take and what their role in the multifamily market will be are
unknowns.

The U.S. Government Accountability Office issued its options assessments on
Sept. 10. One option presented in the report "would abolish the enterprises in
their current form and disperse mortgage lending and risk management throughout
the private sector." While uncertainties abound in the current environment, we
can be sure that an abrupt withdrawal of the GSEs from the multifamily market
will constitute a destabilizing shock to liquidity.

editorial@observer.comSam Chandan, Ph.D., is president and chief economist of
Real Estate Econometrics and an adjunct professor of real estate at the Wharton
School.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Observer, L.P.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              226 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 1, 2017

GUARANTEE NEEDED;
An explicit government guarantee of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is imperative to
reform the secondary market, but needs be carefully circumscribed - covering
only the securities and invoked only after multiple, significant layers of
private capital have been exhausted.

BYLINE: Rodrigo Lopez

SECTION: VOICES; Pg. 19 Vol. 41 No. 8

LENGTH: 561  words


Change has come to Washington, and for some time our industry has been preparing
for a new administration - which means a new approach, different personnel and a
chance to revisit important issues. For the real estate finance industry, this
change is an opportunity to settle the long conservatorship of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.

For years this issue has been a priority for lenders around the country. On
their behalf, the Mortgage Bankers Association has developed a model to end the
conservatorship of the GSEs and establish a new, durable foundation for the
secondary mortgage market.

The MBA presented this model in a whitepaper, GSE Reform Principles and
Guardrails, which begins to address how to move forward with secondary mortgage
market reform. The paper reflects the collective views of a diverse group of
lenders - referred to as the task force - representing all business models from
both the single-family and multifamily markets.

MBA's task force considered many models in developing its recommendation and
built on recommendations previously suggested by past efforts. Several key
features stood out as critical to ensuring the long-term health of the secondary
mortgage market:

* Leveraging the benefits of competition and strong regulation;

* Ensuring equal market access for lenders of all sizes and business models;

* Preserving a strong public mission; and

* Maintaining a deep, liquid market for long-term, single- and multifamily
financing options.

These are the bedrock principles on which a durable housing finance system
should be built for future generations.

In order to properly reform the secondary mortgage market, we must recognize
congressional action is required and embrace the critical role an explicit
federal guarantee plays in housing.

Learning from lessons that led to conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
our proposal focuses on the core need for liquidity, stability and demand in the
global markets for mortgage debt.

An implicit guarantee that leaves taxpayers holding the bag when things go
sideways will no longer suffice. An explicit government guarantee is imperative
but needs be carefully circumscribed - covering only the securities (and not the
issuers) and invoked only after multiple, significant layers of private capital
have been exhausted.

Therefore, in times of extreme duress, the federal government's role would be to
ensure liquidity for continued investor purchases of mortgage-backed securities.

Only Congress can create an insurance fund to support an explicit government
guarantee for eligible mortgage backed securities; any discussion of reform
without congressional action is unrealistic. So, what would an end-state
resemble? In short, MBA supports an end-state that would encourage multiple
guarantors, organized as privately owned utilities with a regulated rate of
return and overseen by a strong, world-class regulator.

They would have a public purpose of providing sustainable credit availability to
the conventional mortgage market to lenders of all sizes and business models.

Guarantors would also be responsible for executing on an affordable-housing
strategy to ensure broad access to credit, preserve and develop affordable
housing options, and address underserved markets nationwide.

Rodrigo Lopez is the executive chairman of NorthMarq Capital and chairman of
Mortgage Bankers Association.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              227 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 26, 2014

Sorry, Fannie: Banks Keeping Choicest Loans

BYLINE: Kate Berry

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 38 No. 35

LENGTH: 799  words


JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo are retaining more high-quality, conforming
mortgages that they would normally sell to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, raising
concerns that the banks are adversely selecting the weakest loans for the
government-sponsored enterprises.

The banks are in talks with Fannie to determine if guarantee fees need to be
raised to cover the higher risk to the GSE of holding more loans with
less-than-stellar credit characteristics. The banks contend they are still
delivering loans of high quality to Fannie. The GSEs routinely evaluate the mix
of loans being delivered to them and hold banks accountable if that mix deviates
significantly from the past.

"If a lender wants to retain some loans on their books, that is totally
acceptable and understandable," says Andy Wilson, a Fannie spokesman, who says
the issue is not a contentious one. "What we have to do is have a conversation
about the risk profile of what the banks would deliver and make sure they are
pricing appropriately."

The change is analogous to a health insurer that suddenly found all of the
people insured under the age of 35 had dropped coverage of their health plans.

"If there is a shift in the profile of risk, we need to price it right," Wilson
says. (Freddie declined to comment for this article.)

Chase has decided to keep anywhere from 10% to 25% of higher-quality conforming
loans that it normally would sell to the GSEs, a person familiar with the matter
said. Wells has not disclosed in the past year the amount of conforming loans it
will retain.

Fannie and Freddie's guarantee fees are typically embedded in mortgage rates to
protect investors from losses on home loans. Those fees have become a sore spot
because they raise the cost to the borrower of getting a mortgage. Borrowers pay
roughly 57 basis points in guarantee fees and more in so-called loan level price
adjustments assessed by the GSEs based on a loan's characteristics.

Those fees alone can add up to 75 basis points to the mortgage rate, a
significant cost for the privilege of selling a loan to Fannie or Freddie.

"Each bank has a view of the risk of the loan, the costs and what price they can
get, net of all that, versus holding a loan on balance sheet," says Cliff Rossi,
a professor of finance at the University of Maryland.

Rossi, who once headed single-family mortgage credit at Freddie, says the fees
are high enough to make holding the loans more attractive. The additional fees
as more than enough compensation for retaining the risk.

"If these are good credits, banks are going to hold them all day long," he said.

The big banks' shift to retaining more loans gained impetus late last year when
the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the GSEs' regulator, announced a fee hike to
bring more private capital back into the market.

The new FHFA Director Mel Watt delayed that expected fee increase in January to
examine its potential impact on the market.

Since the 2007-2008 financial crisis most of the mortgages banks kept on their
balance sheets have been jumbo loans to high-net-worth borrowers. But banks are
flush with cash and with loan volumes plummeting over the last year they
desperately need to add quality assets to their holdings.

The shift also indicates that the banks are extremely comfortable with the loans
they are retaining, which have high FICO scores and low loan-to-value ratios,
because they are most likely to have low defaults.

"We've said pretty consistently that we like mortgages as an asset and continue
to put high-quality loans on balance sheet," says Tom Goyda, a Wells spokesman.
Wells disclosed in the third and four quarters of 2012 and in the first quarter
of 2013 that it would retain more loans ranging from $417,000 to
$625,500-amounts eligible for GSE purchase in pricier housing markets.

Fannie's market share declined 10% in the first quarter but it is unclear how
much of that decline could be attributed to the big banks selling it fewer
loans, Wilson says. Freddie does not disclose market share. The average credit
score on loans purchased by Fannie and Freddie is 752, according to an analysis
by the Urban Institute.

The downside is that the GSEs now may end up with dodgier borrowers, those with
low FICO scores and high loan-to-value ratios. That has led to concerns that the
GSEs could be adversely selected to receive lower-quality loans. That is an
issue that has long plagued the Federal Housing Administration, which has a
mandate to support first-time homebuyers.

"The company providing insurance is always fearful they will be adversely
selected," says Rossi. "This is a very common circumstance for the GSEs to be
in, and which they want to guard against in a big way. If they now say they have
underpriced the risk, they will need to exact some additional guarantee fee over
time."

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              228 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                            January 27, 2017 Friday

Fitch Rates Indiana Housing & Community Devel Auth Single Family Mtg Revs 2017A
'AAA'

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: New York



 New York: Fitch Ratings assigns a 'AAA' rating to the Indiana Housing and
Community Development Authority (the authority) single family mortgage revenue
bonds, $30 million 2017 series A-1 and $14.455 million 2017 series A-2.





 The Rating Outlook is Stable.



 SECURITY

 The bonds are special obligations of the authority secured solely by the
revenues and assets pledged under the amended and restated master indenture that
primarily consist of mortgage backed securities (MBS) guaranteed by the
Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA or Ginnie Mae), mortgage
pass-through certificates guaranteed by the Federal National Mortgage
Association (FNMA or Fannie Mae) and MBS guaranteed by the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC or Freddie Mac) and cash reserves.



 KEY RATING DRIVERS



 LOAN PORTFOLIO: The loan portfolio consists of MBS guaranteed by Ginnie Mae and
Freddie Mac and the Fannie Mae mortgage pass through certificates (hereinafter
MBS).



 ASSET QUALITY: Ginnie Mae, Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae guarantee the full and
timely payment of principal and interest on the respective MBS regardless of
actual performance of the underlying loans.



 ASSET TO DEBT RATIO: The program's asset-to-debt ratio is 209.3% as of fiscal
year ended Dec. 31, 2015.



 PROGRAM OVERSIGHT: Indenture allows surplus funds in excess of 103% to be
withdrawn from the indenture. However, the history of the authority and its
single family mortgage program strongly suggests that management is unlikely to
withdraw substantial amounts from the indenture's surplus funds.



 RATING SENSITIVITIES



 U.S. SOVERIGN LINK: As the ratings of Fannie Mae, Ginnie Mae and Freddie Mac,
as government sponsored entities (GSEs) are currently linked to the U.S.
sovereign rating, any rating action on the U.S. sovereign rating may directly
impact the rating on the bonds.



 CHANGE IN FNMA or FHLMC LINKAGE: Should Fitch's view of the U.S. government's
direct level of financial support for Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac change, the
rating of the two GSEs may be delinked from the U.S. sovereign rating and may
result in negative pressure on the bonds.



 BANKRUPTCY REMOTE: Fitch considers the authority to be bankruptcy remote based
on its public purposes, predominantly limited recourse debt and its inability
under current law to commence a voluntary proceeding under Chapter 9 without
legislative or executive approval. A change in this status could lead to a
rating change and limit the rating on the single family program to that of the
authority's general obligation debt.



 CREDIT PROFILE

 The authority was established in 1978 as a public body and corporate of the
State of Indiana. It is empowered to purchase loans from lenders to provide
permanent financing for the rehabilitation, acquisition or construction of
single-family residential housing made to persons of low and moderate income.



 The 2017 series A bonds are being issued on parity with approximately $142
million in outstanding bonds under the master trust indenture as of Jan. 1,
2017. The indenture's assets are of sound quality as MBS payments are guaranteed
by the GSEs and do not rely on the performance of the underlying mortgages.
Mortgages permitted to be placed into MBS must be fully documented and follow
strict underwriting requirements to qualify. All loans packaged into the MBS are
for first time homebuyers in the state.



 In conjunction with the issuance of the authority's 2016A bonds, the master
trust indenture was amended and restated to incorporate all of the amendments
and restatements of the original 1980 master indenture in a single document. The
amended and restated master indenture removes provisions that applied only when
whole mortgage loans were held under the indenture rather than GNMA, FNMA and
FHLMC MBS. The 2016 master trust indenture will become effective upon the
issuance of the 2017 series A bonds and redemption of the bonds refunded with
this issuance, as holders of more than 66 and 2/3% in principal amount of the
authority's outstanding bonds under the indenture will have consented to the
amendments. The amendments will apply to all bonds issued under the indenture
going forward.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              229 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                   Roll Call

                             July 10, 2008 Thursday

FHA Bill Worries GOP Lawmakers

BYLINE: Charlene Carter, CONGRESSNOW STAFF

SECTION: THE ROAD AHEAD: FINANCE

LENGTH: 553 words


A bill that would allow the Federal Housing Administration greater
responsibility for helping prevent foreclosures nationwide has some Republicans
worried that the agency would not be able to handle its new duties.

A bipartisan group of lawmakers has pushed to expand the FHA's reach during the
economic downturn, when the interest rates on millions of adjustable rate
mortgages are expected to reset to higher rates. That is likely to result in
more expensive mortgages and a much higher risk of default and foreclosure.

The American Housing Rescue and Foreclosure Prevention Act, which is expected to
be enacted into law this year, would allow the FHA to guarantee 30-year,
fixed-rate mortgages for subprime borrowers facing foreclosure, provided that
their lender voluntarily writes down their current loan to current market value.

Sen. Chris Dodd (D-Conn.), chairman of the Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs
Committee, has said that it is a natural idea to allow the FHA - which since
1934 has helped to provide stability and liquidity in the housing market - to
aid struggling homeowners, broaden homeownership and stimulate the building
industry.

Despite its history as an entity designed to stabilize the housing market, some
Senate and House Republicans are concerned that the guarantee program would bail
out bankers by allowing them to dump their worst loans on the agency. In turn,
they fear, the FHA could be distracted or even prevented from carrying out its
long-standing mission.

Sen. Kit Bond (R-Mo.) called the approach disastrous and said the program would
raise false hope for struggling homeowners.

"It is a fundamental principle that the Congress does not create programs that
perpetuate or reward the behavior that led to the housing crisis or damage the
key agencies that play a key role in stabilizing the housing market," Bond said
as the Senate debated the measure on the floor this month.

"While I would like to keep as many homeowners in their homes as possible, this
strategy is more likely to result in a huge bailout for lenders while protecting
a very limited number of homeowners."

Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R-Texas) raised concerns similar to Bond's. Hensarling
added that in his view, the FHA doesn't have the resources to manage the
additional program.

The FHA, a subsidiary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, has
traditionally been a provider of single-family mortgage insurance for home
purchases.

In a rising market this has been a noncontroversial and relatively worry-free
line of work, but in June, HUD announced that the agency suffered a $4.6 billion
loss last year, one it attributed to high default rates on home loans in the
agency's seller-financed down payment mortgage program, according to Brian
Montgomery, HUD's assistant secretary for housing.

Montgomery has warned that "unless we take action to mitigate these losses, the
FHA will soon either have to shut down or rely on appropriations to operate."

The warnings have caused some to question whether the FHA guarantee program
could cause the agency to become insolvent.

House Financial Services Chairman Barney Frank (D-Mass.) has rejected that
argument, saying that the only way the program could jeopardize the agency is if
none of the 500,000 borrowers expected to be helped by the program repaid their
loans.

Ñ

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2008 Roll Call, Inc.


                              230 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             July 14, 2009 Tuesday

Freddie Cuts Origination Forecast

BYLINE: National Mortgage News

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 4 Vol. 174 No. 133

LENGTH: 127  words


Freddie Mac has slashed its origination forecast for the third quarter by $265
billion mainly because of a drop-off in refinancings.

The government-sponsored enterprises's latest housing market forecast, released
Friday, shows loan production in the third quarter coming in at $625 billion,
down from Freddie's $890 billion estimate a month ago.

All of the reduction in loan production comes from conventional loans that
Freddie and Fannie Mae purchase or guarantee.

The new forecast shows a slight pickup in originations of loans guaranteed by
the Federal Housing Administration and the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Freddie is now forecasting that lenders will originate $2.3 trillion in
single-family loans this year, down $400 billion from its previous forecast.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              231 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                             March 13, 2012 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Banks rush out first home loans backed by state

BYLINE: Sarah O'Grady

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 487 words


THREE high street lenders yesterday became the first to offer home loans to
first-time buyers with only a five per cent deposit as part of the first ever
state-backed mortgage guarantee scheme.

Barclays, Nationwide Building Society and NatWest, part of taxpayer-owned Royal
Bank of Scotland, are to offer 95 per cent mortgages through the NewBuy
indemnity plan.

Halifax, part of Lloyds Banking Group, will join them next month and Santander
by summer.

The scheme, launched yesterday by David Cameron, aims to help 100,000 home
buyers who have only a five per cent deposit to buy a new-build property worth
up to £500,000.

Housebuilders will provide a deposit of 3.5 per cent of a property's value, with
the Government giving an additional guarantee of 5.5 per cent.

Prime Minister Mr Cameron heralded the initiative as a way of tempting
first-time buyers back into the market while stimulating the building industry
and the economy.

NatWest has the most competitive deals. It is offering the option to either fix
the mortgage for two years at a rate of 4.29 per cent, or five years at 4.99 per
cent, both with a £499 arrangement fee. These rates will only be available to
buyers of a new-build property through Barratt, Bellway, Bovis, Linden Homes,
Persimmon, Redrow and Taylor Wimpey.

Barclays has a two-year fixed-rate mortgage at 4.99 per cent or a four-year fix
at 5.89 per cent. Both come with a £499 fee and revert to a lifetime tracker at
base plus 3.99 percentage points at the end of the mortgage term.

Nationwide is offering the least competitive rates, according to mortgage
brokers. It has a three-year fixed-rate at 5.69 per cent, with a £999 fee, or a
five-year fixed-rate at 5.99 per cent with a £999 fee.

Both Barclays and Nationwide will only offer their 95 per cent mortgage deals on
properties built by the new home builders.

Experts said the mortgage rates compare favourably to existing 95 per cent
mortgage deals available on the open market.

Saffron Building Society has a three-year fix at 5.79 per cent, while Skipton
Building Society offers a five-year fix at 6.29 per cent with a £195 fee.

David Hollingworth of mortgage brokers London & Country said: "The NewBuy rates
on offer look really good, particularly the deals on offer through NatWest."

However, experts have warned home buyers should carefully consider the risks of
taking out a high loan-to-value mortgage on new-build properties, which often
include a premium on the sale price that can reduce as soon as someone moves in.

The Council of Mortgage Lenders said: "This potential reduction in the value of
the property is an important factor you should consider when buying a new home
using a higher loan-to-value deal.

"If house prices fall, you may not have enough money from selling the property
to repay the mortgage."

The NewBuy guarantee scheme is open to all buyers as long as they are UK
citizens and are buying their property as their main home.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DXP


                       Copyright 2012 Express Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              232 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Orange County Register (California)

                            December 25, 2011 Sunday

Formermortgagegiantexecssued

BYLINE: Jeff Collins Register writer, The Orange County Register

SECTION: REALESTATE; Pg. F

LENGTH: 996 words



HIGHLIGHT: SEC accuses six of committing securities fraud.


The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission sued six former top executives of
government-sponsored mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, saying they
made misleading statements during the peak of the housing boom about their
exposure to high-risk mortgages.

Four days later, California Attorney General Kamala Harris sued the two
agencies, seeking information as part of the state's investigation into the
agencies' foreclosure practices, according to news reports.

An SEC statement following the federal action stated that Fannie's and Freddie's
top executives, including the agencies' CEOs, "told the world that their
subprime exposure was substantially smaller than it really was."

The misstatements occurred when investor interest in the institutions' exposure
to subprime loans was "acute," the statement said, leading investors to believe
the risk on the company's books was smaller than it actually was.

"All individuals, regardless of their rank or position, will be held accountable
for perpetuating half-truths or misrepresentations about matters materially
important to the interest of our country's investors," said SEC Enforcement
Division Director Robert Khuzami.

Congress created Fannie and Freddie as semi-private institutions to generate
cash for mortgage borrowers. They purchase home loans from lenders, then sell
mortgage-backed securities to investors, raising cash for additional loans.

A New York Times report said that during the peak of the housing boom, the two
agencies were losing market share to Wall Street investment firms that were
securitizing loans and selling interests to investors. The federal government
ended up taking over Fannie and Freddie in 2008 after the subprime mortgage
market collapsed and has spent more than $100 billion propping them up.

Those accused of securities fraud in the SEC suits are:

Former Fannie Mae CEO Daniel H. Mudd, former Chief Risk Officer Enrico
Dallavecchia and former single-family mortgage business Executive Vice President
Thomas A. Lund; and

Former Freddie Mac board Chairman and CEO Richard F. Syron, former Executive
Vice President and Chief Business Officer Patricia L. Cook and former
single-family guarantee business Executive Vice President Donald J. Bisenius.

A separate lawsuit was filed Tuesday by California's Harris, seeking to enforce
state subpoenas that had been spurred by the agencies.

According to news reports, Harris served the housing finance agencies with
administrative subpoenas on Nov. 15, but the agencies' federal regulator replied
that "no state Attorney General had the authority" to issue such subpoenas,
according to news reports.

Fannie and Freddie play a central role in the mortgage and foreclosure issues in
California, Harris said in her suit. As a result, Harris requested answers to
questions she says are critical to protecting the health, safety and welfare of
the state's residents.

O.C. foreclosure starts on the rise

Fewer Orange County homeowners are losing their homes to foreclosure, but
lenders have picked up the pace of launching into the foreclosure process on
other homeowners, DataQuick figures for November show.

Lenders filed 1,569 default notices - the start of the foreclosure process -
against homeowners in November. That's up 0.1 percent from year-ago levels and
is 6 percent above the average for the previous 12 months.

Orange County has averaged 1,481 default notice filings a month for the past
year, DataQuick figures show.

Default notices generally are filed after a homeowner misses three or more
months of mortgage payments.

Once a home is in default, owners have from several months to several years,
depending on how fast the lender acts, before the home is offered for sale at
public auction. In the interim, homeowners sometimes catch up on their payments,
surrender the deed or sell the home as a short sale for less than is owed on the
mortgage, provided the lender approves.

Last month's filings, however, are about 15 percent below the monthly average
for the past three years of 1,854 default filings a month. The number got as
high as 3,485 in March 2009, the post-slump high.

However, the number of foreclosures was down last month, DataQuick figures show.
DataQuick reported that 491 homeowners lost their homes to foreclosure in
November.

That's down 1.6 percent from the previous November and about 19 percent below
the average for the previous 12 months.

2 in 5 sales are distressed

Distressed properties persist as a significant drag on home prices, accounting
for 4 out of every 10 homes sold in Orange County, figures from the California
Regional Multiple Listing Service.

The broker-run CR-MLS maintains a database of properties for sale. The San
Dimas-based home-listing service merged with SoCal MLS, the service that had
been serving Orange County.

According to its latest figures, an average of 43.4 percent of all 2011 sales
were bank-owned, a short sale or some other type of distressed property.

That compares with a 2010 average of 43.5 percent. In 2009, the low point for
Orange County home prices, distressed properties accounted for almost half of
all sales, on average.

The number of distressed homes sold decreased from last year in proportion to
the overall drop in all homes sold.

As of October, CR-MLS figures show:

Orange County averaged 946 distressed-home sales a month this year, as of
October. That's down 2.2 percent from the 2010 average of 967 distressed sales a
month. In 2009, Orange County averaged 1,119 distressed-home sales a month.

Short sales - or sales of homes for less than was owed on the mortgage -
decreased from 2010 levels. Orange County averaged 532 short sales a month this
year, or 24.4 percent of all sales. That compares with 560 in 2010, or 25
percent a month.

Sales of bank-owned homes rose slightly. Orange County averaged 351 bank-owned
homes sold monthly this year, or 16.1 percent of all sales. That compares with
338 a month in 2010, or 15.3 percent.



jcollins@ocregister.com

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE:  Story

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 Orange County Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              233 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 7, 2012

Can DeMarco De-Risk GSEs By November?

BYLINE: Paul Muolo

SECTION: INSIDE TAKE; Pg. 1 Vol. 36 No. 32

LENGTH: 545  words


It's no secret that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are actively engaged in
risk-sharing partnerships tied to their multifamily programs, but money-wise it
amounts to a hill of beans.

The golden chalice of risk sharing lies within their bread-and-butter
single-family programs where the two backstop $5.2 trillion of mostly
residential loans with their government guarantees. The private sector-including
several insurance conglomerates, megabanks, Wall Street firms and even REITs-are
well aware of this. And quite frankly they wouldn't mind a piece of the action,
provided that the Federal Housing Finance Agency comes up with some type of
blueprint.

Acting FHFA director Ed DeMarco has spoken of single-family risk sharing on
several occasions over the past year-making a nod to the mortgage insurance
sector-but never in much detail.

Since early this year the agency has supposedly tasked both GSEs to put their
thinking caps on and come up with a plan. A timeline DeMarco provided to
Congress in March targets September as the date for the first single-family
risk-sharing deals.

But the question boils down to this: What will Fannie and Freddie come up with
and will it be profit-enticing enough for the private sector jump on board?

One secondary market executive who's familiar with the effort-and who spoke only
on the condition his name and firm not be published-said the way things stand
today Freddie Mac (for example) might buy $100 million in loans and then issue
an MBS with split guarantees.

Instead of taking on all the risk itself, Freddie would create a senior security
for $95 million and a subordinated piece for $5 million. The investor in a
subordinated tranche would suffer the first wave of losses should they occur. Of
course, the obvious question is this: What type of return would Freddie have to
promise on the "sub" piece to entice investors? Answer: 12% to 14%.

Anyone familiar with mortgages knows that such a return would drive up the cost
of credit for the consumer. And that's the problem with risk-sharing
arrangements: Everyone wants the government to lay off risk but they don't
realize that in the end it means higher rates for homebuyers.

Well, so be it. If the FHFA and Congress truly want Fannie and Freddie to
deleverage someone has to pay for it. In the end it's always the consumer.

Some mortgage executives note that new MBS structures might only be the tip of
the iceberg in the risk-sharing debate. If Fannie and Freddie can create
successful new MBS structures where the private sector takes the first loss
exposure, why not auction off pieces of their existing portfolios, selling that
risk, which is the aforementioned $5.2 trillion?

Meanwhile, a division of the U.S. Treasury is working on a new white paper that
talks about both risk sharing and creating an entirely new secondary marketing
apparatus for the U.S. housing market.

Will the white paper see the light of day before the November elections?
Supposedly, the White House doesn't want housing (mortgages) to be an issue in
the fall campaign, but Washington is known to leak. In the meantime, Freddie Mac
is once again reporting profits (before dividend payments to Treasury are
deducted), so who knows-maybe Congress will just leave the two GSEs alone. But
don't bet on that one.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              234 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

Big Banks Keeping Choicest Mortgages Rather than Sell to GSEs

BYLINE: Kate Berry

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 179 No. F320

LENGTH: 802  words


JPMorgan Chase (JPM) and Wells Fargo (WFC) are retaining more high-quality,
conforming mortgages that they would normally sell to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac,
raising concerns that the banks are adversely selecting the weakest loans for
the government-sponsored enterprises.

The banks are in talks with Fannie to determine if guarantee fees need to be
raised to cover the higher risk to the GSE of holding more loans with
less-than-stellar credit characteristics. The banks contend they are still
delivering loans of high quality to Fannie. The GSEs routinely evaluate the mix
of loans being delivered to them and hold banks accountable if that mix deviates
significantly from the past.

"If a lender wants to retain some loans on their books, that is totally
acceptable and understandable," says Andy Wilson, a Fannie spokesman, who says
the issue is not a contentious one. "What we have to do is have a conversation
about the risk profile of what the banks would deliver and make sure they are
pricing appropriately."

The change is analogous to a health insurer that suddenly found all of the
people insured under the age of 35 had dropped coverage of their health plans.

"If there is a shift in the profile of risk, we need to price it right," Wilson
says. (Freddie declined to comment for this article.)

Chase has decided to keep anywhere from 10% to 25% of higher-quality conforming
loans that it normally would sell to the GSEs, a person familiar with the matter
said. Wells has not disclosed in the past year the amount of conforming loans it
will retain.

Fannie and Freddie's guarantee fees are typically embedded in mortgage rates to
protect investors from losses on home loans. Those fees have become a sore spot
because they raise the cost to the borrower of getting a mortgage. Borrowers pay
roughly 57 basis points in guarantee fees and more in so-called loan level price
adjustments assessed by the GSEs based on a loan's characteristics.

Those fees alone can add up to 75 basis points to the mortgage rate, a
significant cost for the privilege of selling a loan to Fannie or Freddie.

"Each bank has a view of the risk of the loan, the costs and what price they can
get, net of all that, versus holding a loan on balance sheet," says Cliff Rossi,
a professor of finance at the University of Maryland.

Rossi, who once headed single-family mortgage credit at Freddie, says the fees
are high enough to make holding the loans more attractive. The additional fees
as more than enough compensation for retaining the risk.

"If these are good credits, banks are going to hold them all day long," he said.

The big banks' shift to retaining more loans gained impetus late last year when
the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the GSEs' regulator, announced a fee hike to
bring more private capital back into the market.

The new FHFA Director Mel Watt delayed that expected fee increase in January to
examine its potential impact on the market.

Since the 2007-2008 financial crisis most of the mortgages banks kept on their
balance sheets have been jumbo loans to high-net-worth borrowers. But banks are
flush with cash and with loan volumes plummeting over the last year they
desperately need to add quality assets to their holdings.

The shift also indicates that the banks are extremely comfortable with the loans
they are retaining, which have high FICO scores and low loan-to-value ratios,
because they are most likely to have low defaults.

"We've said pretty consistently that we like mortgages as an asset and continue
to put high-quality loans on balance sheet," says Tom Goyda, a Wells spokesman.
Wells disclosed in the third and four quarters of 2012 and in the first quarter
of 2013 that it would retain more loans ranging from $417,000 to $625,500 -
amounts eligible for GSE purchase in pricier housing markets.

Fannie's market share declined 10% in the first quarter but it is unclear how
much of that decline could be attributed to the big banks selling it fewer
loans, Wilson says. Freddie does not disclose market share. The average credit
score on loans purchased by Fannie and Freddie is 752, according to an analysis
by the Urban Institute.

The downside is that the GSEs now may end up with chancier borrowers, those with
low FICO scores and high loan-to-value ratios. That has led to concerns that the
GSEs could be adversely selected to receive lower-quality loans. That is an
issue that has long plagued the Federal Housing Administration, which has a
mandate to support first-time homebuyers.

"The company providing insurance is always fearful they will be adversely
selected," says Rossi. "This is a very common circumstance for the GSEs to be
in, and which they want to guard against in a big way. If they now say they have
underpriced the risk, they will need to exact some additional guarantee fee over
time."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              235 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             January 4, 2010 Monday
                                Regional Edition

Fannie and Freddie;
A new model must restore credibility for mortgage giants.

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 450 words


TUCKED AWAY in the year-end news was the revelation that regulators have
approved pay packages of up to $6 million each for the chief executives of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The companies are undoubtedly important: They back
$5.4 trillion in home mortgages and account for nine-tenths of new home loan
originations. But they are essentially bankrupt and depend on tens of billions
of dollars from the Treasury. Indeed, their losses since falling into government
conservatorship last year have been so large -- the Treasury has pumped in a
combined $112 billion so far -- that the Obama administration expanded their
$400 billion lifeline before its authority to do so expired Dec. 31.

Now it appears that some of the dough will support chief executive pay 15 times
that of the president of the United States -- the firms' nominal master. To be
sure, the latest Fannie-Freddie pay deals are considerably less than those that
its top execs pulled down before the crash. Still, the perceived need to retain
financial talent at this stunning rate of compensation is further evidence, if
any were needed, that the public-private model for these mortgage giants is no
longer sustainable.

The Obama administration has promised to roll out its ideas for fixing Fannie
and Freddie early this year. Anticipating that, the Center for American Progress
(CAP), a liberal think tank with ties to the administration, has proposed new
entities called chartered mortgage-backed securities issuers (CMIs): privately
owned firms that would package mortgages into securities and sell them with an
explicit federal guarantee. Securitization fees would go into an insurance fund
to protect taxpayers against defaults. Profits and product lines would be
tightly limited by federal regulators.

The CAP proposal grapples with the fundamental problem of the old Fannie and
Freddie: An implicit government guarantee permitted them cheap access to
borrowed funds, which they gambled in pursuit of maximum returns to
shareholders. It also wisely emphasizes that the new organizations must help
rebalance federal support between rental housing and single-family homes.
However, the CAP proposal would leave the new companies under political pressure
to meet difficult-to-define "public purposes," such as funneling liquidity to
"underserved" geographical areas. This seems not only risky but redundant, given
the Federal Housing Administration's support for homebuyers of modest means.

A public-utility model for replacing Fannie and Freddie is plausible. But any
new design for these entities will fail if it does not define the roles and
responsibilities of taxpayers and shareholders with absolute clarity -- and
absolute credibility.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              236 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 7, 2014 Tuesday

Washington: Berger, Hunt attend Watt swearing-in

LENGTH: 380  words

DATELINE: Washington


The National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the following news
release:


Mel Watt was sworn in Monday as the new director of the Federal Housing Finance
Agency during a ceremony attended by NAFCU President and CEO Dan Berger and
Senior Vice President of Government Affairs and General Counsel Carrie Hunt.



Watt was sworn in by Transportation Secretary and former Charlotte, N.C., Mayor
Anthony Foxx. "Today's housing finance system is one of the keys to our economic
recovery and I am grateful for the opportunity to help develop a strong
foundation for moving this system forward for the benefit of all Americans at
this critical point in our nation's history," Watt said.

Berger, following the swearing-in, said, "We look forward to working with FHFA
Director Watt as he fills this important post. We appreciate his consideration
on the issue of mortgage fee increases and hope to make continued progress as we
work to ensure the needs of credit unions are met in future housing reform
efforts."

Watt has already announced that he will delay the implementation of planned
mortgage-fee increases until he can evaluate the plan further; NAFCU strongly
supports the delay.

FHFA announced a 10-basis-points increase in guarantee fees, or g-fees, last
month as well as an increase in its loan-level price adjustment, which is
typically passed onto borrowers, for certain single-family loans with maturities
greater than 15 years. NAFCU objected strongly to the planned fee increases.
Watt later said he planned to hold off on the fee hikes for further review.

NAFCU will continue to monitor actions within FHFA to ensure preservation of
credit unions' guaranteed access to the secondary mortgage market and fair
pricing based on loan quality, not volume, in any iteration of housing finance
reform.

Watt, a Democrat from North Carolina, served in the House of Representatives
since 1992. He was confirmed to the FHFA post in December after being nominated
by President Obama. Watt fills the post Ed DeMarco held in acting capacity since
2009 and will control the agency's ongoing conservatorship of
government-sponsored agencies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the supervision and
regulation of the Federal Home Loan Banks.

For more information please visit: http://www.nafcu.org/

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              237 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Sun

                            March 27, 2008 Thursday

New Government Mortgage Program Said To Be 'Useless'

BYLINE: COLIN GUSTAFSON -, Special to the Sun

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 604 words


Mortgage lenders are beginning to offer a new type of mortgage associated with
President Bush's stimulus package that is intended to offer potential buyers
lower rates, and so far the program has not been effective, brokers claim. Chase
Lending Bank and Wells Fargo have begun implementing fees and guidelines for
mortgages of up to $729,750 that will now be guaranteed by the quasi-government
home loan agencies Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, while other large lenders,
including CitiMortgage and Washington Mutual, are expected to follow suit in the
days ahead.

It had been that Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae could guarantee loans only up to
$417,000, but the stimulus package ups the guarantee limits to provide relief
for more homeowners. The going rate on the new, so-called super-conforming loans
is about 6.6%, compared with 5.9% on mortgages that are less than $417,000.

These super-conforming loans come with several restrictions: They are limited to
condominium and single-family homeowners, shutting out buyers of coops, which
make up a majority of New York housing stock; there is a limited window for
applications before the program expires at the end of the year, and there are
limits on cash-out refinancing, a common practice where buyers refinance their
mortgages for more than they currently owe on the loan and pocket the
difference.

With so many restrictions, less than 10% of New Yorkers will be eligible for the
lower-rate loans, the owner of the Manhattan Mortgage Co., Melissa Cohn, said.

The limits on cash-out refinancing are especially burdensome, brokers say. While
Fannie Mae prohibits most cash-out refinancing, Freddie Mac will allow it up to
$100,000, and only to refinance no more than 75% of the home's value. To borrow
at this 75% benchmark, the buyer also must have a credit score of at least 720.
Manhattan attorney Ariyike Diggs, for example, had been planning to cash out on
her $400,000 mortgage by taking out a lower-interest $440,000 loan - but her
mortgage broker was unable to seal the deal because her credit score was 10
points shy of Freddie Mac's cutoff, according to a principal at mortgage firm
Commodore Mortgage Group, Richard Bouchner.

In addition to the lending caveats, the lenders themselves are tacking on
additional fees. Chase Home Lending, for instance, has announced it will add
between a 2% and 3% fee on broker commissions that will likely be passed on to
the borrowers in the form of higher rates.

"The new loan limits were supposed to save a lot of borrowers," Mr. Bouchner
said. "Now that the banks have allowed Freddie and Fannie's guidelines to
trickle down into their system, we're seeing that this isn't the life preserver
that homebuyers had expected." While there are caveats, and the rates are not as
cheap as the smaller mortgages that Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae guarantee, they
are lower than mortgages that are not backed by these agencies. The going rate
for a mortgage of about $700,000 is more than 8%, brokers say.

Still, mortgage experts had hoped the new program would help insulate the New
York housing market from a slowdown. With home prices in New York remaining high
- the median price for condos is $1.35 million, compared with the national
median home price of just $195,900, according to the National Association of
Realtors - they say this incentive was especially important.

Now, the new mortgage program is "essentially useless," the senior vice
president of Preferred Empire Mortgage Co., Jeffrey Appel, said. "If you're not
getting that much of a break on your rates and if there's no cash-out option,
then you have to wonder, what's the point?"

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              238 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             April 17, 2015 Friday

FHFA Moves Cautiously in Reducing Loan Fees

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: LAW & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. F315

LENGTH: 479  words


The Federal Housing Finance Agency is expected to announce as soon as Friday a
modest reduction in certain fees that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac charge on
single-family loans.

The reduction appears likely to involve loan level price adjustments that the
two government-sponsored enterprises charge borrowers and adverse market fees
charged on every loan, but not a guarantee fee reduction that the industry has
sought.

"Everything I have heard indicates the FHFA is going to adjust the loan level
fees and probably leave the guarantee fee alone," said Glen Corso, the executive
director of the Community Mortgage Lenders of America.

FHFA solicited public comment in June on resetting guarantee fees, but shied
away from making any recommendations.

FHFA Director Mel Watt's first official action when he took office last year was
to suspend a 10-basis point hike in the G-fee planned by his predecessor Edward
DeMarco. Some in the industry had hoped Watt would then move quickly to reduce
the fees instead.

But Watt is likely to announce Friday that the agency will eliminate a 25-basis
point adverse market fee the GSEs charge on every loan. Fannie and Freddie
implemented the fee when home prices were falling nationwide. But home prices
are due to rise 6% in 2015 and 5% in 2016, according to CoreLogic.

Reducing the adverse market fee is "low hanging fruit if they want to open up
credit availability," said Joe Ventrone, vice president of regulatory and
industry relations at the National Association of Realtors.

"The real estate market is not adverse any more. They are currently over pricing
the product," he added.

FHFA is also expected to reduce the loan level price adjustments or LLPAs, which
is a fee that homebuyers pay at closing. An LLPA can cost $3,250 on a $100,000
loan for a borrower with a low credit score and little equity.

Riskier borrowers with 640-659 FICO credit scores can pay three times the LLPAs
than borrowers with 700-719 FICO scores. FHFA is expected to reduce that
differential now that the housing market is healing with fewer delinquencies and
lower loan losses.

"The magnitude of the targeted LLPA reductions appears to be modest. We believe
this could translate to 25bp-50bp in LLPA cuts," according to an April 16 report
by Credit Suisse analysts.

News of FHFA's move was first revealed by theWall Street Journallate Wednesday.
A FHFA spokeswoman did not return a request for comment.

FHFA is also expected to release new capital requirements for private mortgage
insurers soon. The mortgage insurers have had to recapitalize over the past few
years. Now regulators and lenders can rely on the MIs to pay their claims when
borrowers default, which gives FHFA more comfort in reducing loan fees.

While industry officials are likely to be disappointed with FHFA's first move,
some expect FHFA will take additional steps over time to reduce GSE loan fees.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              239 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 16, 2015

FHFA Moves Cautiously in Reducing Loan Fees

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: SECONDARY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 479  words


The Federal Housing Finance Agency is expected to announce as soon as Friday a
modest reduction in certain fees that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac charge on
single-family loans.

The reduction appears likely to involve loan level price adjustments that the
two government-sponsored enterprises charge borrowers and adverse market fees
charged on every loan, but not a guarantee fee reduction that the industry has
sought.

"Everything I have heard indicates the FHFA is going to adjust the loan level
fees and probably leave the guarantee fee alone," said Glen Corso, the executive
director of the Community Mortgage Lenders of America.

FHFA solicited public comment in June on resetting guarantee fees, but shied
away from making any recommendations.

FHFA Director Mel Watt's first official action when he took office last year was
to suspend a 10-basis point hike in the G-fee planned by his predecessor Edward
DeMarco. Some in the industry had hoped Watt would then move quickly to reduce
the fees instead.

But Watt is likely to announce Friday that the agency will eliminate a 25-basis
point adverse market fee the GSEs charge on every loan. Fannie and Freddie
implemented the fee when home prices were falling nationwide. But home prices
are due to rise 6% in 2015 and 5% in 2016, according to CoreLogic.

Reducing the adverse market fee is "low hanging fruit if they want to open up
credit availability," said Joe Ventrone, vice president of regulatory and
industry relations at the National Association of Realtors.

"The real estate market is not adverse any more. They are currently over pricing
the product," he added.

FHFA is also expected to reduce the loan level price adjustments or LLPAs, which
is a fee that homebuyers pay at closing. An LLPA can cost $3,250 on a $100,000
loan for a borrower with a low credit score and little equity.

Riskier borrowers with 640-659 FICO credit scores can pay three times the LLPAs
than borrowers with 700-719 FICO scores. FHFA is expected to reduce that
differential now that the housing market is healing with fewer delinquencies and
lower loan losses.

"The magnitude of the targeted LLPA reductions appears to be modest. We believe
this could translate to 25bp-50bp in LLPA cuts," according to an April 16 report
by Credit Suisse analysts.

News of FHFA's move was first revealed by theWall Street Journallate Wednesday.
A FHFA spokeswoman did not return a request for comment.

FHFA is also expected to release new capital requirements for private mortgage
insurers soon. The mortgage insurers have had to recapitalize over the past few
years. Now regulators and lenders can rely on the MIs to pay their claims when
borrowers default, which gives FHFA more comfort in reducing loan fees.

While industry officials are likely to be disappointed with FHFA's first move,
some expect FHFA will take additional steps over time to reduce GSE loan fees.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              240 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 16, 2015

FHFA Moves Cautiously in Reducing Loan Fees

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: SECONDARY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 484  words


The Federal Housing Finance Agency is expected to announce as soon as Friday a
modest reduction in certain fees that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac charge on
single-family loans.

The reduction appears likely to involve loan level price adjustments that the
two government-sponsored enterprises charge borrowers and adverse market fees
charged on every loan, but not a guarantee fee reduction that the industry has
sought.

"Everything I have heard indicates the FHFA is going to adjust the loan level
fees and probably leave the guarantee fee alone," said Glen Corso, the executive
director of the Community Mortgage Lenders of America.

The FHFA solicited public comment in June on resetting guarantee fees, but shied
away from making any recommendations.

FHFA Director Mel Watt's first official action when he took office last year was
to suspend a 10-basis-point hike in the G-fee planned by his predecessor Edward
DeMarco. Some in the industry had hoped Watt would then move quickly to reduce
the fees instead.

But Watt is likely to announce Friday that the agency will eliminate a
25-basis-point adverse market fee the GSEs charge on every loan. Fannie and
Freddie implemented the fee when home prices were falling nationwide. But home
prices are due to rise 6% in 2015 and 5% in 2016, according to CoreLogic.

Reducing the adverse market fee is "low-hanging fruit if they want to open up
credit availability," said Joe Ventrone, vice president of regulatory and
industry relations at the National Association of Realtors.

"The real estate market is not adverse any more. They are currently over pricing
the product," he added.

FHFA is also expected to reduce the loan level price adjustments or LLPAs, which
is a fee that homebuyers pay at closing. An LLPA can cost $3,250 on a $100,000
loan for a borrower with a low credit score and little equity.

Riskier borrowers with 640-659 FICO credit scores can pay three times the LLPAs
than borrowers with 700-719 FICO scores. The FHFA is expected to reduce that
differential now that the housing market is healing with fewer delinquencies and
lower loan losses.

"The magnitude of the targeted LLPA reductions appears to be modest. We believe
this could translate to 25bp-50bp in LLPA cuts," according to an April 16 report
by Credit Suisse analysts.

News of the FHFA's move was first revealed by theWall Street Journallate
Wednesday. An FHFA spokeswoman did not return a request for comment.

The FHFA is also expected to release new capital requirements for private
mortgage insurers soon. The mortgage insurers have had to recapitalize over the
past few years. Now regulators and lenders can rely on the MIs to pay their
claims when borrowers default, which gives the FHFA more comfort in reducing
loan fees.

While industry officials are likely to be disappointed with the FHFA's first
move, some expect the FHFA will take additional steps over time to reduce GSE
loan fees.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              241 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Herald (Glasgow)

                              March 7, 2008 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Sterling moves above Dollar2 as MPC holds UK rates steady

BYLINE: IAN McCONNELL BUSINESS EDITOR

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 906 words


THE pound jumped above Dollar2 for the first time this year yesterday after the
Bank of England held UK base rates at 5.25per cent, with its Monetary Policy
Committee unmoved for now by yet further signs of a weakening UK housing market.

Halifax, Britain's biggest mortgage lender, reported hours before the MPC's
decision at noon yesterday that the average UK house price fell by a further
0.3per cent in February.

Taylor Wimpey, Britain's largest housebuilder meanwhile reported a 19per cent
tumble in its UK order book between the start and end of 2007 to GBP1.06bn. It
said that UK home sales in the second half were around 15per cent lower than in
the same six months of 2006.

It added that UK cancellation rates were running above 30per cent in the second
half of last year, way ahead of a long-term average of about 20per cent. This
signals increasing wariness among would-be homebuyers at a time when a sharp
domestic economic slowdown is looming and banks have been hiking mortgage
interest rates and tightening lending criteria.

Shares in Taylor Wimpey plunged in the immediate wake of yesterday morning's
results and the company's announcement that it was suspending a share buy-back
programme.

They then turned around to finish up 2per cent on the session at 167.5p, defying
a tumbling stock market. That  said, they have plunged from a 52-week high of
540.75p as housebuilding stocks have found themselves among the biggest
casualties of the worldwide credit crunch and global economic slowdown resulting
from massive default on home loans by "sub-prime" US households with poorer
credit ratings.

Taylor Wimpey's pre-tax profits, before exceptionals, tumbled to GBP535.6m in
2007 from GBP776.5m in the prior 12 months.

Although the pound burst through Dollar2 yesterday to touch a session high of
Dollar2.0096, as the US currency remained on the ropes, the euro jumped to yet
another all-time high against sterling of 76.92p.

Hawkish comments from European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet, as
the ECB held benchmark interest rates in the 15-nation eurozone at 4per cent,
seem likely to keep the euro firm in the near term at least.

The MPC had been expected almost universally to stand pat on UK interest rates
yesterday, amid continuing signs of inf lationary dangers.

However, after it announced its decision yesterday, economists reiterated their
belief that a weakening UK economy would ensure rates fell further as the year
progressed.

The MPC has cut UK base rates by a quarter-point twice so far this cycle, on
December 6 and February 7, to take them to 5.25per cent.

Expectations of further cuts were bolstered yesterday by banking industry
figures showing US mortgage foreclosures hit a record high in the fourth
quarter. These numbers fuelled concerns about the state of the US economy, which
appears to be either in or on the brink of recession, and the knock-on impact
around the globe.

Shares in UK banks were hammered as investors on Wall Street made plain their
nervousness over a Dollar1.5bn fundraising plan announced by bond insurer Ambac.

Many big banks around the globe find themselves with heavy exposure to
"monoline" insurers such as Ambac, which guarantee swathes of the complicated
financial instruments held by banks and hammered by the global credit crunch.
Investors therefore remain on red alert over the potential impact which failure
of any monoline insurer, or a less dramatic but nevertheless serious downgrade
of these companies' credit ratings by the big international agencies, could have
on the big banks in terms of further write-offs.

The UK's FTSE-100 index of leading shares dropped 87.1 points to 5766.4
yesterday.

Shares in Royal Bank of Scotland fell 3.9per cent to 341.25p. Barclays sllipped
4.6per cent to 427p.

In NewYork, the Dow Jones Industrial Average  finished 214.60 points lower at
12,040.39.

The US Mortgage Bankers' Association said a record 0.83per cent of US home loans
were entering the foreclosure process in the last three months of 2007, compared
with 0.54per cent in the same period of 2006.

The US mortgage delinquency rate of 5.82per cent was the highest since 1985 and
up from 4.95per cent in the fourth quarter of 2006. While slightly more than one
in 20 homeowners was missing monthly payments during the last three months of
2007, nearly one in six sub-prime borrowers was delinquent.

The Federal Reserve meanwhile revealed yesterday that the overall proportion of
equity which Americans had in their homes had fallen to less than 50per cent for
the first time since 1945.

Opinion is divided on the extent to which the MPC will be able to cut UK rates.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at consultancy Global Insight, expects a cut
in base rates to 5per cent in May and then further reductions to take them to
4.5per cent by the year-end and 4per cent in the first half of 2009.

But Stuart Porteous, head of group economics at Royal Bank of Scotland, said:
"There are growing concerns that the growth-inflation trade-off has worsened,
where slower growth this year may not guarantee lower inflation further out.
Only if price expectations remain anchored can policymakers be confident that
inf lation will move back towards the 2per cent target. As a result, the MPC
will continue to proceed cautiously in order to maintain its inflation-fighting
credentials. We expect one more rate cut this year, most likely in May, unless
economic conditions weaken substantially."

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GH


                      Copyright 2008 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              242 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 8, 2013 Tuesday
                                Regional Edition

Time to fix Fannie and Freddie

BYLINE: Charles Lane

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 790 words


I know that Congress and the Obama administration have their hands full with the
debt ceiling, the threat of budget "sequester" and the related battle over how
much to raise taxes and cut entitlement spending. Even so, I have to ask: Are
they ever going to get around to fixing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac?

The ultimate fate of these two giant government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs),
which back or guarantee most home mortgages in the United States, might be as
important to the economy as the federal debt.

Yet their future has been unsettled since September 2008, when their regulator,
the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), seized control of them and declared
them unable to withstand the housing market crash without an infusion of
taxpayer funds. And that infusion has been massive: $187.5 billion.

As intended, the bailout, or "conservatorship," as it's formally known,
prevented a collapse that could have reverberated around the world, where
investors - including the central banks of China, Japan and other major nations
- hold hundreds of billions of dollars' worth of GSE securities.

But even though it has lasted 52 months - and counting - FHFA's conservatorship
was never meant to be permanent. As long as they're in limbo, the GSEs can't
truly plan a strategy, and their employee morale will suffer. Above all, the
housing market will remain too uncertain for the kind of private-sector
commitments upon which housing's full recovery depends.

In recent years the GSEs have been a bone of partisan contention. Democrats
generally supported them as a positive legacy of the New Deal and Great Society
that helped promote homeownership and build the middle class. Republicans
decried them as corporate welfare for the housing industry.

Neither side was free of self-interest: Democrats milked the GSEs to fund
projects backed by their various constituencies; the GOP critique echoed that of
Wall Street, which was encroaching on the GSEs' mortgagesecuritization business.

Nor should one exaggerate the partisan divide. At various times, politicians
from both parties engaged in boosterism about the "American dream" and used the
GSEs to advance it. Both responded to real estate agents, mortgage bankers and
other hometown interests. As the saying goes, there's housing in every
congressional district.

Still, experience mostly vindicates the GSEs' critics. Profit-motivated private
investors owned stock in the GSEs; managers pursued shareholder profits with a
funding advantage based on the implicit, but real, taxpayer guarantee. This
encouraged Fannie and Freddie to take on excessive risk, with disastrous results
- not only the direct cost of the bailout but also the broader indirect costs of
over-investment in single-family housing.

I never quite grasped the liberal love affair with these giant, politically
connected financial corporations and their highly paid executives. Yes, benefits
trickled down, in the form of higher homeownership rates. But after a point,
these gains were unsustainable, as the crash proved.

To its credit, the Obama administration has identified the GSEs' "structural
design flaws, combined with failures in management," as "the primary cause of
their collapse" - as a Treasury Department report put it in 2011. The
administration argued that reform should avoid re-creating the GSEs'
public-private conflict.

Yet while the administration outlined several reform options, it did not push
for any of them. (Republicans have floated plans with equal futility.)
Meanwhile, the administration pressured FHFA to manipulate GSE finances in favor
of underwater homeowners - ostensibly to free up cash for consumer spending and
short-term economic growth.

Edward F. DeMarco, acting director of the FHFA, justifiably resisted using the
GSEs yet again as an off-budget cash cow. His reward was extravagant
vilification from progressives, who launched an election-year Internet campaign
blaming him for the sour economy and demanding his firing.

The GSEs are shrinking gradually, as well as stabilizing. With administration
support, they raised fees to securitize loans, and DeMarco recently agreed with
Treasury on modifications to the bailout that will help slim the GSEs even
faster.

The time is ripe for a conclusive fix. Is that too much to hope for? Despite the
partisan wrangling and interest-group lobbying - not to mention legitimate
policy disagreements - basic principles of a new mortgage finance system are
widely agreed upon. There should be no more confusion of public mission and
private profit; government support, if any, should be transparent and limited to
the truly needy.

The American dream of homeownership is a good thing. Alas, we've been trying to
have too much of it.

lanec@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              243 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                October 26, 1998

GSEs Benefit from Originations

BYLINE: BY MARK FOGARTY

SECTION: AT THE MBA; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: Chicago


The hot originations market has worked its way up to the government agencies
that guarantee and package mortgages into securities.  The Federal Housing
Authority, Department of Veterans Affairs and the Government National Mortgage
Association all turned in stellar fiscal 1998 origination years, their top
officials said here.

Ginnie Mae, which packages FHA and DVA mortgages into securities, finished FY
1998 with $ 138 billion in originations, its second-best year ever, executive
vice president George Anderson told the annual convention of the Mortgage
Bankers Association of America here.

That was a 40% boost from the $ 97.6 billion originated in fiscal 1997.  Net
income for Cinnie Mae is expected to top $ 600 million, Mr. Anderson said, and
multifamily outstandings are at a historical high of $ 14.5 billion after $ 3
billion were made in FY 1998, which ended Sept. 30.

At the end of FY 1997, $ 13.6 billion in multifamily was outstanding after
Ginnie Mae securitized $ 2.5 billion in multifamily loans.

William Apgar, the President's nominee for FHA Commissioner, said FHA endorsed
1.1 million single-family mortgages last year.

He said that was "a significant increase," but did not have the corresponding
number for FY 1996, nor did he have the volumes for FHA multifamily.

And R. Keith Pedigo, Loan Guaranty Services director for DVA, said the agency
had guaranteed 350,000 mortgages in the fiscal year, which ended Sept. 30, for a
total of $ 39 billion.

He said that was up 90,000 home loans from the year before.

Mr. Pedigo noted also that delinquencies on VA loans have leveled off this year,
after 15% increases from 1995 to 1997.

Forty-one percent of 1998 originations were refinancings, he said, and he said
more than two million veterans have loans at 7.5% or above, indicating a big
potential refi wave for vets.

There have been some problems on DVA refis, with lenders selling vets minimal
rate and payment reductions, and some vets have wound up with loan amounts
greater than the original instruments.

So the agency will require interest and rate reductions.  If the borrower is
delinquent, the lender needs VA approval to issue the refi.

Mr. Pedigo said DVA has a technology plan which will require lenders to
contribute a fee of $ 20 to $ 25 per loan guaranteed for DVA to improve its
technology.

Limits on this will probably be $ 15 to $ 20 million over three years, he said,
noting DVA would have collected $ 8.8 million this year if it was in effect.

Twenty percent of DVA loans have used automated underwriting systems in recent
months, he said, and DVA is "close to approval" on using Fannie Mae's Desktop
Underwriter system in addition to Freddie Mac's Loan Prospector system.

Mr. Apgar said 10% to 12% of FHA endorsements (10,000 loans a month) are being
done on Freddie's LP since FHA implemented it in March.  A pilot program for DU
is just about done, the official said.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture, Bill Apgar

                         Copyright 1998 Faulkner & Gray


                              244 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             March 30, 2012 Friday
                                  Main Edition

Bailout claim has element of truth

BYLINE: Willoughby Mariano; Staff

SECTION: METRO NEWS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 989 words


U.S. Rep. Lynn Westmoreland thinks taxpayers may be dragged into the bailout
business again, thanks to the Federal Housing Administration.

The FHA provides mortgage insurance to encourage banks to write loans to people
who have little cash for a down payment. Many of these loans went bad when the
housing bubble burst, and FHA officials are trying to raise money to keep the
insurance afloat.

It's not the first time, Westmoreland said during a Feb. 29 congressional
hearing.

"There's not been one single federal housing program yet that has not needed a
bailout to survive," Westmoreland said.

All federal housing programs? We contacted a Westmoreland spokeswoman to get the
story.

Leslie Shedd, the spokeswoman, said Westmoreland was referring to three programs
that were started to keep the housing market stable and encourage Americans to
buy homes: Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the FHA.

Here's how the feds got involved in the housing market: After the real estate
market collapsed during the Great Depression, the feds took steps to encourage
banks to make home loans to families to buy houses.

They created the FHA, which issues mortgage insurance to guarantee that banks
will get their money back even if a homeowner doesn't make payments. This
encourages banks to approve mortgages for people who don't have a lot of money
or have mediocre credit.

They also created Fannie Mae, and later Freddie Mac, to help lenders raise money
to make more loans. Fannie and Freddie do this by selling the mortgages lenders'
make in bulk as securities and guaranteeing they will make a return.

Other programs perform similar tasks. For instance, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, like the FHA, insures home loans, but only for houses in rural
areas. The Office of Public and Indian Housing backs them for native lands,
while the Department of Veterans Affairs guarantees them for veterans.

Ginnie Mae, like Fannie and Freddie, guarantees mortgage securities, but its
securities are made up of government-backed loans by the FHA, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and Public and
Indian Housing.

This is what our research found: Fannie and Freddie were bailed out by taxpayers
in 2008. But calling them "federal housing programs" is a thorny issue. They
weren't controlled by the government until the bailout.

Congress chartered Fannie and Freddie as "government-sponsored enterprises," or
GSEs. They are supposed to help the U.S. meet its housing policy goals, but they
were designed as for-profit corporations with their own shareholders and boards
of directors. The federal government explicitly said it did not back the GSEs'
securities.

"They are in no way categorized as federal housing programs," said Ted Gayer,
co-director of the economic studies program at the Brookings Institution.

The feds estimate the bailout will cost between $220 billion and $311 billion
through 2014, though some of that will be paid back.

The president's proposed budget for 2013 says the U.S. Treasury might have to
give the FHA $688 million in emergency funds, but whether help will come in the
form of a taxpayer-funded bailout is uncertain.

The FHA hiked the cost of mortgage insurance earlier this month to raise money,
and it is set to receive about $1 billion from a legal settlement over
fraudulent foreclosure practices. Its officials say these measures will avoid a
bailout, but critics say this won't be enough.

Ginnie Mae hasn't been bailed out, and it's not clear it's in dire trouble.

A November 2011 General Accounting Office report found that higher-than-expected
defaults could force Ginnie Mae to dip into its reserves. It also concluded that
Ginnie should do better at predicting future costs and documenting its methods.

But so far, Ginnie has taken in more money than it has spent, the GAO said.

The remainder of the federal programs are smaller players in the mortgage
markets.

As of the second quarter of 2011, the FHA backed nearly $1 trillion in
single-family loans. Veterans Affairs backed less than a quarter of that, while
the USDA backed some 7 percent, according to data from the federal agency that
took over Fannie and Freddie.

They have yet to run into the kinds of trouble that Fannie, Freddie and the FHA
are experiencing.

The USDA and PIH have not needed a bailout so far, but Edward Pinto, a former
Fannie Mae executive and scholar at the conservative American Enterprise
Institute, warns the USDA might need one, in part because it makes riskier
loans.

The FHA requires down payments of 3.5 percent. The USDA allows loans with no
money down.

As for Veterans Affairs, the word "bailout" does not apply. Whenever one of its
loans defaults, taxpayers automatically pick up the tab. The program is not
expected to pay for itself.

Westmoreland's claim that "there is not one single federal housing program yet
that has not needed a bailout to survive" has shortcomings.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have been bailed out. And the FHA is in need of help,
though it has not been bailed out at this point.

But Fannie and Freddie did not come under federal control until 2008. They are
strange creatures on the U.S. financial landscape. They were created by the
government but operated independently until the housing bust. At that time, they
were bailed out by the feds.

The three other federal housing efforts have not been bailed out. And it's not
clear that they will need taxpayer assistance.

Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the FHA are much larger players in the housing
market. This bolsters Westmoreland's larger point that organizations designed to
help the housing market need help, too.

Westmoreland earns a Half True.

Comment on a ruling

Want to comment on a Truth-O-Meter ruling? You can. Just go to Facebook and
search for PolitiFact Georgia. Once our page appears, hit the "Like" button. And
let the commenting commence.

This article was edited for length.To see a complete version, go to
www.politifact.com/georgia.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2012 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                              245 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Origination News

                                   July 2014

Underused VA Program Makes Inroads as FHA Costs Rise

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 21 Vol. 23 No. 9

LENGTH: 778  words


Of the 16.4 million active-duty service members and military veterans with
mortgages, less than 12% have a loan guaranteed by the Department of Veterans
Affairs.

Some blame this low participation rate on a lack of promotion for the VA home
loan program, which was created in 1944. Many loan officers don't even ask
potential clients if they are veterans. And many veterans don't know enough
about the program to ask for a VA loan.

Others blame lenders and real estate agents who have preferred the loan products
guaranteed or purchased by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Housing
Administration.

But things are looking up for VA lending as specialists in the product redouble
their efforts to get the word out and other low-down-payment products grow more
expensive.

A sharp increase in Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance premiums
is making VA more competitive, according to Megan Booth, senior policy
representative at the National Association of Realtors.

"There is not a Realtor alive today that thinks FHA is a better deal" for
veterans, Booth said. "That is helping the VA grow and it will continue to help
the VA grow."

VA lenders originated a record 629,300 single-family loans in fiscal 2013, which
ended Sept. 30. The agency endorsed 90,820 single-family loans in the fiscal
second quarter, totaling $20.1 billion, down 10.5% from the prior quarter. FHA
endorsements declined at twice that rate over the same period. Sixty-three
percent of VA loans are going to homebuyers rather than for refinancing,
according to agency officials.

The Veterans Association of Real Estate Professionals, a trade group launched in
2011 to promote the VA program, held its first Washington conference last month.

"There are a lot of misconceptions about the VA home loan program among real
estate, lending and housing professionals," says Son Nguyen, the group's
co-founder and president. "We want to change that through education and
outreach."

The trade group will provide VA with "honest feedback," he says.

VA officials told the conference they will be issuing a proposal soon that will
clarify the agency's rules on negotiating fees with sellers. Real estate agents
have been pressing the VA for a clarification because veterans are often
disadvantaged when competing with non-veterans to buy a house, particularly when
there are multiple bidders.

The fee rule would have been out by now, but the work had to take a backseat to
the agency's version of the qualified mortgage rule, the VA's assistant director
for loans, John Bell, told the conference.

The VA issued an interim final QM rule on May 30. The VA version essentially
provides a safe harbor for home purchase loans that meet the agency's
traditional lending standards. The VA has the lowest delinquency rate of any
government loan program.

But VA used the QM rule to stop lenders from repeatedly refinancing veterans who
fall behind on their payments.

Interest rate reduction refinancing loans were "never intended to be a loss
mitigation tool," Bell said. It was intended to reduce monthly payments, not add
fees to their loan balances which the veteran couldn't repay.

"Some predatory lenders took advantage of that situation," Bell said. "We had to
stop it."

Under the VA's QM rule, performing loans can be refinanced after six months.
These rate-reducing refis can qualify for a safe harbor if the borrower can
recoup the refinancing costs within 36 months.

The VA loans that don't meet that refinancing standard will be considered
"rebuttable presumption" loans, subject to greater litigation risk than safe
harbor loans.

Meanwhile, lenders continue to complain that there is a shortage of VA-approved
appraisers and underwriters, which slows processing times.

"I can't tell how many times the appraisal is the hiccup in the process," said
David Gibbons, the national VA mortgage program manager at Wells Fargo Home
Mortgage.

But the VA is becoming more responsive. "VA is trying to get more appraisers and
weeding out the bad ones," Booth said at the conference.

The VA is recruiting new appraisers every month, Bell said. And the agency is
reviewing appraisals for quality as well as monitoring and scoring appraiser
performance.

However, the VA will not use appraisal management companiess. "Not while I am at
VA," Bell said. (He didn't say why, but appraisers and other critics of AMCs
often complain that these outfits often employ second-rate appraisers who don't
know the local markets.)

VA is becoming more responsive to industry concerns, Nguyen said, noting that
the agency is working on seven proposed changes to the home loan guarantee
program. "It shows willingness that I have not seen before."

URL: http://www.originationnews.com/

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: ON


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              246 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                           Investor's Business Daily

                            October 14, 2005 Friday

Bust In Nation's Housing Sector Could Hit Freddie, Fannie Hard; Their guarantees
cover big share of mortgages, shifting risks off banks

BYLINE: BY LAURA MANDARO

SECTION: SECTION A; NATIONAL EDITION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1381 words


If the housing market sputters, it's not just individual homeowners who will
feel the jolt.

The legion of financial institutions that own mortgages will also get rattled.

Banks, thrifts and credit union lenders now hold only one-third of the $8.5
trillion in single-family mortgage debt outstanding.

That's down from 44% in 1989, right before the last steep downturn in
residential real estate and accompanying bank failures, says the Federal
Reserve.

In the place of traditional lenders, government-chartered mortgage financers
such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have added volume to their loan books.
They've pooled and sold off many of these mortgages to investors in the U.S. and
abroad.

Mortgage-backed securities also have swelled, as institutional investors snap
them up. But Freddie and Fannie's guarantee to back many of these securities if
the homeowner skips payments still puts them at risk for defaults.

"To the extent that we get mortgage risk out of the banking system, that's a
good thing," said Lawrence White, a professor of economics at New York
University's Stern School of Business. "But since a big chunk has ended up with
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which have an implicit government guarantee, then
we've substituted one set of government regulation problems for another."

And banks' increased reliance on such loans -- they hold $2.85 trillion in
single-family mortgages vs. $1 trillion in 1989 -- means they might not escape a
bubble burst unscathed.

There are signs housing is starting to cool. Mortgage applications have fallen
to their lowest point since late April. Long-term fixed rates are at their
highest level since March while adjustable rates are at four-year peaks. The
market's supply of new homes hasn't been this deep since 2000, suggesting price
gains could slow.

What happened to lenders after the last big real estate bubble burst is still
fresh in the minds of many who lived through the early 1990s, particularly in
hard-hit places like California and New England.

Nationally, 1,569 banks and 1,273 thrifts during that period failed, the victims
of high interest rates, speculative commercial real estate lending, regulatory
changes and local employment shocks.

Roads To Nowhere

As a bank examiner in the late 1980s, financial analyst Campbell Chaney
remembers driving to the far suburbs of Los Angeles to see projects funded by
local banks.

He found roads leading to nowhere. After laying down asphalt and installing
sewers, developers ran out of money to build houses. In downtown L.A., he
visited 40-story office buildings with three-quarters of their suites empty.

Banks' loan portfolios reflected these vacancies. Write-offs soared. The housing
collapse "shocked a lot of bankers in California," said Chaney, now an analyst
with Sanders Morris Harris. This time around, "banks have been able to sell off
a lot of their risks . . . instead of holding them on their books."

Dispersal of banks' lending risk is one reason a replay of the last real estate
cycle -- and subsequent bank bust -- seems unlikely.

Still, regulators aren't taking any chances. As the housing market has boomed,
banks' loan portfolios have become more concentrated in real estate. And lending
standards have loosened.

"Banking supervisors have become concerned recently about apparent increased
risk-taking in both commercial and residential real estate lending," Federal
Reserve Gov. Susan Schmidt Bies told a bank conference Wednesday.

The national bank regulators are preparing guidance on the latest generation of
exotic mortgages, such as option-ARMs. With the last collapse in mind, the Fed
is also considering issuing new standards for commercial real estate.

"This has historically been a highly volatile asset class, and it played a
central role in the banking problems of the late 1980s and early 1990s," said
Bies.

The housing market exposure of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which buy loans from
banks and thrifts that originate with the mortgages, has also raised a red flag.

Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan has expressed caution about "systemic
risks" created by the growth in the mortgage portfolios of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, also called government-sponsored enterprises, or GSEs.

"Without the needed restrictions on the size of the GSE balance sheets, we put
at risk our ability to preserve safe and sound financial markets," he said in
May.

GSEs, which also include the Federal Home Loan Banks, are the single largest
group exposed to U.S. mortgage credit. They held or guaranteed 45% of
outstanding single-family mortgages and mortgage-backed securities at the end of
June.

Freddie And Fannie Fears

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac expanded their share of the mortgage market,
including single-family and multifamily loans, to $3.8 trillion in June. This
expansion has boosted profits at the two institutions.

It's also renewed complaints that their size poses a risk to the U.S. financial
system. If they run into trouble, a taxpayer bailout could be enormous. Congress
is debating whether to restrict the size of Fannie and Freddie's mortgage
portfolios as well as beef up oversight.

Investors have already flown the coop. Accounting scandals and fears that
Congress could severely restrict their growth have shaved half of Freddie Mac's
stock price in the last year. Fannie's shares have fallen 28% since July.

The head winds that tipped over lenders during the last real estate cycle are
absent from this cycle.

For residential real estate, regional job losses were the most dangerous. In the
late 1980s and early 1990s, the Texas oil bust, the California defense cuts and
the thrift failures sapped local markets -- and that jump in unemployment drove
down home prices in those states.

In this cycle, home prices have continued to climb even in regions that suffered
widespread job losses, such as the San Francisco Bay Area after the tech bubble
burst in 2000.

Meanwhile, an 80% rise in average home prices since 1997 means many owners have
substantial equity in their houses. Homeowners struggling with payments are more
likely to sell and avoid foreclosure than those with little equity.

"It's rare that a homeowner would default on their loan if they have home
equity," said Freddie Mac chief economist Frank Nothaft.

One new wrinkle in this cycle is the growth in new mortgages that let homeowners
buy increasingly costly homes without a similar hike in deposits or monthly
payments.

As the average homeowner's ability to afford a home has hit a 14-year low, banks
have touted interest-only and flexible payment mortgages.

"Piggy-back" home equity loans, which let people shoe-horn into a large mortgage
with a small deposit and no mortgage insurance, made up two-thirds of all second
mortgages in the second half of 2004, said the Mortgage Bankers Association.

"What's different this time is there's a number of new products that are
untested in a weak market," said Fred Cannon, an analyst at Keefe, Bruyette &
Woods.

Banks Still In The House

Traditional lenders are knee-deep in housing loans, despite their lower total
share of the mortgage market. Mortgage-related assets make up nearly half of
banks' portfolios, says the FDIC. That exposure has rattled some investors.

"Whatever happened to a diversified loan portfolio?" wrote Sadoff Investment
Management in its October newsletter. "The banks are over-concentrated in
housing."

These fears aren't necessarily reflected in the lenders' reports.

Countrywide Financial, the No. 1 U.S. mortgage lender, on Tuesday said its
originations rose 58% in September from a year earlier.

Freddie Mac said home price gains have made its loans less risky. Its average
mortgage as a share of the home's value is 57% vs. a loan-to-value ratio of more
than 65% in the late 1990s. That gives Freddie a cushion if home prices slide.

But investors don't seem to be taking any chances on the mortgage finance
sector. An index of mortgage lenders and insurers formed by Keefe, Bruyette has
fallen 13% since its July 22 start.

With originations still growing, "the sell-off in mortgage stocks would seem to
imply that there's concern because of credit risk and the flattening yield
curve," said Keefe, Bruyette's Cannon.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2005 Investor's Business Daily, Inc.
                                www.investors.com


                              247 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Senate Banking Panel Passes Housing Reauthorization Measure

                            June 22, 1994, Wednesday

Heather Ann Hope

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Senate Banking Committee overwhelmingly approved a comprehensive housing
reauthorization bill yesterday that in many respects follows the House version
passed last week.

The committee voted 15 to 3.

Congress must pass a housing reauthorization bill by Sept. 30 to reauthorize
dozens of federal housing programs for the new fiscal year.

One of the major provisions in the legislation would consolidate seven homeless
assistance programs into one, thus improving the "delivery of homeless
assistance by providing a predictable source of dollars to states and
localities," Senate Banking Committee Chairman Donald W. Riegle, D Mich., said
at the markup yesterday.

The Senate committee's bill also would reauthorize the existing HOME program for
two years, approving $2 billion for fiscal 1995 and $2.3 billion for fiscal
1996. The House bill authorizes $1.75 billion for fiscal 1995 and $2 billion for
fiscal 1996.

Separately, a new HOME loan guarantee program allowing states and localities to
receive more money upfront for projects would be created under the Senate
legislation. The bill authorizes $1 billion for fiscal 1995.

Municipalities would be allowed to issue taxable bonds at up to five times the
most recent year's federal allocation, with the subsequent year's allocation
being used to retire the debt. The federal government would guarantee repayment
of the debt should the loan go into default.

Under both the Senate and House versions of the bill, the multifamily
risk-sharing program would be extended, and a new program for single family risk
sharing would be created. Risk sharing is designed to test the idea of
permitting state and local housing authorities to help the Federal Housing
Administration insure multifamily and single-family homes.

Among other provisions, the Senate bill would revamp the Section 8 rent subsidy
program in light of the anticipated expiration of existing Section 8 contracts.
The legislation protects current tenants and attempts to entice owners to
continue to participate in the program.

The Senate bill now goes to the floor for consideration, but the "biggest
question is when," said John Murphy, executive director of the Association of
Local Housing Finance Agents. The Senate has a tight schedule and the committee
leadership wants to get the bill through quickly with limited debate, Murphy
said.

The full House is expected to consider its version shortly after the July
recess. House and Senate committee members hope to complete a conference on the
bill by August but may not meet that deadline, thus pushing the bill back to
September, Murphy said. But at any rate, the bill is expected to pass Congress
without much controversy, he said.

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 455 words

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1994 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              248 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 MARCH 1, 1999

Roundup: Fannie Buys $ 1.9B Tax-Exempt Bonds

LENGTH: 682 words

Washington-During 1998, Fannie Mae purchased $ 1.4 million worth of tax-exempt
Community Development Bonds, $ 310.6 million worth of taxable mortgage revenue
bonds and $ 13.7 million worth of taxable Down-Payment Assistance Investment
Notes.

The GSE invested more than $ 1.92 billion in tax-exempt single-family MRBs
issued by housing finance agencies. In addition, the MRBs purchased made
affordable mortgage financing available to approximately 32,000 low- and
moderate-income home buyers, a 68% increase from the 1997.

Also, Fannie Mae purchased $ 621 million of tax-exempt and taxable multifamily
housing revenue bonds.

Fannie Mae's total targeted affordable housing production was over $ 1.3 billion
in 1998, exceeding $ 723 million it invested in 1997.

Washington

Freddie Mac reported that in 1998 its multifamily division provided credit
support to $ 473 million of mortgages funded from proceeds of tax-exempt bonds.

Mitchell Kiffe, Freddie vice president for Multifamily Loan Production, said the
multifamily tax-exempt credit enhancement product directly helps those cities
and states that want to build, rehabilitate and sustain affordable rental
housing in their communities.

Freddie's Multifamily Bond Credit Enhancement Program was launched last year to
expand its support of affordable rental housing by extending the reach of its
strong credit position in the capital markets to investors in municipal housing.


The MBCEP allows credit enhancement of mortgages backing both fixed- and
floating-rate bonds along with the substitution of a Freddie Mac credit
enhancement for direct-pay letters of credit.

Also the program gives borrowers who want to finance affordable rental housing
the opportunity to do so by attaching a Freddie Mac guarantee to the mortgage
financed by the bonds.

Mr. Kiffe said enabling these bonds to receive or maintain a high credit rating
results in the cost of borrowing being kept low and the rents on apartments
financed with bond proceeds more affordable.

Calabasas, CA

Countrywide Home Loans Inc. here has developed a program whereby homeowners who
elect to refinance can reinvest their savings into a mutual fund.

The new program, called Countrywide InvestPlus, automatically takes the
difference between what the borrower owed each month under the old loan, and
what is owed on the new loan and puts it into a mutual fund through a sister
company, Countrywide Investments Inc.

In an example given by Countrywide, the borrower has a $ 130,000 mortgage at
7.5%. The loan is refinanced to 6.875% in a "no-cost" program, and the borrower
saves $ 660 per year or $ 55 per month.

Over the life of the loan, the savings could be as much as $ 19,760.

If this $ 55 per month were invested at a 5% rate, the homeowner could have
nearly $ 46,000 in capital for a return of 128% when the 30-year mortgage is
paid off. This is an estimate, and actual performance of the fund can vary.

Consumers can choose the monthly amount they would like to invest and have it
automatically invested in the fund of their choice.

Joe Anderson, executive vice president of the consumer markets division, said,
"today's mortgage rates are at historical lows and offer unparalleled
opportunities for consumers to save.

"Our special InvestPlus plan allows consumers to save on their monthly mortgage
payments and invest the difference in mutual funds."

New York

Fitch IBCA has downgraded Residential Funding Mortgage Securities Inc., RFMSI
series 1993-S30 class B1 to the speculative grade rating of B from the
speculative grade rating of BB.

The subordinate class has about $ 1.8 million outstanding and was downgraded due
to its level of losses to date and its high delinquencies in relation to
applicable credit support (0.30%).

As of the January distribution, 1.41% of the pool was more than 90 days past due
and its losses over time have been about $ 1.6 million, or 0.51% of the initial
1993-S30 pool. Fitch IBCA's website is www.fitchibca.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1999 Faulkner & Gray


                              249 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           The Arizona Capitol Times

                          September 14, 2011 Wednesday

Keeping rural Arizona 'afloat': USDA development program provided $750 million
to bolster outlying areas

BYLINE: Don Harris

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1466  words


The three most prevalent words in politics these days are jobs, jobs, jobs.

On one hand, incumbents are doing and saying what they think they should in
order to hang onto their jobs, and challengers are scurrying about trying to
figure out ways to snatch those jobs for their very own.

But the jobs that really matter are the ones that constituents still have, are
in danger of losing, have lost or are applying for.

Jim Rounds, senior vice president/senior economist at Elliott D. Pollack &
Company, says people who are unemployed probably won't find a job for the rest
of the year, and people who have jobs probably will keep them, but they're still
concerned and are cutting back on spending.

Arizona went from second in the nation in job growth in 2006 to 49th in 2009 and
2010, Rounds says, but he sees marked improvements ahead. "Before mid-decade we
will be in the top five in the country again in both population and employment
growth," he says. "But, gone are the days of us also creating higher wage jobs
with no effort. Also gone are the days of the state outperforming the country in
times of recession, as was recently demonstrated. It will take a while to turn
things around. "

In these dire economic times, government agencies at the federal and state
levels - and in Arizona it's the public/private quasi-governmental Arizona
Commerce Authority - are tasked with providing loans, grants, loan guarantees
and myriad incentives designed to help the private sector create or retain jobs.

At the federal level, the U.S. Department of Agriculture invested more than $750
million in rural Arizona communities during fiscal year 2010, creating or saving
several thousand jobs, according to Alan Stephens, Arizona director of the USDA
Rural Development program.

Last month, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced grant recipients of the
agency's Rural Energy for America Program (REAP), 10 of which will be given to
smallArizona rural businesses. REAP offers funds for farmers, ranchers and rural
small businesses to purchase and install renewable energy systems and make
energy-efficiency improvements. These federal funds leverage other funding
sources for small businesses.

"All of the 10 grants here in Arizona will be used for solar projects," Stephens
says, "which makes sense given our abundant sunshine. "

The Arizona projects represent businesses in Chino Valley, Willcox, Bisbee,
Cottonwood and Fort Mohave.

Dianna Jennings, the agency's public affairs specialist, provides a breakdown of
some of the USDA's Rural Development efforts in Arizona.

In the Business Loans division, 11 loans were made totaling

$28 million, resulting in 471 jobs saved or created in rural Arizona, Jennings
says. Ten were guaranteed loans, meaning a bank or lending institution made the
loan and the feds guarantee it.

"In rural areas, where access to capital is so limited, our guarantee program
often drives lending," Jennings says. "Banks may think the business plan looks
good, but perhaps there isn't a track record or the economy is a little shaky.
They might deny a small business loan without the guarantee, but they have
enough of risk mitigation with our guarantee to take the chance on the small
business. "

In housing, USDA did 3,252 guaranteed home loans; 140 home loans through the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009; and nearly 300 other
home-related loans.

That represents 3,685 Arizona homes built, purchased or repaired in fiscal year
2010, under the USDA Rural Development program. Translated into jobs, the feds
use the figure of two jobs per home, which totals an estimated 7,370 jobs from
housing programs.

Under the USDA's Community Facility Program, 10 loans totaling $51 million were
made, Jennings says, saving or creating an estimated 878 jobs.

Jobs spawned by the single-family housing, community facilities and business
projects total 8,719. What's not included are jobs created through USDA's
RuralDevelopment Water and Waste Water Program, which involved several large
projects for a total of nearly

$29 million, plus $169 million in utility funding for broadband, electric and
telecom projects.

Job figures are based on the actual jobs reported by project managers and the
estimated jobs based on industry estimates for the other programs, Stephens
says.

"Although we can only estimate the impact created by the record investments by
USDA Rural Development in Arizona in FY2010, there is no doubt that it had a
huge impact in helping our rural communities stay afloat...and boosting
employment in the areas of our state most vulnerable to job loss," Stephens
says.

Jennings says funding for the housing program was 97 percent loans, 3 percent
grants; for business programs, 89 percent loans,

11 percent grants; and for community programs, 57 percent loans,

43 percent grants, mostly for water/waste water grants in low-income areas.

Sandra Watson, executive vice president and chief operating officer of the
Arizona Commerce Authority, touts the fledgling agency's game plan designed to
secure "better jobs for our citizens, and helping to create an Arizona that is
globally competitive. "

"The ACA will focus exclusively on business attraction, growth and expansion of
Arizona's strongest economic sectors, including science/technology,
aerospace/defense, renewable energies and small business/entrepreneurial
expansion efforts," Watson says.

By far the largest economic development project in the past year was the
announcement last October that Intel Corporation plans to invest $6 billion to
$8 billion in manufacturing to support future technology advancements in
facilities throughout the country, including its massive site in Chandler. The
investment will support the creation of 6,000 to 8,000 construction jobs and 800
to 1,000 new permanent high-tech jobs nationally, with a significant portion
destined for Arizona. Intel's Chandler facility employs approximately 9,700 and
is the company's second largest site.

In addition to the Intel project, from July 1, 2010, to June 30, 2011, the ACA
reports having coordinated efforts to locate, relocate or assist with the
expansion of more than 30 companies, projecting the creation of nearly 11,000
jobs within three years and generating more than $1.3 billion in capital
investment. The average salary of the jobs created, according to the ACA, is
$52,261.

Early this year, the ACA reported awarding $2 million in ARRA money to 21 rural
entities throughout the state. ACA estimates the grants resulted in the creation
of more than 500 full-time jobs and 80 part-time jobs, and generated

$12.8 million in matching and other funds. Among the communities that benefitted
were Eloy, Flagstaff, Safford, Yuma, Kayenta, Prescott Valley, Clifton,
Florence, Wickenburg, Douglas and La Paz and Mohave counties.

Rounds of Elliott D. Pollack & Company says he's tracking raw job numbers,
regardless of quality. "In the longer term, though, we also need to focus on
growing well," the economist says. "We need to start making stuff again, not
just homes and other buildings, but higher value-added products and services,
products that are made locally and consumed out of state. These are called
'base' industries. "

Government, Rounds says, affects these industries at the margin. Arizona has
lost 300,000 jobs, and Rounds says it's up to government to create competitive
tax rates and invest in education in order to attract higher-paying jobs in
better industries.

"Government can improve the quality, the private sector will take care of the
quantity," he says. "First and foremost, we need to be competitive in the
basics: tax rates, regulation policies, and the provision of physical and
intellectual infrastructure. The government can directly impact these. But,
labor costs, labor quality, and other operating expenses are also considered by
businesses. These are more difficult to impact. Economic incentives are also
important in select cases.  But, care must be taken in their use. "

Corporate profits are higher than ever, Rounds says, adding, "That doesn't seem
to jibe with the state of the economy. It's mainly in the financial sectors and
manufacturing. Profits are very high, but business spending on plant expansion
will be slow. We're getting closer to seeing some limited investment, though.
Hiring will be relatively slow, but there will be more pressure to hire by the
end of the year. There is lots of money sitting on the sidelines. Banks are
going to have to start lending again. "

Rounds gives the Arizona Commerce Authority high marks, so far: "The upper
management of the ACA is much more knowledgeable than I was anticipating, as are
some of the senior staff. They have also demonstrated a willingness to take a
leadership role in terms of economic development. A lot of work remains, but so
far, so good. "

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Government activity

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              250 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                            March 12, 2008 Wednesday

Morning briefs

SECTION: Pg. D-1

LENGTH: 569 words


GREEN FROG ART GRABS WORKING MOTHER HONOR

A women-owned Ponte Vedra Beach business was recognized nationally for its
flexible schedules, benefits tailored to families and community commitment.

Green Frog Art was among 25 businesses chosen by Working Mother magazine as its
2008 Best Women-Owned Companies, according to an announcement Tuesday.

Green Frog was founded in 1995 by Kelly Neal Mariotti to fill a niche she saw
for furniture that could be enjoyed as babies grow up, according to its Web
site.

Green Frog's original and hand-painted art appears on furniture and accessories
including lamps and decorative toy boxes.

Business partner Linda Carpenter said the company's latest move is opening a
gallery section in the USA Baby store at 13475 Atlantic Blvd.

Liz Flaisig/ The Times-Union

FED'S MOVE A BOOST FOR FANNIE, FREDDIE

The ability of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to raise capital - which hit
rock-bottom last week - has been boosted by the Federal Reserve's latest market
intervention.

Drained by multibillion-dollar fourth-quarter losses, the country's biggest
mortgage-finance companies are thirsting for cash so they can play a bigger role
in the struggling housing market. But Fannie and Freddie, which together hold or
guarantee around $4.9 trillion in home-loan debt, have had difficulty lining up
buyers for their mortgage-backed securities amid tumbling home prices and rising
foreclosures.

The Federal Reserve answered that call Tuesday by making available to Wall
Street banks up to $200 billion in Treasury securities, with a twist - the
agency will accept as collateral the types of securities Fannie and Freddie
guarantee and sell to investors.

Associated Press

FEE HIKES COMING TO LONDON-AREA AIRPORTS

Travelers using London's two biggest airports can expect to be charged higher
fees announced Tuesday by Britain's airline regulator.

The Civil Aviation Authority said higher fees, effective April 1, are needed to
pay for improvements at Heathrow and Gatwick airports, and for increased
security.

British Airways accused the agency of caving in to pressure from the airport
owner, BAA, a subsidiary of Grupo Ferrovial of Spain, but BAA complained that
the settlement was insufficient.

The Civil Aviation Authority said it would allow fees to rise 23.5 percent at
Heathrow to the equivalent of $25.82 per passenger, effective April 1. At
Gatwick it is allowing a 21 percent increase to the equivalent of $13.70 per
passenger.

Associated Press

HONDA MINI-VEHICLE PLANT STARTING IN JAPAN

A Honda subsidiary is building a plant in Japan to produce mini-vehicles, the
automaker said Tuesday, as soaring gas prices boosts demand for the cheap,
fuel-efficient tiny cars.

Yachiyo Industry Co. Ltd., a unit of Honda Motor Co., will build a plant in Mie
prefecture, southwest of Nagoya, in central Japan, with engine production set to
start in 2009 and auto production a year later, the Tokyo-based company said in
a statement.

Production capacity, when combined with an older plant nearby, will total
240,000 a year, and the new plant will make mini-vehicles such as Life and Zest
models, Honda said.

Honda will invest $491 million in the new plant as part of an effort to
strengthen its mini-vehicle business.

Minicars in Japan are limited to an engine size of up to 660 cubic centimeters,
and restricted in size by law. They have been popular for years in Japan, and
demand has been picking up abroad.

Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 The Florida Times-Union


                              251 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Mortgage Insurance Trade Group Head Terms Bill to Expand FHA Role Unfair

                             March 17, 1989, Friday

By Nicholas J. Dazzo


A proposal to expand the role of the Federal Housing Administration was
introduced in the Senate late Wednesday but was attacked as being unfair to low
and moderate-income first-time home buyers by the president of a mortgage
insurance trade association.

The proposal, the National Affordable Housing Act introduced by Senators Alan
Cranston, D-Calif., and Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y., would give the Federal Housing
Administration the power to guarantee mortgage loans for up to 95% of the median
home price in a particular geographic area.

Currently, the FHA guarantees mortgages up to a fixed amount per region,
regardless of the size of an individual loan. For example, the maximum mortgage
guarantee for a single-family home in the New York metropolitan area is
$101,250.

William H. Lacy, president of of the trade group, said an increase in the amount
of government loan insurance will assist American families seeking shelter. He
said, however, the insurance coverage should be based on income and not on
median home prices because in many regions real estate values are
disproportionately greater than average income. In such places, families with
above-average incomes would receive additional loan insurance to buy houses that
families with average incomes cannot afford, he argued.

"Allowing FHA to insure home loans of $150,000 or more, effectively provides a
government housing program for those earning $70,000, $80,000, and $90,000
annually," he said. "It does little to help teachers, firefighters, truck
drivers, and others earning median salaries.

"The proper role of the government is to provide solutions to problems that
private initiatives cannot solve," he added. "Government programs that duplicate
services already provided by private enterprise without helping the
disenfranchised are not desirable."

Mr. Lacy's trade association represents private mortgage insurance companies.

Public Service Receives Bid

Public Service Co. of New Hampshire said it received an offer from New Hampshire
Electric Cooperative Inc. to purchase the company's northern division.

Public Service, which is currently operating under Chapter 11 of the Federal
Bankruptcy Code, said it made no decision to sell the division or any other part
of the company and will continue to evaluate all bids submitted to the
bankruptcy court.

Primary Markets

In the largest investment-grade corporate bond deal ever brought to market,
General Electric Capital Corp. issued $1.2 billion of triple-A rated 10.15%
one-year notes through a group led by Kidder Peabody & Co. The previous record
was held by Eastman Kodak Co. for a $1.1 billion issue of 10-year notes managed
by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets last year. A Kidder syndicate official said
yesterday's offering was increased to meet strong investor demand.

Ford Motor Credit Corp. issued $225 million of three-year floating rate notes
through Goldman Sachs & Co. The interest rate on the notes will be reset weekly
to float at 25 basis points below the three-month London Interbank Offered Rate,
which is currently 10 1/4%.

Darling Delaware Co. offered $165 million of 14% 10-year senior subordinated
notes through Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. The notes, rated B3 by Moody's
Investor Service and B by Standard & Poor's Corp., were priced at par.

Shoney's Inc. filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange
Commission to sell $175 million of 15-year subordinated zero coupon bonds called
liquid yield option notes through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.

Proceeds from the sale of the Lyons, about $50 million, will be used to prepay
part of the financing incurred in the company's 1988 leveraged recapitalization.


Secondary Markets

Prices of fixed-rate mortgage-backed securities were narrowly mixed in moderate
trading yesterday and closed about 3/8 point lower. Yield spreads between
mortgage-backeds and the 10-year Treasury issue widened another six basis points
yesterday, bringing net increases during the past week to almost 20 basis
points.

Corporate bond prices were essentially unchanged in quiet trading yesterday. The
investment-grade market was largely focused on the General Electric Capital
Corp. offering, traders said.

Ratings

Moody's said it upgraded the senior debt ratings of Societe Nationale Elf
Aquitaine to Aa3 from A1 and confirmed the company's prime-1 commercial paper
rating. About $650 million of securities is affected.

The rating agency said the upgrade represents "sound debt protection and an
improving cash flow outlook as a result of the company's cost reduction and
rationalization efforts of the past several years." Moody's said the upgrade
also reflects the improving oil industry environment.

Standard & Poor's reported on the credit quality of two foreign governments
yesterday. The agency assigned an implicit A-minus rating to the long-term debt
of Malaysia and an implicit A1 rating to the short-term debt.

"The ratings reflect a strong recovery from Malaysia's 1985-1986 recession,
improving fiscal and current account performance and growing inflows of foreign
nondebt capital," the rating agency said.

Standard & Poor's also assigned an A1 short-term rating to the Republic of
Iceland's $200 million Eurocommercial paper program. I also assigned an implicit
A rating to the government's long-term debt.



                        Mortgage Prices
                 GNMA   FNMA   FHLMC  Treas.
                10.50% 10.50% 10.50% 8 7/8s/99
 Price          99-13  98-31  98-15  97-07
 Change           -05    -01    -01    +02
 Yield          10.76  10.80  10.80   9.30
 Prior day      10.73  10.79  10.79   9.31
 52-week high   10.76  10.80  10.80   9.40
 52-week low     9.20   8.58   8.77   8.29

                         CORPORATE BONDS
                        Investment Grade
                       Index   Prev.    %
                       Price    Day    Chg.
 Financials           93.340  93.306  +0.04
 Oil and Gas          94.266  94.292  -0.03
 Industrials          91.924  91.932  -0.01
 Electric Utilities   89.224  89.270  -0.05
 Telephone Utilities  87.574  87.689  -0.13
 10-Year Treasuries   97.219  97.125  +0.06
 30-Year Treasuries   97.500  97.406  +0.06


SECTION: CORPORATE AND MORTGAGE SECURITIES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1112 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Includes tables

                      Copyright 1989 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              252 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           February 10, 2009 Tuesday

Fannie Eases Its InvestorLoan Rules

BYLINE: Harry Terris

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 1 Vol. 175 No. 26

LENGTH: 787  words


Fannie Mae is loosening a restriction to encourage lending to property
investors, a group that has been widely blamed for contributing to the housing
meltdown but is also seen by many as critical to a recovery.

The government-sponsored enterprise told lenders last week that starting next
month it will buy or guarantee home loans made to borrowers that have mortgaged
as many as nine other properties. Currently, Fannie will not touch a loan if the
borrower has financed more than three other homes.

The change is meant "to bring added liquidity to the investor segment of the
market and help hasten the recovery," Fannie said.

However, the GSE, which said it wants to make more loans available to
"high-credit quality, bona fide ... experienced investors," is tightening other
requirements for this type of borrower. Starting in June, an investor will have
to hold six months of payments in reserve, rather than two months, to get a
single-family loan approved by Fannie's automated system.

Since they were seized by the government last year, Fannie and Freddie Mac have
been directed to put more emphasis on supporting the housing market; like other
prospective homebuyers, investors have been dissuaded from making purchases by
tightened underwriting standards and forecasts that prices will keep tumbling.

"Investors are often the first sign of a stabilizing market," said Joe Garrett,
a principal at Garrett, Watts & Co., a consulting firm in Berkeley, Calif. "One
of the things that leads the economy out of a housing crisis is when prices get
cheap enough that investors start moving in and buying things. ... Then the
owner-occupants see that prices have stopped falling - they see how cheap prices
have gotten, and they start to jump in."

Fannie also said a desire to expand the range of potential buyers for properties
with tenants played a role in the new standards. Last month both GSEs said they
would no longer evict tenants living in foreclosed properties and would offer
them month-to-month leases instead.

Robert Simpson, the founder and president of Investors Mortgage Asset Recovery
Co. LLC, an Irvine, Calif., audit and fraud analysis firm, said he was wary of
easing restrictions on investor loans.

"The idea that we need to let investors back in" to shore up the housing market
amounts to "an artificial bottom," he said. "Let those prices come down to the
point where normal people can afford them, and you'll find buyers, but not at
these inflated prices."

Basing loans on a reasonable multiple of rent would be a safe way to lend to
investors, Mr. Simpson said. Right now such buyers are "catching a falling
knife," with prices likely to tumble further. "The government, I think,
rightfully has an interest in seeing that people own a home. ... But I don't
believe the government has any interest in seeing that people are successful
real estate investors," he said.

Moody's Economy.com Inc. has projected that prices will decline another 11% from
the fourth quarter before stabilizing at the end of this year.

David Zugheri, the co-founder and chief marketing officer of the Houston lender
Envoy Mortgage Ltd., said underwriting standards are "very different" today from
years past, when a loan on a tenantless property would be granted on the basis
of rents in its geographic market.

For refinancings, underwriters today typically look for income from the property
"to support itself and then some," he said. They also want to make sure
borrowers "can stand on their own feet, even if the property is not bringing in
any income at all, if it were vacant."

As a result of such changes and market conditions, Envoy is "seeing less and
less investment properties," Mr. Zugheri said. When the private securitization
market was operating, there was "no real defined cap" on the number of mortgages
for investment homes. "People would come by with 20-plus properties."

Mr. Garrett said that "the biggest problem" in securing loans for investment
properties "is the lack of equity."

"A few years ago you could've bought, as an investor, these same properties for
5% down or 10% down. Now it's more like 30% down," and in some cases 40%.

"Prices haven't fallen enough in most places for investors to come in," he said.
"In areas where the prices have fallen low enough," and rental income is enough
to produce "a break-even or a positive cash flow, underwriters are approving
those loans."

During the boom, cash flow often got little attention, under the assumption that
properties might be resold within three months, Mr. Garrett said. Now cash
flows, debt coverage, leases, and the borrower's experience as a landlord and
independent financial strength are scrutinized, he said. "These are actually
pretty good loans."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              253 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                               February 10, 2009

Fannie Eases Its InvestorLoan Rules.

BYLINE: Harry Terris

SECTION: Pg. 1 Vol. 175 No. 26 ISSN: 0002-7561

LENGTH: 787 words



HIGHLIGHT: Fannie Mae


Fannie Mae is loosening a restriction to encourage lending to property
investors, a group that has been widely blamed for contributing to the housing
meltdown but is also seen by many as critical to a recovery.

The government-sponsored enterprise told lenders last week that starting next
month it will buy or guarantee home loans made to borrowers that have mortgaged
as many as nine other properties. Currently, Fannie will not touch a loan if the
borrower has financed more than three other homes.

The change is meant "to bring added liquidity to the investor segment of the
market and help hasten the recovery," Fannie said.

However, the GSE, which said it wants to make more loans available to
"high-credit quality, bona fide ... experienced investors," is tightening other
requirements for this type of borrower. Starting in June, an investor will have
to hold six months of payments in reserve, rather than two months, to get a
single-family loan approved by Fannie's automated system.

Since they were seized by the government last year, Fannie and Freddie Mac have
been directed to put more emphasis on supporting the housing market; like other
prospective homebuyers, investors have been dissuaded from making purchases by
tightened underwriting standards and forecasts that prices will keep tumbling.

"Investors are often the first sign of a stabilizing market," said Joe Garrett,
a principal at Garrett, Watts & Co., a consulting firm in Berkeley, Calif. "One
of the things that leads the economy out of a housing crisis is when prices get
cheap enough that investors start moving in and buying things. ... Then the
owner-occupants see that prices have stopped falling - they see how cheap prices
have gotten, and they start to jump in."

Fannie also said a desire to expand the range of potential buyers for properties
with tenants played a role in the new standards. Last month both GSEs said they
would no longer evict tenants living in foreclosed properties and would offer
them month-to-month leases instead.

Robert Simpson, the founder and president of Investors Mortgage Asset Recovery
Co. LLC, an Irvine, Calif., audit and fraud analysis firm, said he was wary of
easing restrictions on investor loans.

"The idea that we need to let investors back in" to shore up the housing market
amounts to "an artificial bottom," he said. "Let those prices come down to the
point where normal people can afford them, and you'll find buyers, but not at
these inflated prices."

Basing loans on a reasonable multiple of rent would be a safe way to lend to
investors, Mr. Simpson said. Right now such buyers are "catching a falling
knife," with prices likely to tumble further. "The government, I think,
rightfully has an interest in seeing that people own a home. ... But I don't
believe the government has any interest in seeing that people are successful
real estate investors," he said.

Moody's Economy.com Inc. has projected that prices will decline another 11% from
the fourth quarter before stabilizing at the end of this year.

David Zugheri, the co-founder and chief marketing officer of the Houston lender
Envoy Mortgage Ltd., said underwriting standards are "very different" today from
years past, when a loan on a tenantless property would be granted on the basis
of rents in its geographic market.

For refinancings, underwriters today typically look for income from the property
"to support itself and then some," he said. They also want to make sure
borrowers "can stand on their own feet, even if the property is not bringing in
any income at all, if it were vacant."

As a result of such changes and market conditions, Envoy is "seeing less and
less investment properties," Mr. Zugheri said. When the private securitization
market was operating, there was "no real defined cap" on the number of mortgages
for investment homes. "People would come by with 20-plus properties."

Mr. Garrett said that "the biggest problem" in securing loans for investment
properties "is the lack of equity."

"A few years ago you could've bought, as an investor, these same properties for
5% down or 10% down. Now it's more like 30% down," and in some cases 40%.

"Prices haven't fallen enough in most places for investors to come in," he said.
"In areas where the prices have fallen low enough," and rental income is enough
to produce "a break-even or a positive cash flow, underwriters are approving
those loans."

During the boom, cash flow often got little attention, under the assumption that
properties might be resold within three months, Mr. Garrett said. Now cash
flows, debt coverage, leases, and the borrower's experience as a landlord and
independent financial strength are scrutinized, he said. "These are actually
pretty good loans."

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 6140478

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Fulltext

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERBAFT

                        Copyright 2009 Gale Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Business and Industry
                          Copyright 2009 Thomson Media


                              254 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 7, 2015

Fannie G-Fee Income Tops Investment Income in First Quarter

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: SECONDARY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 348  words


Fannie Mae reported net interest income of $5.1 billion in the first quarter,
over half of which came from guarantee fees rather than its investment
portfolio.

"This is the first time we have disclosed that a majority of our revenues have
come from our guarantee fees, a trend that we would expect to continue over
time," said Timothy Mayopoulos, Fannie's chief executive officer, during a
conference call.

G-fees on single family loans totaled $3 billion in the first quarter, up from
$2.9 billion a year ago, according to Fannie. Such income has been slowly rising
after the Federal Housing Finance Agency began hiking G-fees at the same time
that it ordered Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to reduce mortgage portfolio income.

Fannie's mortgage investment portfolio dropped to $411.7 billion as of March 31
from $597.8 billion two years ago.

Overall, Fannie posted $1.9 billion in net income in the first quarter, up from
$1.3 billion a quarter earlier.

"This was another quarter of strong financial performance. We continue to have
solid revenues," Mayopoulos said.

In the first quarter, Fannie purchased $113.2 billion in single-family loans, up
slightly from the quarter prior and a jump of 48% from a year ago.

Mayopoulos added that Fannie is continuing to work with lenders, the Mortgage
Bankers Association and FHFA to provide more clarity on representation and
warranty risk. The changes announced last year in that area are already having
an impact, he said. "These changes to the rep and warrant framework are very
much welcomed and appreciated" by lenders, Mayopoulos said. "It has encouraged
many lenders to adjust or take off their overlays."

The Fannie CEO also noted that the government-sponsored enterprise has added an
appraisal analysis application and a pre-delivery eligibility and data
evaluation tool into Desktop Underwriter.

"The integration of these applications has allowed lenders to effectively manage
their risk and product very solid loans," he said.

Fannie Mae is still operating in conservatorship and it will pay a $1.8 billion
dividend to the Treasury Department in June.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              255 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                             August 9, 2010 Monday

Freddie Mac seeks Treasury support

BYLINE: By Alistair Barr MarketWatch

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 372 words


Freddie Mac said Monday it will ask the Treasury Department for $1.8 billion of
government support after the mortgage giant lost $6 billion during the second
quarter.

Freddie reported a net loss of $4.71 billion in the latest quarter, versus net
income of $302 million in year earlier, the company added.

Including a $1.3 billion dividend payment to the Treasury Department, Freddie
reported a net loss attributable to common stockholders of $6.01 billion, or
$1.85 a share. That compares with a net loss of $840 million, or 26 cents a
share, in the year earlier.

The results left Freddie with a net worth deficit of $1.7 billion at the end of
June. The Federal Housing Finance Agency, Freddie's regulator, will ask Treasury
for $1.8 billion to fill the gap, the company said. That will bring total
support from the Treasury to more than $64 billion.

Freddie Mac stock is down about 72 percent so far this year.

Freddie Mac and fellow mortgage giant Fannie Mae were bailed out by the
government in 2008. Taxpayer support has increased since then as Fannie and
Freddie stepped in to prop up a crumbing mortgage market that was deserted by
banks and other private lenders.

Indeed, during the first half of 2010, Freddie and Fannie "supplied the majority
of all the liquidity to the U.S. mortgage market," Freddie Mac Chief Executive
Charles Haldeman said in a statement Monday.

The company said its portfolio of guarantees on single-family mortgages
continues to suffer "significant" losses.

Nonperforming assets were $118.71 billion at the end of June, up from $103.92
billion at the end of 2009.

Home loans from 2005, 2006 and 2007 continue to generate most of Freddie's
credit losses. Mortgages originated in 2007 contributed $1.33 billion of credit
losses in the second quarter. These loans have a delinquency rate of more than
11 percent, Freddie noted.

Still, more recent home loans are performing better, and the overall delinquency
rate at the end of the second quarter was 3.96 percent, down from 4.13 percent
on March 31, Freddie reported.

Seasonal factors helped to push down the delinquency rate. More loan
modifications, mortgages returning to performing status and loans completing the
foreclosure process also helped, Freddie added.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              256 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               February 16, 2009

Fannie Eases Investor Rules

BYLINE: Harry Terris

SECTION: Pg. 1 Vol. 33 No. 20

LENGTH: 789  words


WASHINGTON-Fannie Mae is loosening a restriction to encourage lending to
property investors, a group that has been widely blamed for contributing to the
housing meltdown but is also seen by many as critical to a recovery.

The government-sponsored enterprise told lenders last week that starting next
month it will buy or guarantee home loans made to borrowers that have mortgaged
as many as nine other properties. Currently, Fannie will not touch a loan if the
borrower has financed more than three other homes.

The change is meant "to bring added liquidity to the investor segment of the
market and help hasten the recovery," Fannie said.

However, the GSE, which said it wants to make more loans available to
"high-credit quality, bona fide ... experienced investors," is tightening other
requirements for this type of borrower. Starting in June, an investor will have
to hold six months of payments in reserve, rather than two months, to get a
single-family loan approved by Fannie's automated system.

Since they were seized by the government last year, Fannie and Freddie Mac have
been directed to put more emphasis on supporting the housing market; like other
prospective homebuyers, investors have been dissuaded from making purchases by
tightened underwriting standards and forecasts that prices will keep tumbling.

"Investors are often the first sign of a stabilizing market," said Joe Garrett,
a principal at Garrett, Watts & Co., a consulting firm in Berkeley, Calif. "One
of the things that leads the economy out of a housing crisis is when prices get
cheap enough that investors start moving in and buying things. ... Then the
owner-occupants see that prices have stopped falling - they see how cheap prices
have gotten, and they start to jump in."

Fannie also said a desire to expand the range of potential buyers for properties
with tenants played a role in the new standards. Last month both GSEs said they
would no longer evict tenants living in foreclosed properties and would offer
them month-to-month leases instead.

Robert Simpson, the founder and president of Investors Mortgage Asset Recovery
Co. LLC, an Irvine, Calif., audit and fraud analysis firm, said he was wary of
easing restrictions on investor loans.

"The idea that we need to let investors back in" to shore up the housing market
amounts to "an artificial bottom," he said.

"Let those prices come down to the point where normal people can afford them,
and you'll find buyers, but not at these inflated prices," he added.

Basing loans on a reasonable multiple of rent would be a safe way to lend to
investors, Mr. Simpson said. Right now such buyers are "catching a falling
knife," with prices likely to tumble further.

"The government, I think, rightfully has an interest in seeing that people own a
home. ... But I don't believe the government has any interest in seeing that
people are successful real estate investors," he said.

Moody's Economy.com has projected that prices will decline another 11% from the
fourth quarter before stabilizing at the end of this year.

David Zugheri, the co-founder and chief marketing officer of the Houston lender
Envoy Mortgage Ltd., said underwriting standards are "very different" today from
years past, when a loan on a tenantless property would be granted on the basis
of rents in its geographic market.

For refinancings, underwriters today typically look for income from the property
"to support itself and then some," he said. They also want to make sure
borrowers "can stand on their own feet, even if the property is not bringing in
any income at all, if it were vacant."

As a result of such changes and market conditions, Envoy is "seeing less and
less investment properties," Mr. Zugheri said. When the private securitization
market was operating, there was "no real defined cap" on the number of mortgages
for investment homes. "People would come by with 20-plus properties."

Mr. Garrett said that "the biggest problem" in securing loans for investment
properties "is the lack of equity.

"A few years ago you could've bought, as an investor, these same properties for
5% down or 10% down. Now it's more like 30% down" and in some cases 40%.

"Prices haven't fallen enough in most places for investors to come in," he said.
"In areas where the prices have fallen low enough," and rental income is enough
to produce "a break-even or a positive cash flow, underwriters are approving
those loans."

During the boom, cash flow often got little attention, under the assumption that
properties might be resold within three months, Mr. Garrett said.

Now cash flows, debt coverage, leases, and the borrower's experience as a
landlord and independent financial strength are scrutinized, he said. "These are
actually pretty good loans."

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              257 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        The Jamestown Sun (North Dakota)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             June 25, 2016 Saturday

Top three lenders for ND GRH loan program recognized

BYLINE: The Jamestown Sun, N.D.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 371 words


June 25--The U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development honored the top
three lenders for North Dakota's Guaranteed Rural Housing (GRH) loan program, a
program designed to help low- and moderate-income households secure funding for
a home.

In the last twelve months through the GRH program, 51 lenders around the state
financed 355 home loans totaling $50.4 million.

The top three lenders are:

-- Gate City Bank: 47 loans, $5.8 million.

-- First Community Credit Union: 38 loans, $3.9 million.

-- Western Cooperative Credit Union: 25 loans, $4.3 million

Ryan Taylor, USDA Rural Development state director, awarded a plaque to each
lender to recognize their involvement with the GRH program and their continued
commitment to providing affordable homeownership.

"The partnership we have with local lenders has allowed us to provide more
successful homeownership opportunities to North Dakotans and their families,"
Taylor said. "This is important because owning a home provides families a
foundation for a financially secure and stable future. Homeownership also builds
stronger communities and neighborhoods, and we can all appreciate those benefits
in the fabric of our state and our local economies."

In North Dakota, USDA Rural Development oversees a single-family housing
portfolio of $304 million, consisting of more than 2,800 home loans.

GRH is a budget-neutral federal program; it supports itself through capital
created by loans, so the program functions without tax dollars. Approved,
private lenders provide the loans, while the federal government guarantees them.
This program has no down payment requirement for eligible-income households and
has no maximum mortgage limits. Eligible homes are located in rural communities
with 35,000 or fewer residents.

For households interested in applying for a GRH loan, contact an approved
lender. For institutions interested in becoming an approved USDA lender, contact
the office at (701) 530-2046 or at grh.questions@nd.usda.gov To learn more about
this and other Rural Development programs, visit http://www.rd.usda.gov/nd.

___ (c)2016 The Jamestown Sun (Jamestown, N.D.) Visit The Jamestown Sun
(Jamestown, N.D.) at www.jamestownsun.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160625-QJ-Top-three-lenders-for-ND-GRH-loan-program-recognized-0625-20160625

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QJ


                        Copyright 2016 The Jamestown Sun


                              258 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 9, 2008 Tuesday

Bailout like a pillow in front of a bulldozer

BYLINE: JOHN HEINZL, jheinzl@globeandmail.com

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: GLOBE INVESTOR COLUMN; MARKET MOVES: U.S. HOUSING
CRISIS; Pg. B15

LENGTH: 704 words


It would be nice if the U.S. Treasury's decision to bail out Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac brought an end to the credit crisis, arrested the free fall in
housing prices and put the shaky U.S. economy back on solid footing.

It would also be nice if Santa Claus existed and we could all eat candy 24/7.
But let's be realistic, folks. The U.S. economy is a mess, and it's bound to get
messier before a sustained recovery can take place. There's no guarantee the
bailout plan will even achieve its objective, which is to bring mortgage rates
down and grease the wheels of lending so the housing market can recover.

Watching the stock market yesterday, though, you'd think the most severe housing
slump since the Great Depression was a thing of the past. Fuelled by hopes that
home prices will stabilize after tumbling by about 20 per cent, shares of home
builders surged. Pulte Homes, one of the largest U.S. builders, soared 11.2 per
cent. Toll Brothers, which specializes in luxury homes, jumped 9.4 per cent.

The optimism spilled over to home improvement retailers, pushing Home Depot up
5.5 per cent and Lowes 6.2 per cent. Financial stocks also rocketed higher on
the news, with the good cheer spreading all the way to Bay Street, where
Canadian banks rose virtually across the board.

The gains faded as the day progressed, but the Dow Jones industrial average
still finished up 290 points or 2.6 per cent. Canada's S&P/TSX composite index
wasn't so lucky, however, as a 347-point advance early in the session dwindled
to a 182-point or 1.4-per-cent loss, largely because of weakness in commodities.

Most observers agree that the decision to place Fannie and Freddie into
conservatorship was necessary, particularly since foreign investors were
beginning to lose faith in the debt of these government-sponsored entities. If
the GSEs had been allowed to fail, the consequences for the housing and
financial markets would have been devastating, given that Fannie and Freddie own
or guarantee nearly half of the $12-trillion in U.S. home mortgages.

By providing an explicit guarantee to Freddie and Fannie's debts, the U.S.
government aims to bring down the cost of funding for the mortgage giants, which
it hopes will translate into lower borrowing costs for consumers. That, in turn,
may help to stem the precipitous drop in home prices.

"The government bailout of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac was essential and
inevitable," said Murray Leith, director of research at Odlum Brown Ltd. "While
the bailout won't stop the housing downturn in its tracks, it provides much hope
that it will be less painful than would have been the case."

But will mortgage rates fall low enough to pull the housing market out of its
slump? That remains to be seen. Certainly, with the U.S. unemployment rate at a
five-year high and inflation-adjusted earnings going down, not up, the macro
backdrop isn't encouraging. Already, a record 9 per cent of U.S. mortgage
holders are behind in their payments or in foreclosure, and every time a factory
lays off employees, that number rises.

What's more, as long as home prices are falling - some pundits think prices
could plunge another 10 to 20 per cent before hitting bottom - banks may be
reluctant to extend credit to home buyers for fear of watching the value of
their collateral sink.

Then there's the not insignificant danger that, if the housing market continues
to deteriorate, the U.S. government could be on the hook for hundreds of
billions of dollars in losses at Freddie and Fannie, pushing its already bloated
budget deficit - estimated at about $400-billion this year - even higher.

All of which suggests that the celebration on financial markets yesterday may
have been a tad premature.

*****

Is the worst over for U.S. housing?

Shares of home builders and home improvement retailers soared after the U.S.
government took control of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Toll Brothers

SHARE PRICE, DAILY CLOSE, (TCL-NYSE)

Yesterday's close

$26.47 U.S., up $2.27

*****

Home Depot

SHARE PRICE, DAILY CLOSE, (HD-NYSE)

Yesterday's close

$30.16, U.S., up $1.57

*****

Lowes Companies

SHARE PRICE, DAILY CLOSE, (LOW-NYSE)

Yesterday's close

$27.36 U.S., up $1.61

SOURCE: THOMSON DATASTREAM

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              259 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 July 14, 2014

Ginnie Poised to Eclipse Freddie as No. 2 Secondary Market Agency

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 38 No. 41

LENGTH: 773  words


The Government National Mortgage Association has long been considered a piker
compared to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. But Ginnie Mae's tertiary status in the
secondary market could soon change.

The agency and others are predicting that Ginnie could surpass Freddie in
outstanding mortgage backed securities in the next nine to 12 months.

"We are projecting in the next 12 months, our outstanding securities should
exceed Freddie's outstanding balances," says Ginnie Mae president Ted Tozer.

Some Wall Street analysts have told his agency that "it could happen even
sooner, maybe as early as nine months from now."

One reason is the shift in the originations market away from refinancing, in
favor of loans for home purchases.

"The purchase share within the Ginnie market is higher than the purchase share
within the Freddie market," says Laurie Goodman, a senior fellow at the Urban
Institute.

Freddie is the second-largest of the secondary marketing agencies, with $1.63
trillion in outstanding MBS, compared to $1.5 trillion in outstanding Ginnie
MBS. Fannie Mae is the top dog with $2.76 trillion in outstanding MBS.

Four years ago, Ginnie Mae had just $1 trillion in outstanding MBS, compared to
$1.73 trillion in Freddie MBS.

The agency's subsequent growth "shows how well the [Ginnie Mae] program has
worked in attracting capital to support the housing industry," Tozer says.

Lisa Gagnon, a spokeswoman for Freddie, says the GSE "is maintaining a
competitive presence in the single-family mortgage market and working to expand
it prudently and responsibly. Our goal is to continue to provide liquidity,
streamline processes and bring more certainty and transparency to the market so
our lender customers of all sizes can help more families buy homes they can
afford to keep."

Freddie's growth has been hampered by poor pricing and liquidity for its
securities. For a number of esoteric reasons, investors treat Freddie's MBS,
which Freddie calls "participation certificates," or PCs, as lower grade bonds
that those guaranteed by Fannie Mae.

Freddie had strong MBS issuance during the recent refinancing boom. But lenders
were essentially refinancing existing Freddie loans, which wasn't additive to
the GSE's MBS book of business.

Ginnie Mae, on the other hand, was gradually increasing its MBS portfolio
through the securitization of new Federal Housing Administration, Department of
Veterans Affairs and Rural Housing Service guaranteed loans.

Now that Home Affordable Refinancing Program originations have slowed, Freddie's
issuance of new MBS has fallen slightly below Ginnie's monthly volume.

Ginnie's growth has also been hampered by the drop in FHA originations over the
past year due to large increases in FHA insurance premiums. (Ginnie guarantees
timely payment of interest and principal on securities backed by loans that are
in turn guaranteed by FHA and other agencies.)

However, Ginnie Mae issuance has been aided by a pickup in VA-guaranteed loans.
Currently, VA loans make up nearly 40% of Ginnie Mae pools, compared to 20% just
two year ago.

"Borrower reliance on explicit government insurance and guarantees through FHA,
VA and RHS has experienced the fastest growth, and FHA has been the primary
source of credit for borrowers with less than pristine credit," Goodman wrote in
a recent blog post.

The former Wall Street analyst estimates that Freddie has $1.5 trillion in
single-family PCs and Ginnie has $1.4 trillion in single-family MBS.

Moving up to second place won't necessarily be a cake walk for Ginnie.

There has been dramatic improvement in the pricing and liquidity of Freddie
securities in the past year, according Credit Suisse mortgage strategist Mahesh
Swaminathan.

The spread between Freddie and Fannie securities has narrowed by almost 50% over
that period, he says.

This improvement comes from the alignment of Fannie and Freddie practices which
the Federal Housing Finance Agency has been pushing.

The pricing of Freddie bonds also got a boost when new FHFA director Mel Watt
came out "forcefully" for creating a common Fannie/Freddie mortgage security,
Swaminathan says.

"Moving toward a single common security will improve liquidity in the housing
finance markets," Watt said in first his major speech as the GSE regulator,
delivered on May 13. "It would also reduce costs to the enterprises,
particularly Freddie Mac, since Freddie's securities have historically traded at
a disadvantage to Fannie Mae."

This pronouncement has convinced investors the Freddie bonds will eventually be
convertible into a Fannie MBS or a new common mortgage security. But it may take
several few years before this conversion is possible.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              260 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                           January 28, 2017 Saturday

Fitch Ratings assigns 'AAA' rating to Indiana Housing

LENGTH: 199 words

DATELINE: New York



 New York: Fitch Ratings, a nationally recognized statistical rating
organization (NRSRO) designated by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission,
has assigned a 'AAA' rating to the Indiana Housing and Community Development
Authority (the authority) single family mortgage revenue bonds, $30 million 2017
series A-1 and $14.455 million 2017 series A-2.





 The loan portfolio consists of MBS guaranteed by Ginnie Mae and Freddie Mac and
the Fannie Mae mortgage pass through certificates (hereinafter MBS). Ginnie Mae,
Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae guarantee the full and timely payment of principal
and interest on the respective MBS regardless of actual performance of the
underlying loans.



 The bonds are special obligations of the authority secured solely by the
revenues and assets pledged under the amended and restated master indenture that
primarily consist of mortgage backed securities (MBS) guaranteed by the
Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA or Ginnie Mae), mortgage
pass-through certificates guaranteed by the Federal National Mortgage
Association (FNMA or Fannie Mae) and MBS guaranteed by the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC or Freddie Mac) and cash reserves.



LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              261 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 June 16, 2014

Underused VA Mortgage Program Makes Inroads

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 38 No. 38

LENGTH: 873  words


Of the 16.4 million active-duty service members and military veterans with
mortgages, less than 12% have a loan guaranteed by the Department of Veterans
Affairs.

Some blame this low participation rate on a lack of promotion for the VA home
loan program, which was created in 1944. Many loan officers don't even ask
potential clients if they are veterans. And many veterans don't know enough
about the program to ask for a VA loan.

Others blame lenders and real estate agents who have preferred the loan products
guaranteed or purchased by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Housing
Administration.

But things are looking up for VA lending as specialists in the product redouble
their efforts to get the word out and other low-downpayment products grow more
expensive.

A sharp increase in Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance premiums
is making the VA more competitive, according to Megan Booth, senior policy
representative at the National Association of Realtors.

"There is not a Realtor alive today that thinks FHA is a better deal" for
veterans, Booth said. "That is helping the VA grow and it will continue to help
the VA grow."

VA lenders originated a record 629,300 single-family loans in fiscal 2013, which
ended Sept. 30. The agency endorsed 90,820 single-family loans in the fiscal
second quarter, totaling $20.1 billion, down 10.5% from the prior quarter. FHA
endorsements declined at twice that rate over the same period. Sixty-three
percent of VA loans are going to homebuyers rather than for refinancing,
according to agency officials.

The Veterans Association of Real Estate Professionals, a trade group launched in
2011 to promote the VA program, held its first Washington conference last week.

"There are a lot of misconceptions about the VA home loan program among real
estate, lending and housing professionals," says Son Nguyen, the group's
co-founder and president. "We want to change that through education and
outreach."

The trade group will provide the VA with "honest feedback," he says.

VA officials told the conference they will be issuing a proposal soon that will
clarify the agency's rules on negotiating fees with sellers. VA rules currently
limit the amount veterans can be charged for closing costs and fees for termite
and other inspections.

Real estate agents have been pressing the VA for a clarification because
veterans are often disadvantaged when competing with non-veterans to buy a
house, particularly when there are multiple bidders.

The fee rule would have been out by now, but the work had to take a backseat to
the agency's version of the qualified mortgage rule, the VA's assistant director
for loans, John Bell, told the conference.

The VA issued an interim final QM rule on May 30. The VA version essentially
provides a safe harbor for home purchase loans that meet the agency's
traditional lending standards. The VA has the lowest delinquency rate of any
government loan program.

But the VA used the QM rule to stop lenders from repeatedly refinancing veterans
who fall behind on their payments.

Interest rate reduction refinancing loans were "never intended to be a loss
mitigation tool," Bell said. It was intended to reduce monthly payments, not add
fees to their loan balances which the veteran couldn't repay.

"Some predatory lenders took advantage of that situation," Bell said. "We had to
stop it."

Under the VA's QM rule, performing loans can be refinanced after six months.
These rate-reducing refis can qualify for a safe harbor if the borrower can
recoup the refinancing costs within 36 months.

VA loans that don't meet that refinancing standard will be considered
"rebuttable presumption" loans, subject to greater litigation risk than safe
harbor loans.

Meanwhile, lenders continue to complain that there is a shortage of VA-approved
appraisers and underwriters, which slows processing times.

"I can't tell how many times the appraisal is the hiccup in the process," said
David Gibbons, the national VA mortgage program manager at Wells Fargo Home
Mortgage.

But VA is becoming more responsive. "VA is trying to get more appraisers and
weeding out the bad ones," Booth said at the conference.

The VA is recruiting new appraisers every month, Bell said. And the agency is
reviewing appraisals for quality as well as monitoring and scoring appraiser
performance.

However, the VA will not use appraisal management companies. "Not while I am at
VA," Bell said. (He didn't say why, but appraisers and other critics of AMCs
often complain that these outfits often employ second-rate appraisers who don't
know the local markets.)

The VA is becoming more responsive to industry concerns, Nguyen said, noting
that the agency is working on seven proposed changes to the home loan guarantee
program. "It shows a willingness that I have not seen before."

The Navy veteran stressed that his organization wants to become "the eyes and
ears" for the VA program.

VAREP has a web portal for real estate professionals and will soon announce a
consumer portal for service members and veterans.

"There is a large percentage of people who are eligible for a VA loan but don't
want to use it because they don't understand it. That is where education and
outreach could be effective," said Wells Fargo's Gibbons.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              262 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                October 23, 1995

FHA, VA Lending Off Last Year

SECTION: Pg. 6

LENGTH: 619 words

DATELINE: Washington


During the past year, higher interest rates have taken their toll on lenders who
make government-backed loans.  In fiscal 1995, the government loan programs saw
volume fall to half the previous year's level.

Both the Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans Affairs home loan
program were coming off record years in fiscal 1994, but lenders still may have
been unprepared for the contraction they faced over the last 12 months.

The FHA insured $ 46 billion of one-to-four-family home loans in the fiscal year
that ended Oct. 1, compared with $ 101 billion a year earlier.  It was the
lowest annual dollar total tallied since FY 1989.

Despite the deline in volume, FY 1995 was not that bad a year in a larger
historical context.  While the FHA total was down substantially from fiscal
years 1993 and 1994, it was only down modestly from the three prior years.

Moreover, the FHA exceeded $ 46 billion in volume only twice in the 1980s (1986
and 1987), when a decline in interest rates generated strong loan volume.

Refinancings accounted for 12% of FHA endorsements in the fiscal year.
Adjustable rate loans accounted for 30% of the FHA's business.

Federal Housing Commissioner Nicolas Retsinas said that the decline in
refinancing activity was largely responsible for the drop in FHA volume.  As
interest rates edged downward in recent months, government-backed lending has
picked up steam again along with the rest of the mortgage business.

"I think volume is starting to come back up.  We can see that at the end of this
fiscal year.  That would lead me to believe that next year we will do more units
than this year but less than the year before," Mr. Retsinas said.

The heart of the late 1993 refinancing boom was included in the fiscal 1994
numbers, which is one reason the FY 1994 government lending volume hit a record.
The government's fiscal year runs from October through the following September.
Also, FHA and VA loan endorsement statistics lag a couple of months behind loan
originations.

The Veterans Affairs home loan program guaranteed $ 25.3 billion in home loans
during fiscal 1995, down from a record $ 55 billion a year earlier.

Adjustable rate mortgages accounted for 22% of the loans guaranteed by the VA in
fiscal 1995, but that might drop dramatically in FY 1996.  The authority to
insure ARMs expired at the end of September, and Congress has yet to give the VA
program new ARM lending authority.  Refinancings accounted for about 11% of the
VA guarantees.

Keith Pedigo, director of the loan guarantee service for the Department of
Veterans Affairs, said that the number of home loans guaranteed by the VA in FY
1995 was right on the average for the last 15 years.  He said he expects FY 1996
to be another average year.

"I think the fact that rates were so low in early 1994 resulted in most of the
pent-up demand being satisfied," Mr. Pedigo said.

The DVA exercised its "no-bid" option in just 3% of defaults last year, down
from a high of 24% in the late 1980s.

FHA Single Family Insured
Fiscal Year     Total No.      Total Amount
1977                305,961     $ 8,245,764,931
1978                315,092       9,958,637,932
1979                431,578      16,468,052,842
1980                409,672      17,365,246,121
1981                276,778      12,481,224,164
1982                156,276       7,483,231,188
1983                435,405      22,706,096,889
1984                346,266      18,713,210,727
1985                328,796      18,907,146,534
1986                762,700      46,681,368,630
1987              1,392,328      86,725,314,330
1988                737,032      44,793,722,937
1989                686,695      42,908,808,327
1990                810,061      53,141,189,888
1991                720,282      49,034,443,896
1992                660,179      46,515,694,037
1993                943,711      69,342,234,869
1994              1,340,240     100,631,203,393
1995                586,787      45,953,947,861


Source: HUD

LOAD-DATE: November 02, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1995 Faulkner & Gray


                              263 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                                  May 5, 2016

As Investment Portfolio Dwindles, Fannie Looks Elsewhere for Growth

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: SECONDARY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 612  words


Fannie Mae's investment portfolio - once the source of a bulk of its revenue -
continued its rapid decline in the first quarter, but executives said they are
comfortable focusing on other areas for growth going forward.

The government-sponsored enterprise's holdings of mortgage-backed securities and
other mortgage-income producing assets fell to below $200 billion.

"Today we have wound down the investment portfolio from a historic high of $900
billion to less than $200 billion with further reductions underway," said
Timothy Mayopoulos, the GSE's chief executive, during an earnings conference
call Thursday.

While profitable, reliance on these investments made the company's earnings
volatile, subject to the ups and down of interest rates and hedging strategies.
Going forward, Fannie will be relying more on loan guarantee fee income from its
single-family and multifamily businesses.

"It is a stable source of revenue and much less subject to interest rate and
market volatility," Mayopoulos told reporters.

Fannie generated $3.2 billion in single-family guarantee income in the first
quarter of 2016 and fourth quarter of 2015. Multifamily guarantee income totaled
$333 million in both quarters.

Overall, Fannie's single-family business posted net income of $2.4 billion in
the first quarter, compared to a $464 million loss by its capital markets
business, which reflects the GSE's investment portfolio results.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency hiked Fannie and Freddie Mac's single-family
guarantee fees in 2012 and now a large portion of its single-family portfolios
are benefiting from the higher fees.

"Approximately 85% of our loans are 15- and 30-year fixed rate loans,"
Mayopoulos said. "These mortgages remain the loan of choice of the vast majority
of homebuyers."

Overall, Fannie Mae posted $1.1 billion in net income for the first quarter,
compared to net income of $1.9 billion in the first quarter of 2015. Despite a
shift in revenue sources, Mayopoulos said he expects Fannie will "remain
profitable on an annual basis for the foreseeable future."

Freddie Mac issued its earnings on Tuesday and reported a $200 million loss.
This loss raised concerns that the reduction in the investment portfolios and
the new emphasis on risk sharing transactions will reduce the GSEs' earnings
potential. In addition, the both GSEs are in conservatorships and
undercapitalized for their size.

Fannie has a net worth of $2.1 billion, compared to Freddie's $1 billion.

When asked about Fannie's capital cushion, Mayopoulos noted that the GSEs have a
line of credit with the U.S. Treasury.

"We try to keep credit standards high so as to minimize losses. We have been
aggressive in addressing loss mitigation when loans go delinquent," he added.

The serious delinquency rate (90 days or more past due) on Fannie loans has been
declining since 2010. Its $2.8 trillion single-family loan guarantee portfolio
had a 1.44% serious delinquency rate as of March 31 and 55% of its delinquent
loans were originated in 2005 through 2008.

During the conference call, Mayopoulos also stressed Fannie's commitment to
credit risk transfers.

"We are moving from being a company that stores credit risk to being one that
also matches credit risk by intelligently distributing it other market
participants. We do this through capital market transactions, reinsurance
transactions and other types of transactions," he said.

Over the past two years, Fannie has sold a portion of the credit risk on $590
billion of single-family loans, which represents 18% of its single-family
guarantee portfolio. Those investors are taking a portion of the first-loss
position and receive a share of the guarantee fees.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              264 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         assetsecuritizationreport.com

                                    May 2016

As Investment Portfolio Dwindles, Fannie Looks Elsewhere for Growth

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 613  words


Fannie Mae's investment portfolio - once the source of a bulk of its revenues -
continued its rapid decline in the first quarter, but executives said they are
comfortable focusing on other areas for growth going forward.

The government-sponsored enterprise's holdings of mortgage-backed securities and
other mortgage-income producing assets fell to below $200 billion.

"Today we have wound down the investment portfolio from a historic high of $900
billion to less than $200 billion with further reductions underway," Timothy
Mayopoulos, the GSE's chief executive, said during an earnings conference call
Thursday.

While profitable, reliance on these investments made the company's earnings
volatile, subject to the ups and down of interest rates and hedging strategies.
Going forward, Fannie will be relying more on loan guarantee fee income from its
single-family and multifamily businesses.

"It is a stable source of revenue and much less subject to interest rate and
market volatility," Mayopoulos told reporters.

Fannie generated $3.2 billion in single-family guarantee income in the first
quarter of 2016 and fourth quarter of 2015. Multifamily guarantee income totaled
$333 million in both quarters.

Overall, Fannie's single-family business posted net income of $2.4 billion in
the first quarter, compared with a $464 million loss by its capital markets
business, which reflects the GSE's investment portfolio results.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency hiked Fannie and Freddie Mac's single-family
guarantee fees in 2012 and now a large portion of its single-family portfolios
are benefiting from the higher fees.

"Approximately 85% of our loans are 15- and 30-year fixed-rate loans,"
Mayopoulos said. "These mortgages remain the loan of choice of the vast majority
of homebuyers."

Overall, Fannie Mae posted $1.1 billion in net income for the first quarter,
compared to net income of $1.9 billion in the first quarter of 2015. Despite a
shift in revenue sources, Mayopoulos said he expects Fannie will "remain
profitable on an annual basis for the foreseeable future."

Freddie Mac issued its earnings on Tuesday and reported a $200 million loss.
This loss raised concerns that the reduction in the investment portfolios and
the new emphasis on risk sharing transactions will reduce the GSEs' earnings
potential. In addition, the both GSEs are in conservatorships and
undercapitalized for their size.

Fannie has a net worth of $2.1 billion, compared to Freddie's $1 billion.

When asked about Fannie's capital cushion, Mayopoulos noted that the GSEs have a
line of credit with the U.S. Treasury.

"We try to keep credit standards high so as to minimize losses. We have been
aggressive in addressing loss mitigation when loans go delinquent," he added.

The serious delinquency rate (90 days or more past due) on Fannie loans has been
declining since 2010. Its $2.8 trillion single-family loan guarantee portfolio
had a 1.44% serious delinquency rate as of March 31 and 55% of its delinquent
loans were originated in 2005 through 2008.

During the conference call, Mayopoulos also stressed Fannie's commitment to
credit risk transfers.

"We are moving from being a company that stores credit risk to being one that
also matches credit risk by intelligently distributing it other market
participants. We do this through capital market transactions, reinsurance
transactions and other types of transactions," he said.

Over the past two years, Fannie has sold a portion of the credit risk on $590
billion of single-family loans, which represents 18% of its single-family
guarantee portfolio. Those investors are taking a portion of the first-loss
position and receive a share of the guarantee fees.

URL: http://www.asreport.com

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: STRUCTUREDFINANCENEWS_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              265 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             July 27, 2010 Tuesday

Loan-Limit Extension Advances

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16 Vol. 175 No. 114

LENGTH: 162  words


House and Senate committees have approved Department of Housing and Urban
Development appropriation bills that extend the $729,750 conforming loan limit
through September 2011.

The maximum $729,750 loan eligible for purchase by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and
Federal Housing Administration in high-cost areas was to expire at yearend. As
expected, elected officials and industry groups want to pass an extension now to
prevent possible disruptions if the legislative process gets bogged down later
this year.

Without an extension, the maximum loan limit would drop back to $625,500.

House and Senate appropriators also are in sync in renewing Federal Housing
Administration and Ginnie Mae loan commitment authority at fiscal year 2010
levels. The appropriation bills, which are waiting approval by the House and
Senate, authorize FHA to insure up to $400 billion of single-family loans in
fiscal year 2011 and Ginnie Mae to guarantee up to $500 billion of
mortgage-backed securities.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              266 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 9, 2012 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Twin Reports Stoke Cautious Optimism for Rebound in the Housing Market

BYLINE: By ANNIE LOWREY

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 712 words


WASHINGTON -- In the latest sign that the worst might be over for the battered
American housing market, the two government-controlled mortgage finance giants,
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, this week reported some of their best quarterly
results since the real estate collapse.On Wednesday, Fannie Mae posted
second-quarter net income of $5.1 billion. That is up from $2.7 billion in the
first quarter of this year and an improvement from a net loss of $2.9 billion in
the second quarter of last year. Fannie requested no additional money from the
Treasury and said it would pay a $2.9 billion dividend to taxpayers.

On Tuesday, its brother organization, Freddie Mac, announced second-quarter net
income of $3 billion, up from $577 million in the first quarter and a net loss
of $2.1 billion in the year-ago second quarter. It also requested no additional
federal aid and said it would pay a $1.8 billion dividend to the federal
government.

''We've have had two very good quarters,'' Timothy J. Mayopoulos, who became
Fannie Mae's chief executive in June, said in an interview. ''In the longer
term, we're encouraged by what we see, but it's going to be driven by factors
that are bigger than we are,'' including unemployment and consumer confidence.

The mortgage giants have moved into the black as American home prices have
increased, delinquency rates have continued to fall and what analysts have
cautiously described as a housing recovery has begun to take hold.

This week, CoreLogic, a real estate data firm, said that home prices rose 2.5
percent in June compared with a year ago. There has also been a surge in
refinancing, as homeowners have taken advantage of record low interest rates.

''At the halfway point, 2012 is increasingly looking like the year that the
residential housing market may have turned the corner,'' Anand K. Nallathambi,
CoreLogic's president, said in a statement. ''While first-half gains have given
way to second-half declines over the past three years, we see encouraging signs
that modest price gains are supportable across the country in the second half of
2012.''

Both mortgage financiers said that loans made during the housing bubble -- loans
on which homeowners were more likely to default -- were becoming smaller
proportions of their portfolios. That means that the two mortgage giants expect
smaller losses on bad loans and better earnings on good ones.

Freddie said loans that originated from 2005 to 2008 accounted for about a
quarter of their portfolio of single-family mortgages, and loans originated
after 2008 were more than half.

Housing experts caution that the increase in home prices might not augur a
housing turnaround -- and that further losses might still lie ahead for the
Washington-based mortgage financiers. Though prices increased in June, home
sales declined by 5.6 percent, the largest drop in 16 months, according to
Capital Economics.

The housing recovery is held back by broader economic sluggishness, analysts
said. Unemployment remains stuck above 8 percent. Wage growth is sluggish. Many
American households are saddled with debt. Consumer confidence is low. That
means relatively few families have the means or the desire to invest in a new
house.

''It's too early to declare a national housing recovery,'' said Mr. Mayopoulos.
''The second half of the year is not likely to be as strong as the first half of
the year. A big part of results we're seeing came from a significant increase in
home prices -- and it is not clear to us that we'll see further sustained
increase in home prices for the next few quarters.''

Combined, Fannie and Freddie own or guarantee about $5 trillion in American home
mortgages, half of the overall market. The two financiers buy mortgages from
lending banks, group them together into bonds and then sell the bonds to
investors -- along with a guarantee to cover losses.

Those guarantees meant that Fannie and Freddie started to hemorrhage money when
real estate prices started to collapse in 2006. Millions of American homeowners
went into foreclosure, requiring huge payouts from the financiers and
necessitating a government takeover in September 2008.

Fannie and Freddie have required about $190 billion in federal assistance. They
have paid back about $46 billion in dividend payments.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/09/business/economy/fannie-and-freddie-reports-of
fer-positive-sign-for-housing.html

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Timothy J. Mayopoulos, above, is Fannie Mae's chief. At right,
a Freddie Mac employee at a homeowners' workshop in Maryland. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
CHRISTOPHER SPIELMANN
 MARK WILSON/GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            August 7, 2013 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Obama: Wean off Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac;
Says investors need a bigger housing stake

BYLINE: Julie Schmit and Aamer Madhani, USA TODAY,

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 680 words


Almost five years after taxpayers bailed out mortgage giants Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, President Obama said on Tuesday that it's time for private
investors to take a bigger role in the mortgage market.

Fannie and Freddie collapsed in 2008 before being bailed out with almost $200
billion in taxpayer funds.

But with the nation's real estate market on the mend, Obama said in an address
in Phoenix on home ownership that it is time to wind down the two companies and
make clear that the days of a guaranteed government bailout are over.

"For too long, these companies were allowed to make big profits buying
mortgages, knowing that if their bets went bad, taxpayers would be left holding
the bag," Obama said. "It was heads we win, tails you lose."

For the better part of his time in the White House, Obama has faced calls to
shake up Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, but the administration has held back on
taking action while the housing market was weak.

Obama's call to wind down the government's role in the U.S. mortgage finance
market won't have an immediate impact on the mortgage market and probably not
even one for years, mortgage experts say.

Any efforts to reform Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, which currently fund two out
of three new housing mortgages in the U.S., would likely take years, even if and
after there's consensus on what to do.

"This is the beginning of a long process," says Jed Kolko, an economist with
real estate website Trulia.

With his remarks, Obama for the first time endorsed bipartisan efforts in the
Senate on mortgage overhaul. He also made it clear that he expects any
legislation to spell out a limited government role for backing Fannie  and
Freddie  and that it must ensure Americans' continued access to a 30-year
mortgage at a fixed interest rate.

"I believe that while our housing system must have a limited government role,
private lending should be the backbone of the housing market, including
community-based lenders who view their borrowers not as a number, but as a
neighbor," he said.

But it will create a tricky balance for lawmakers to reduce the mortgage
market's dependence on government guarantees provided to Freddie and Fannie
while retaining the 30-year, fixed-rate mortgages that those government
guarantees help provide.

The federal guarantee behind home loans backed by Freddie and Fannie are part of
the reason mortgage availability has spread as widely as it has. When that
"umbilical cord" is cut, it will need to be carefully done so that mortgage
costs don't rise too high, says Herbert Kaufman, professor emeritus at the W.P.
Carey School of Business at Arizona State University and a former economist with
Fannie Mae.

Obama repeated his call for Congress to take action to make it easier for
homeowners who are underwater on their mortgages to refinance their loans at
lower interest rates.

He also attempted to tie the fate of the housing market to Congress passing an
overhaul of the country's immigration laws, a second-term legislative priority
for the White House that is facing tough opposition in the Republican-controlled
House. He noted a recent study by the pro-immigration group Americas
Society/Council of the Americas that shows immigrants have added $ 3.7 trillion
in housing wealth.

"It's pretty simple: When more people buy homes, and play by the rules, home
values go up for everybody," Obama said.

Obama chose Phoenix -- the epicenter of the U.S. housing bust that wiped out $7
trillion in homeowner equity -- for this stop on his  ongoing summer road tour
in which he has been spotlighting his ideas for creating jobs and promoting
growth, while hammering Republicans for not working with him.

Although the Phoenix market is still well below its pre-housing crisis height,
it has made progress. The median single-family-home price rose  to $185,000, up
about 26% from May of last year. And foreclosure starts hit historic low levels
this spring.

Obama will follow up  today with an interview on the real estate website Zillow,
where he will expand on his ideas for keeping the housing market on a winning
streak.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo David Kadlubowski, The Arizona Republic

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              268 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                             May 20, 2010 Thursday
                                   L2 Edition

Taxpayers, housing need a divorce

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 573 words


Even though Las Vegas is full of never-sold and foreclosed-upon houses, a rumble
of new home building has begun there. Similar trends are seen in other housing
meltdown meccas: Phoenix, Florida and inland California.

Awesome. Vegas has almost 10,000 empty new houses, and thousands of older ones
go into foreclosure every month. If builders want to gamble on new development
with their own money, more power to them.

But wait. They're not doing it entirely with their own money. As in the bubble
days, the taxpayers continue to take on much of the risk through
government-guaranteed mortgages. Using taxpayers as suckers of last resort has
got to stop.

What a shock to learn that the Federal Housing Administration still backs loans
requiring only a 3.5 percent down payment -- and in flattened housing markets
like Las Vegas'. No private lender today would let ordinary people put down so
little of their own money on a mortgage.

The tiny FHA down payment helps builders unload the houses to struggling buyers.
Builder and buyer are happy. But who assumes the risk of the loan going bad?
Tommy and Tillie taxpayer, that's who.

Question: If home prices in Las Vegas have already plunged 60 percent from the
boom days of 2006, why can't the folks who want to buy a house there scrub up a
more traditional 20 percent down payment? The reason in many cases is that
they've already gone under every seat cushion and can't find another nickel.
Without Uncle Sugar's help, they are unable to close the deal.

Across America, meanwhile, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continue to finance or
back the vast majority of single-family house mortgages -- 70 percent in 2009.
They buy mortgages from lenders, then package them into securities bearing
"implicit" taxpayer guarantees.

The scandal of Fannie and Freddie is that they were also private companies
seeking to maximize profits. The result was the sleaziest of all Wall Street
arrangements: Executives made big bucks off the subprime orgy while leaving the
taxpayers holding the bag when it all went splat.

Fannie and Freddie have since been nationalized. From 2008 through 2020, they
will cost taxpayers almost $380 billion, according to the Congressional Budget
Office. This lousy deal has enraged the public, as well it should.

The Senate has asked the Treasury to come up with a plan to close, privatize or
otherwise lighten the Fannie and Freddie burden to taxpayers. That is a fine
idea, but there's always opportunity to muck it up.

Several Republicans tried to skip the careful removal of the taxpayer guarantees
and instead do something simple and simple-minded with glossy political appeal.
Sens. John McCain of Arizona, Richard Shelby of Alabama and Judd Gregg of New
Hampshire called for a two-year deadline to remove the government crutch.

Problem is, with private companies having virtually abandoned the housing
finance market, Fannie and Freddie are about all that's left. They provide what
little liquidity there is. A quick shutdown would send the very fragile housing
market into collapse.

One safer immediate crowd-pleasing change would be to stop the FHA from backing
loans with less than a 4-percent down payment. Funny how Congress hasn't made
that simple, no-brainer demand -- especially since the FHA is itself in lousy
shape. Could the reason be that too many big-money interests still rely on risky
mortgage lending?

If so, let them take the risk. That's the capitalist way -- or used to be.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              269 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                             May 22, 2010, Saturday

Taxpayers need to be divorced from housing

BYLINE: Froma Harrop

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A

LENGTH: 621 words


Even though Las Vegas is full of never-sold and foreclosed-upon houses, a rumble
of new home building has begun there. Similar trends are seen in other housing
meltdown meccas: Phoenix, Florida and inland California.

Awesome. Vegas has almost 10,000 empty new houses, and thousands of older ones
go into foreclosure every month. If builders want to gamble on new development
with their own money, more power to them.

But wait. They're not doing it entirely with their own money. As in the bubble
days, the taxpayers continue to take on much of the risk through
government-guaranteed mortgages. Using taxpayers as suckers of last resort has
got to stop.

What a shock to learn that the Federal Housing Administration still backs loans
requiring only a 3.5-percent down payment - and in flattened housing markets
like Las Vegas'. No private lender today would let ordinary people put down so
little of their own money on a mortgage.

The tiny FHA down payment helps builders unload the houses to struggling buyers.
Builder and buyer are happy, but who assumes the risk of the loan going bad?
Tommy and Tillie taxpayer, that's who.

Question: If house prices in Las Vegas have already plunged 60 percent from the
boom days of 2006, why can't the folks who want to buy a house there scrub up a
more traditional 20-percent down payment? The reason, in many cases, is that
they've already gone under every seat cushion and can't find another nickel.
Without Uncle Sugar's help, they are unable to close the deal.

Across America, meanwhile, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continue to finance or
back the vast majority of single-family house mortgages - 70 percent in 2009.
They buy mortgages from lenders, then package them into securities bearing
"implicit" taxpayer guarantees.

The scandal of Fannie and Freddie is that they were also private companies
seeking to maximize profits. The result was the sleaziest of all Wall Street
arrangements: Executives made big bucks off the subprime orgy while leaving the
taxpayers holding the bag when it all went splat.

Fannie and Freddie have since been nationalized. From 2008 through 2020, they
will cost taxpayers almost $380 billion, according to the Congressional Budget
Office. This lousy deal has enraged the public, as well it should.

The Senate has asked the Treasury to come up with a plan to close, privatize or
otherwise lighten the Fannie and Freddie burden to taxpayers. That is a fine
idea, but there's always opportunity to muck it up.

Several Republicans tried to skip the careful removal of the taxpayer guarantees
and instead do something simple and simple-minded with glossy political appeal.
Sens. John McCain of Arizona, Richard Shelby of Alabama and Judd Gregg of New
Hampshire called for a two-year deadline to remove the government crutch.

Problem is, with private companies having virtually abandoned the housing
-finance market, Fannie and Freddie are about all that's left. They provide what
little liquidity there is. A quick shutdown would send the very fragile housing
market into collapse, with dire consequences for the whole economy.

Senate Banking Committee Chairman Chris Dodd, D-Conn., was right in calling the
proposal "the height of irresponsibility," and the Senate did well to reject
this piece of populist pandering.

One safer immediate crowd-pleasing change would be to stop the FHA from backing
loans with less than a 4-percent down payment. Funny how Congress hasn't made
that simple, no-brainer demand - especially since the FHA is itself in lousy
shape. Could the reason be that too many big-money interests still rely on risky
mortgage lending?

If so, let them take the risk. That's the capitalist way - or used to be.

Harrop is a columnist for The Providence Journal.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2010 Charleston Newspapers


                              270 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae to Offer New Multifamily Mortgage Securities

                            January 16, 1984, Monday

By Leslie Eaton


Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae are planning to offer a new type of security backed
by mortgages on multifamily housing units by the end of June, the presidents of
the organizations said Friday.

Kenneth Thygerson, president of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. - known as
Freddie Mac - and Robert J. Mylod, president of the Federal National Mortgage
Association - known as Fannie Mae - made their announcements at a press
conference sponsored by the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.

Both organizations provide secondary markets for mortgages, and they currently
sell single-family mortgage-backed pass-through obligations. Freddie Mac is
owned by the Federal Home Loan Banks; Fannie Mae is owned by private investors
but is supervised by the federal government.

The new Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae securities will be pass-though obligations
backed by mortgages on apartment houses. In a mortgage pass-through obligation,
mortgages are combined into a pool and the borrowers' principal and interest
payments are used to pay off the securities.



Mr. Thygerson and Mr. Mylod said the major stumbling block in developing such
securities is determining what information must be disclosed to investors.

''We have a lot of lawyers at work,'' Mr. Thygerson said, noting that the
disclosure required on multifamily mortgage-backed issues would probably
resemble that required by real-estate syndicates.

Leland Brendzel, executive vice president and chief financial officer of Freddie
Mac, said the securities would probably have 10 to 15 year maturities with
five-year call protection. The mortgages underlying the securities would be made
by thrift institutions, and they would feature 30-year amortization and
five-year no-prepayment clauses.

The individual mortgages backing the securities could be as large as $20
million, Mr. Brendzel said, but are more likely to be in the $5 million to $10
million range, and pooled.

The Fannie Mae securities will probably have 10-year call protection, said
Burleigh Burshem of Fannie Mae's multifamily activities division. He added that
the Fannie Mae issue would have ''guaranteed timely pass through of pricipal and
interest,'' while Freddie Mac guarantees only timely pass-through of interest.



The federal agency involved in the secondary mortgage market - the Government
National Mortgage Association, or Ginnie Mae - insures and packages only
single-family mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration or the
Veterans Administration.

Freddie Mac is also trying to develop a security backed by adjustable-rate
mortgages, which it hopes to issue during the second half of 1984, Mr. Brendzel
said. The difficulty is in developing a pool of similar adjustable-rate
mortgages, he said, because the terms of adjustable-rate mortgages vary widely.

''There's so much going on in the ARM market,'' he said, ''but we're working on
standardization'' of mortgages.

Ginnie Mae may get into adjustable-rate mortgage-backed securities too, said
Warren A. Lasko, executive vice president of Ginnie Mae.

Because the Federal Housing Administration will now insure ajustable-rate
mortgages, he said, ''we want to develop something. But we don't have any sense
of volume, and in theory there could be a problem with how to standardize them
and which index'' should be used to adjust the mortgage rates.

Fannie Mae is ''at this time not interested'' in developing an adjustable-rate
mortgage-backed security, Mr. Mylod said. The adjustable-rate mortgages which
the organization owns ''are a very valuable asset on our balance sheet.''

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 603 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1984 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              271 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         assetsecuritizationreport.com

                                    May 2016

Freddie Expands Risk Sharing Program to Multifamily Mortgages

BYLINE: Allison Bisbey

SECTION: NEWS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 283  words


Freddie Mac is expanding its efforts to sell to private investors a portion of
the credit risk on certain multifamily mortgages it guarantees.

The company Monday settled its first offering of multifamily Structured Credit
Risk (SCR) Notes, unsecured general obligations whose performance is linked to
the credit and principal payment risk of a reference pool of multifamily
mortgage loans backing state and local housing finance agency tax-exempt bonds.

The new program is similar to Structured Agency Credit Risk notes, which Freddie
launched in 2013 to transfer the credit risk of single family mortgages backing
mortgage bonds that it guarantees.

Both programs reduce taxpayers' exposure to mortgage default risk.

In this initial offering, Freddie Mac sold $52 million of class B notes issued
by SCR Notes Series 2016-MDN1, which transfer the first loss risk on a reference
pool of more than 50 multifamily mortgage loans originated between 2007 and 2015
with an approximate unpaid principal balance of $1.04 billion. Systima Capital
Management is the sole initial investor for the class B notes.

Freddie Mac retains the senior loss credit risk on the Series 2016-MDN1.

Wells Fargo is the sole structuring agent, lead manager and sole bookrunner.

"Freddie Mac is a market leader in shifting credit risk away from taxpayers and
to the private market," Victor Pa, vice president of multifamily investments for
Freddie Mac, said in a press release. "We are bringing additional capital
markets expertise to the targeted affordable apartment market."

Pa said the market is ready for this type of investment. Freddie Mac expects to
have one or two SCR Notes offerings a year, and expand the program over time.

URL: http://www.asreport.com

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: STRUCTUREDFINANCENEWS_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              272 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Low Interest Rates Reviving Housing Starts, U.S. Finds

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr.

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 605 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


Though falling interest rates have done little to perk up car sales this summer,
they are reviving the housing industry, figures released by the Commerce
Department showed today.

In a surprisingly robust performance, the nation's builders broke ground for
homes in July at the fastest clip so far this year, a 1.38 million annual pace
that represented the biggest monthly surge in 16 months.

As a result, analysts said, the Federal Reserve seemed likely to defer any
further cuts in interest rates.

"Housing's starting to do pretty well," said Robert Van Order, chief economist
for the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. "When rates drop from over 9
percent to under 8, you get some kick from it."

The 6.7 percent jump in housing starts last month was the fourth advance in a
row. The results were even more impressive because the department revised upward
the totals for both June and May.

"This is really a very strong gain," said Robert R. Davis of America's Community
Bankers, a trade group for savings institutions. Such strength, mirrored in a
5.3 percent jump in permits issued for construction, further diminished chances
that the Federal Reserve would further ease monetary policy at a meeting of its
Open Market Committee next Tuesday, analysts suggested.

"This pretty much guarantees that there will be no change in policy," said Paul
L. Kasriel, chief domestic economist at the Northern Trust Company in Chicago.

On Monday, Alan S. Blinder, the Fed's vice chairman and an official somewhat
more inclined toward lower interest rates than most colleagues, indicated
reluctance to seek a reduction now.

But while the housing rebound embraced both single-family homes and multi-unit
dwellings last month, the report was somewhat marred because the strength was
highly concentrated in the South, which has long accounted for more than 40
percent of the new-home market.

Starts in the South soared 15.5 percent, to a 656,000 annual pace, or 47.5
percent of the total, while the West managed only a 2.2 percent rise, the
department found. And starts actually declined 4.8 percent in the Northeast,
where activity is lowest, and fell seven-tenths of 1 percent in the Midwest.

But David F. Seiders, economist for the National Association of Home Builders,
said he was not much disturbed by this. He noted that the South contained some
of the fastest-growing markets and said he had to believe that the Northeast was
stronger than the figures, which are subject to significant revision, showed.

Mr. Seiders also cited the latest tabulation of the association's housing index,
compiled from a survey of builders about their model-home traffic, their current
sales and their expectations for the next six months. The index climbed another
two points in August, to 53, its fourth straight advance from April's low
reading of 38.

"Builders feel pretty comfortable with the inventory level" of unsold homes, Mr.
Seiders said.

The revision in June starts lifted the pace to 1,293,000 from an initially
estimated 1,263,000, while May starts are now put at 1,282,000, up from
1,264,000, the department's report showed.

The actual number of homes started last month, with no adjustment for
seasonality, was 125,000 -- 1.1 percent above the June level but 2.2 percent
below that of July 1994.

Permits, the report also showed, were at a pace of 1,343,000 in July as all
regions except the Northeast showed increases.

Shipments of mobile homes, reported with a one-month lag, ran at a seasonally
adjusted annual rate of 329,000 in June, unchanged from the May pace but 11.5
percent above that of June 1994.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Housing Construction" shows new private housing started from
2/94 to 7/95 (Source: Commerce Department)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                             May 19, 2010 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Taxpayers still on mortgage hook

BYLINE: By Froma Harrop - Creators Syndicate

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 607 words


Even though Las Vegas is full of never-sold and foreclosed-upon houses, a rumble
of new home building has begun there. Similar trends are seen in other housing
meltdown meccas: Phoenix, Florida and inland California.

Awesome. Vegas has almost 10,000 empty new houses, and thousands of older ones
go into foreclosure every month. If builders want to gamble on new development
with their own money, more power to them.

But wait. They're not doing it entirely with their own money. As in the bubble
days, the taxpayers continue to take on much of the risk through
government-guaranteed mortgages. Using taxpayers as suckers of last resort has
got to stop.

What a shock to learn that the Federal Housing Administration still backs loans
requiring only a 3.5 percent down payment -- and in flattened housing markets
like Las Vegas. No private lender today would let ordinary people put down so
little of their own money on a mortgage.

The tiny FHA down payment helps builders unload the houses to struggling buyers.
Builder and buyer are happy. But who assumes the risk of the loan going bad?
Tommy and Tillie taxpayer, that's who.

Question: If home prices in Las Vegas have already plunged 60 percent since
2006, why can't the folks who want to buy a house there scrub up a more
traditional 20 percent down payment? The reason in many cases is that they've
already gone under every seat cushion and can't find another nickel. Without
Uncle Sugar's help, they are unable to close the deal.

Across America, meanwhile, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continue to finance or
back the vast majority of single-family house mortgages. They buy mortgages from
lenders, then package them into securities bearing "implicit" taxpayer
guarantees.

The scandal of Fannie and Freddie is that they were also private companies
seeking to maximize profits. The result was the sleaziest of all Wall Street
arrangements: Executives made big bucks off the subprime orgy while leaving the
taxpayers holding the bag when it all went splat.

Fannie and Freddie have since been nationalized. From 2008 through 2020, they
will cost taxpayers almost $380 billion, according to the Congressional Budget
Office. This lousy deal has enraged the public, as well it should.

The Senate has asked the Treasury to come up with a plan to close, privatize or
otherwise lighten the Fannie and Freddie burden to taxpayers. That is a fine
idea, but there's always opportunity to muck it up.

Several Republicans tried to skip the careful removal of the taxpayer guarantees
and instead do something simple and simple-minded with glossy political appeal.
Sens. John McCain of Arizona, Richard Shelby of Alabama and Judd Gregg of New
Hampshire called for a two-year deadline to remove the government crutch.

Problem is, with private companies having virtually abandoned the housing
finance market, Fannie and Freddie are about all that's left. They provide what
little liquidity there is. A quick shutdown would send the very fragile housing
market into collapse, with dire consequences for the whole economy. Senate
Banking Committee Chairman Chris Dodd, D-Conn., was right in calling the
proposal "the height of irresponsibility." And the Senate did well to reject
this piece of populist pandering.

One safer immediate crowd-pleasing change would be to stop the FHA from backing
loans with less than a 4-percent down payment. Funny how Congress hasn't made
that simple, no-brainer demand -- especially since the FHA is itself in lousy
shape. Could the reason be that too many big-money interests still rely on risky
mortgage lending?

If so, let them take the risk. That's the capitalist way -- or used to be.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Commentary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              274 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Las Cruces Sun-News (New Mexico)

                             May 19, 2010 Wednesday

Froma Harrop: Taxpayers and housing need a divorce

BYLINE: By Froma Harrop / Providence (R.I.) Journal

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 629 words


Even though Las Vegas is full of never-sold and foreclosed-upon houses, a rumble
of new home building has begun there. Similar trends are seen in other housing
meltdown meccas: Phoenix, Florida and inland California.

Awesome. Vegas has almost 10,000 empty new houses, and thousands of older ones
go into foreclosure every month. If builders want to gamble on new development
with their own money, more power to them.

But wait. They're not doing it entirely with their own money. As in the bubble
days, the taxpayers continue to take on much of the risk through
government-guaranteed mortgages. Using taxpayers as suckers of last resort has
got to stop.

What a shock to learn that the Federal Housing Administration still backs loans
requiring only a 3.5 percent down payment -- and in flattened housing markets
like Las Vegas'. No private lender today would let ordinary people put down so
little of their own money on a mortgage.

The tiny FHA down payment helps builders unload the houses to struggling buyers.
Builder and buyer are happy. But who assumes the risk of the loan going bad?
Tommy and Tillie taxpayer, that's who.

Question: If home prices in Las Vegas have already plunged 60 percent from the
boom days of 2006, why can't the folks who want to buy a house there scrub up a
more traditional 20 percent down payment? The reason in many cases is that
they've already gone under every seat cushion and can't find another nickel.
Without Uncle Sugar's help, they are unable to close the deal.

Across America, meanwhile, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continue to finance or
back the vast majority of single-family house mortgages - 70 percent in 2009.
They buy mortgages from lenders, then package them into securities bearing
"implicit" taxpayer guarantees.

The scandal of Fannie and Freddie is that they were also private companies
seeking to maximize profits. The result was the sleaziest of all Wall Street
arrangements: Executives made big bucks off the subprime orgy while leaving the
taxpayers holding the bag when it all went splat.

Fannie and Freddie have since been nationalized. From 2008 through 2020, they
will cost taxpayers almost $380 billion, according to the Congressional Budget
Office. This lousy deal has enraged the public, as well it should.

The Senate has asked the Treasury to come up with a plan to close, privatize or
otherwise lighten the Fannie and Freddie burden to taxpayers. That is a fine
idea, but there's always opportunity to muck it up.

Several Republicans tried to skip the careful removal of the taxpayer guarantees
and instead do something simple and simple-minded with glossy political appeal.
Sens. John McCain of Arizona, Richard Shelby of Alabama and Judd Gregg of New
Hampshire called for a two-year deadline to remove the government crutch.

Problem is, with private companies having virtually abandoned the housing
finance market, Fannie and Freddie are about all that's left. They provide what
little liquidity there is. A quick shutdown would send the very fragile housing
market into collapse, with dire consequences for the whole economy.

Senate Banking Committee Chairman Chris Dodd, D-Conn., was right in calling the
proposal "the height of irresponsibility." And the Senate did well to reject
this piece of populist pandering.

One safer immediate crowd-pleasing change would be to stop the FHA from backing
loans with less than a 4-percent down payment. Funny how Congress hasn't made
that simple, no-brainer demand - especially since the FHA is itself in lousy
shape. Could the reason be that too many big-money interests still rely on risky
mortgage lending?

If so, let them take the risk. That's the capitalist way -- or used to be.

Froma Harrop writes for the Providence (R.I.) Journal and is distributed by
Creators Syndicate, Inc.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2010 Las Cruces Sun-News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              275 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Silver City Sun-News (New Mexico)

                             May 19, 2010 Wednesday

Froma Harrop: Taxpayers and housing need a divorce

BYLINE: By Froma Harrop / Providence (R.I.) Journal

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 629 words


Even though Las Vegas is full of never-sold and foreclosed-upon houses, a rumble
of new home building has begun there. Similar trends are seen in other housing
meltdown meccas: Phoenix, Florida and inland California.

Awesome. Vegas has almost 10,000 empty new houses, and thousands of older ones
go into foreclosure every month. If builders want to gamble on new development
with their own money, more power to them.

But wait. They're not doing it entirely with their own money. As in the bubble
days, the taxpayers continue to take on much of the risk through
government-guaranteed mortgages. Using taxpayers as suckers of last resort has
got to stop.

What a shock to learn that the Federal Housing Administration still backs loans
requiring only a 3.5 percent down payment -- and in flattened housing markets
like Las Vegas'. No private lender today would let ordinary people put down so
little of their own money on a mortgage.

The tiny FHA down payment helps builders unload the houses to struggling buyers.
Builder and buyer are happy. But who assumes the risk of the loan going bad?
Tommy and Tillie taxpayer, that's who.

Question: If home prices in Las Vegas have already plunged 60 percent from the
boom days of 2006, why can't the folks who want to buy a house there scrub up a
more traditional 20 percent down payment? The reason in many cases is that
they've already gone under every seat cushion and can't find another nickel.
Without Uncle Sugar's help, they are unable to close the deal.

Across America, meanwhile, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continue to finance or
back the vast majority of single-family house mortgages - 70 percent in 2009.
They buy mortgages from lenders, then package them into securities bearing
"implicit" taxpayer guarantees.

The scandal of Fannie and Freddie is that they were also private companies
seeking to maximize profits. The result was the sleaziest of all Wall Street
arrangements: Executives made big bucks off the subprime orgy while leaving the
taxpayers holding the bag when it all went splat.

Fannie and Freddie have since been nationalized. From 2008 through 2020, they
will cost taxpayers almost $380 billion, according to the Congressional Budget
Office. This lousy deal has enraged the public, as well it should.

The Senate has asked the Treasury to come up with a plan to close, privatize or
otherwise lighten the Fannie and Freddie burden to taxpayers. That is a fine
idea, but there's always opportunity to muck it up.

Several Republicans tried to skip the careful removal of the taxpayer guarantees
and instead do something simple and simple-minded with glossy political appeal.
Sens. John McCain of Arizona, Richard Shelby of Alabama and Judd Gregg of New
Hampshire called for a two-year deadline to remove the government crutch.

Problem is, with private companies having virtually abandoned the housing
finance market, Fannie and Freddie are about all that's left. They provide what
little liquidity there is. A quick shutdown would send the very fragile housing
market into collapse, with dire consequences for the whole economy.

Senate Banking Committee Chairman Chris Dodd, D-Conn., was right in calling the
proposal "the height of irresponsibility." And the Senate did well to reject
this piece of populist pandering.

One safer immediate crowd-pleasing change would be to stop the FHA from backing
loans with less than a 4-percent down payment. Funny how Congress hasn't made
that simple, no-brainer demand - especially since the FHA is itself in lousy
shape. Could the reason be that too many big-money interests still rely on risky
mortgage lending?

If so, let them take the risk. That's the capitalist way -- or used to be.

Froma Harrop writes for the Providence (R.I.) Journal and is distributed by
Creators Syndicate, Inc.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2010 Silver City Sun-News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              276 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               September 27, 2010

The Future of the Nation's Housing Finance System The Future of the Housing
Finance System

BYLINE: Edward Demarco

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 4 Vol. 35 No. 1

LENGTH: 1326  words


As I stated in my testimony in May before this subcommittee, the main purpose in
addressing housing finance reform should be to promote the efficient provision
of credit to finance mortgages for single-family and multifamily housing.
Legislation is needed to restructure and strengthen our nation's housing finance
system and to resolve the enterprise conservatorships.

Ensuring an orderly transition will be essential to avoid disrupting the housing
finance system at this critical juncture, when markets are still very fragile.
It is also important to consider how the recent enactment of the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act will address certain deficiencies and
make substantial changes to some long-standing policies and practices. The new
law may affect the products offered to consumers and the manner in which
financial institutions engage in various lending activities, as a result of new
risk retention and borrower protection standards.

Currently all conventional mortgages purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
benefit from the financial support agreements with Treasury. In the future
design of our housing finance system, careful consideration should be given to
targeting subsidies to specific groups that lawmakers determine warrant that
benefit. For example, the explicit government guarantees that the Federal
Housing Administration and Veterans Administration provide reflect policymakers'
judgment as to the public benefits from targeting certain borrowers with those
programs. There may be other categories of borrowers for whom a direct form of
government subsidy is appropriate, as determined by Congress.

It is reasonable to question whether all conventional mortgages warrant a
government guarantee. Recently there has been a growing call for some form of
explicit federal insurance to be a part of the housing finance system of the
future. While such an outcome has certain merit and some attractive features, I
believe that the potential costs and risks associated with such a framework have
not yet been fully explored. To put it simply, replacing the enterprises'
"implicit" guarantee with an explicit one does not resolve all the shortcomings
and inherent conflicts in that model, and it may produce its own problems. I
offer three observations in that regard for your consideration.

First, the presumption behind the need for an explicit federal guarantee is that
the market either cannot evaluate and price the tail risk of mortgage default,
at least at any price that most would consider "reasonable" or cannot manage
that amount of mortgage credit risk on its own. But we might ask whether there
is reason to believe that the government will do better? If the government
backstop is underpriced, taxpayers eventually may foot the bill again.

Second, if the government provides explicit credit support for the vast majority
of mortgages in this country, it would likely want a say with regard to the
allocation or pricing of mortgage credit for particular groups or geographic
areas. The potential distortion of the pricing of credit risk from such
government involvement risks further taxpayer involvement if things do not work
out as hoped.

Third, regardless of any particular government allocation or pricing
initiatives, explicit credit support for all but a small portion of mortgages,
on top of the existing tax deductibility of mortgage interest, would further
direct our nation's investment dollars toward housing. A task for lawmakers is
to weigh such incentives against the alternative uses of such funds.

I would be remiss if I did not mention the Federal Home Loan Banks, which factor
into any discussion of the future role of housing GSEs. FHLBank assets have been
on a decline since September 2008 and now stand at $937 billion. Over that same
time period, advance activity has steadily declined. As of June of this year,
advances were at $540 billion, 46% lower than record levels reached in October
2008. While the decline appears to be slowing, it represents a stark contrast to
the 2007 response to the liquidity crisis, when the FHLBanks increased advances
to members by 58% in 15 months. The steady decline since that time is primarily
a reflection of member balance sheets, which are now characterized by strong
deposit growth and tepid loan demand.

Although the credit quality of mortgages held by the FHLBanks is much better
than the industry average, the FHLBanks have pulled back from mortgage purchase
activity as well. As of June 2010, the FHLBanks held $66.8 billion in mortgage
loans, which represents only 7% of their combined assets. The decline results
from both the reduction in new activity and an increase in prepayments.

Overall, the cutback in mortgage holding reflects an assessment by many FHLBanks
that the returns associated with mortgages are insufficient to outweigh the
associated funding and hedging risks.

Ten of the 12 FHLBanks reported a net profit in the second quarter of 2010, and
the 12 collectively reported a net income of $326.4 million. This figure is
nearly unchanged from the first quarter of 2010, as credit impairments on
private-label MBS were offset by higher net interest income and lower
mark-to-market losses.

However, the FHLBanks have not escaped without some financial adversity
associated with the deterioration of mortgage markets. As of June 30, 2010, the
FHLBanks held private-label MBS equivalent to 4.9% of assets. To date,
shortfalls of principal or interest have occurred on only 1% of the number of
private-label MBS held by the FHLBanks. Still, collectively the system has taken
$3.3 billion in credit-related impairments on these investments and recorded an
additional $10.8 billion in noncredit-related, other-than-temporary-impairments.

Three of the FHLBanks that have recognized other-than-temporary-impairments on
their private-label MBS investments-Pittsburgh, Seattle and San Francisco-have
filed complaints in state courts that allege fraud, misrepresentation, and
violations of state and federal securities laws in connection with their
purchase of certain securities. The complaints seek rescission of the purchase
transactions and the defendants' repurchase of the securities for the original
purchase price. The aggregate original principal amount of the securities in
question is approximately $20 billion.

I would like to raise one more important safety and soundness matter concerning
the FHLBanks. Based on recent trends, it appears that the FHLBanks will fulfill
their obligation within the next 18 months or so to pay a portion of the
interest on bonds issued by the Resolution Funding Corp. as part of the savings
and loan cleanup of 1989. Today, each FHLBank's REFCORP obligation is 20% of its
net earnings.

In the 20 years in which the FHLBanks have had this obligation, their retained
earnings, a key component of their capital structure, have been less than would
otherwise have been the case. With this obligation, most or all FHLBanks have
not rebuilt or maintained retained earnings adequate to the size and risks of
their current business.

As their safety and soundness regulator, this is of concern to FHFA. The
fulfillment of the REFCORP obligation presents an opportunity to help the
FHLBanks work through current financial problems and be better prepared for the
future by accelerating the rate at which the FHLBanks build their retained
earnings. I have asked FHFA staff to begin work on an approach that would
achieve that end when the REFCORP obligations are satisfied.

During conservatorship, the enterprises have made significant progress in
improving the quality of new mortgages purchased. In addition to eliminating
riskier types of products, the enterprises have tightened their underwriting
guidelines and reduced risk layering.

New enterprise mortgage guarantees have been for borrowers with higher credit
scores and loans with lower LTV ratios, two factors that affect expected default
rates.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              277 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                             July 17, 2012 Tuesday

Fitch: Indiana Housing and Community Dev Auth's Series bonds outlook negative

LENGTH: 222  words

DATELINE: New York



  Global rating agency Fitch has assigned an 'AAA' rating to the $73.5 million
Indiana Housing and Community Development Authority's (IHCDA) Housing Revenue
Bonds (mortgage backed securities) 2012 series 1 (AMT).
 The bonds have a Negative Outlook reflecting Fitch's current Rating Outlook
for the US Government.
 Proceeds of the bonds will refund series 2005 B-3, 2005 C-2 and 2006 A-2
outstanding variable-rate demand obligations (VRDO) under the single-family
mortgage revenue bonds indenture.
 The bonds are limited obligations of the issuer secured by the revenue and
assets pledged under the indenture which primarily consist of payments on
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC), Federal National Mortgage
Association (FNMA) and Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA) Mortgage
 Backed Securities (MBS).
 The 'AAA' rating on the bonds is based on the guarantee of full and timely
payment of principal and interest on the MBS which will pass through to the
bonds regardless of the performance of the underlying loans that back the MBS.
 The guarantee on the GNMA MBS is backed by the U.S. full faith and credit.
 The rating also reflects the pass-through structure of the MBS transaction, as
 payments of principal and interest on the MBS are directly passed through to
the bondholders each month as the MBS are paid.


LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              278 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Finance Board Mulls Overhaul of Home Loan Bank System

                             April 26, 1993, Monday

By ROBYN MEREDITH BERRY

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Back when children still walked miles through the snow to school and some small
communities depended on a single savings and loan for the credit to build
houses, Congress created the Federal Home Loan Bank System.

Now that automobiles, school buses, and subways have widely replaced walking and
banks face competition for customers in even the smallest towns, the Home Loan
Bank System is pondering whether the way it operates is still relevant after 61
years.

"What may have seemed like a very reasonable structure in 1932 seems today a
little out of touch," said Thomas H. Stanton, a Washington attorney and expert
on government-sponsored enterprises such as the Home Loan Bank System.
Recommendations Drafted

In a draft report on the future of the system, even the banks' regulator, the
Federal Housing Finance Board, asked the question, "Is the bank system still
relevant?"

The board concludes that the banks can remain very effective for housing
finance, with systemwide changes.

Some of their recommendations will be submitted to Capitol Hill on Wednesday
along with studies by several other agencies, including the Congressional Budget
Office, the General Accounting Office, and the Department of Housing and Urban
Development. Congress requested the reports last year as part of a review of the
bank system.

The system was established in 1932 to encourage home ownership. It consists of
12 banks that have an implicit government guarantee and are owned by local
financial institutions. They lend money to member institutions that need cash.
Other Resources Available

But these days, savings and loans that run short of cash to lend or have trouble
meeting withdrawals of deposits can raise cash quickly on their own. They can
sell home mortgages that conform to secondary market standards, such as falling
below the $203,150 loan ceiling.

Loan demand did pick up during the last six months of 1992 and the first quarter
of this year, owing to an increase in mortgage demand and to the 1989 decision
to admit commercial banks and credit unions as members.

But with demographics auguring a slowdown in household formations, and increased
competition from other government-sponsored enterprises like Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, the bank system must prepare for the day when demand for loans
might be flat at best.

Daniel F. Evans Jr., chairman of the finance board, said in an interview: "We
are left with nonconforming loans, there's no doubt about that. And that would
be the social purpose of the Federal Home Loan Bank System, to liquefy
nonconforming loans."

The system faces two strains. One is the changing mortgage market. The other is
responsibility for contributing $300 million annually toward the savings and
loan bailout, which will continue into the next century.

The fixed obligation has reduced the amount of dividends that the system pays
its stockholders, which leads to complaints from the system's savings and loan
members, most of which are required to belong.

Because those payments must be met even when demand for advances is down and the
system traditionally would have shrunk its assets, the system now must increase
its investments to earn high enough returns to pay its obligations. Investments
at the end of February were $72.7 billion, compared with $80.5 billion in
advances.

Mr. Evans explained, "That is why our investment account is so large - it has to
be large in order to generate the $300 million, plus a fair return.  Housing
Program Helps Profits

"So the policy question for Congress is: Is it appropriate for the Federal Home
Loan Bank System to be, in many respects, a giant mutual fund?" Mr. Evans said.

The Home Loan Bank System's profits were $1.56 billion in 1990, when the $300
million annual tax and a $50 million allotment to affordable housing programs
were first applied. Those payments amounted to about 23% of system profits. Last
year the payments accounted for nearly 40% of the system's profits of $900
million. The affordable housing program expenditures are required to increase by
1995 to at least $100 million annually.

The finance board, as well as industry trade groups, want the $300 million
annual payment to be reduced to 20% of system earnings so it can fluctuate with
the system's earnings each year.

Rep. Richard H. Baker, R-La., and Rep. Stephen L. Neal, D-N.C., introduced a
bill earlier this year to do just that.

To deal with future lack of loan demand, the system is trying to create new
products as well as carve a niche for itself by providing credit to help develop
affordable housing. Risk Guards Planned

Michael A. Jessee, president of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston, said new
products are likely include those that guard against prepayment risk and
interest rate risk. The system is also considering securitizing loans for
multifamily dwellings, which are considered riskier than loans for single-family
homes.

The finance board insists its efforts to meet unmet housing needs will produce
competitive returns on the bank system's investments.

"We're trying to walk a fine line between doing well and doing good," said R.
Matthew Neff, deputy to the chairman of the finance board.

Mr. Evans said, "It would be incredibly disingenuous of me to say that the
banking industry in this country has a high level of commitment to affordable
housing." Resistance Expected

He conceded that the finance board's plan was likely to meet resistance from
many member institutions.

"There are going to be a significant minority of members who will resist the
assets of the system and the assets of their own institutions being used for
affordable-housing projects. My reaction to that is with the taxpayers'
guarantee on the bonds and with deposit insurance on the deposits, that's the
cost of receiving those two benefits - a broader social commitment."

Most of the changes to the bank system that the finance board is considering
would require congressional action. Industry and congressional sources say that
raising the subject of reforming the Federal Home Loan Bank System would allow
for changes the finance board would not want.

And while subsidizing home financing has many friends in Congress, there have
been whispers that the Federal Home Loan Bank System has outlived its time.
Who'll Pay the Bill?

Then again, the $300 million payment could prove to be the system's savior as
well as its tormentor. Congress could abolish the Federal Home Loan Bank System,
but who would pay the annual $300 million contribution to the savings and loan
bailout?

Annual payments are due until the year 2030.

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1110 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Evans Jr.,photo

                      Copyright 1993 American Banker, Inc.


                              279 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               December 21, 1992

Record Securitization for Mortgage Agencies

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 477 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Record mortgage origination levels have led to record securitization for the
secondary market agencies.

The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and Federal National Mortgage Association
will purchase or guarantee a combined total of more than $ 400 billion in
mortgages and mortgage-backed securities in 1992.

In 1991, the two corporations purchased or guaranteed $ 239 billion in home
mortgages.

Freddie Mac will purchase a record $ 185 billion in mortgages in 1992,
representing nearly 25% of the $ 800 billion in originations this year.

In 1991, Freddie Mac posted $ 100 billion in mortgage purchases.  Its previous
purchase volume record was $ 104 billion in 1986.

Freddie Mac also will reach a record this year by issuing $ 175 billion in MBS,
compared with $ 92.5 billion in 1991.

While Fannie Mae has not released year-end estimates, it is clear that it has
seen record activity in 1992.

During the first eleven months of 1992, Fannie Mae issued $ 175 billion in MBS,
including $ 13 billion originated by Fannie Mae itself.

Fannie Mae lenders issued $ 162 billion in mortgage securities through November
1992, while Fannie Mae tallied $ 67 billion in total portfolio purchases.

Combined, purchases plus lender-issued MBS totaled $ 229 billion during the
first eleven months of the year.

In all of 1991, Fannie Mae purchased or guaranteed $ 139 billion in mortgages.

Both corporations had to adapt to meet the huge volume increase this year.

"With mortgage rates dipping to their lowest levels in nearly two decades, 1992
was an extraordinary year for both refinancings and originations," Freddie Mac
president Leland Brendsel told reporters here.

He said 1992 was a year that demonstrated the efficiency and stability of the
secondary market.

"Not only have we brought enormous benefits to the mortgage markets, but also we
are doing it in a safe and sound way."

Donna Callejon, senior vice president for single-family marketing at Fannie Mae,
said the company re-evaluated many of its business practices in light of the
origination activity this year.

"We have been in very much a reactive mode this year," she said.

Fannie Mae was pleased that despite economic weakness, mortgage defaults have
not shown a significant increase this year.

Lower rates and refinancing have helped improve consumer balance sheets, Ms.
Callejon said during a Fannie Mae news conference.

The Government National Mortgage Association has seen record activity as well.

During the first ten months of 1992, Ginnie Mae already had exceeded its 1991
total for commitments on MBS.

Ginnie Mae had issued commitments to guarantee $ 72 billion in MBS through
October.

In all 1991, Ginnie Mae issued just under $ 69 billion in commitments.

Ginnie Mae guarantees securities backed by Federal Housing Administration and
Department of Veterans Affairs mortgage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              280 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION
Three Views: The Troubled Savings and Loan Associations;
On the Future, if There Is One, of the Thrifts

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1533 words


GRIM news for the savings and loan industry keeps coming. American thrifts lost
$3.6 billion in the second quarter of this year, the Federal Home Loan Bank
Board reported last week, bringing losses for the last 12 months to $13.5
billion. Congress is moving toward consideration of a Federal bailout to close
down or merge the industry's insolvent institutions: Senator William Proxmire,
Democrat of Wisconsin and chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, said last
week that a $20 billion bailout would be in order. Meanwhile, the Home Loan
board, which has rescued 105 insolvent thrifts this year, predicts it will
settle as many as 50 more by the end of this month. Some experts are beginning
to ask whether the thrift industry will survive the crisis. Others say that
maybe it should not survive because the business has so changed that the
traditional savings and loan association is obsolete. There are predictions,
too, that Washington might seek to reorganize the industry, possibly merging the
thrifts into the banking industry. Nathaniel C. Nash, a reporter in the
Washington bureau of The New York Times discussed the thrifts' future with three
experts: R. Dan Brumbaugh, a former economist at the Federal Home Loan Bank
Board and now a consultant in San Francisco; Gerald J. Levy, chairman of the
Guaranty Savings and Loan Association of Milwaukee and former chairman of the
United States League of Savings Institutions; and Richard T. Pratt, chairman of
Merrill Lynch Mortgage Capital Inc. and former chairman of the Federal Home Loan
Bank. Here are excerpts.

R. DAN BRUMBAUGH: We No Longer Need A Specialized Lender

Question. Has it become unnecessary to give thrifts a special incentive to make
home mortgages?

Answer. No. I think that there's certainly a change in financial institutions'
structure, but the reasons for a specialized industry dedicated to housing I
think remain. Savings and loans are the only financial institutions that provide
those services throughout the country in virtually every city and town.

Q. Why has the percent of home mortgages from thrifts declined?

A. Certainly there has been far more competition in the mortgage business over
the past seven or eight years. There are many more mortgage bankers, mortgage
brokers, subsidiaries of commercial banks that have been originating mortgage
loans on a far more aggressive basis. But one also has to look at who ultimately
holds all of this mortgage paper. And the largest holder of mortgages on homes
are savings and loans.

Q. If Congress dropped the unique elements of a thrift, would mortgage
availability decline?

A. Clearly if the savings and loan industry were forced to switch to a
commercial bank charter, losing all of the special benefits, we would of course
be forced to become more bank-like. That would lead us ultimately away from
residential mortgage lending. So I think you'd start seeing some significant
dropoff in the amount of cash available for home purchase.

Two years ago the sense was that we'd be moving to a world where Citicorp and
Sears, G.E., all of the larger players, G.M. and their mortgage origination
facilities, would be driving out the traditional lenders. In fact, with the
changing shape of the mortgage product and with a strong re-emphasis on
adjustable rate mortgage loans, we've seen a resurgence of portfolio lenders,
the traditional savings and loan.

Q. So you think that there is still a role for Government subsidies in support
of a specific mortgage industry?

A. The only subsidy that remains is that thrifts can deduct 8 percent of our
income, set it aside in a bad-debt reserve, without paying tax on it at that
time. The key is that you have an industry with specific regulatory requirements
saying that it has to be primarily engaged in housing finance. That will
guarantee that mortgage money will always be available and will not dry up in
hard times.

GERALD J. LEVY: The Reasons for The Industry Remain

Question. Given changes in mortgage financing, do we still need a subsidized
industry to provide it?

Answer. There's no need for a specialized subsidy for housing. The private
sector has the ability to produce all the housing demanded by those that have
the wherewithal to purchase it. I think the original support of the thrift
industry was for the benefit of those owning thrifts, not for the public.

Q. Is a home-ownership subsidy justified?

A. There may be some specific instances where it's appropriate. If in fact a
subsidy is justified, I think that the more efficient way to provide that
subsidy is to enhance the mortgage instrument, not to support the financial
institution.

Q. Meaning the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation, through which the Government guarantees mortgage-backed
securities?

A. That's right. Through Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae for a nominal cost, you have
essentially removed the credit risk from the basic single-family mortgage. Then
the most efficient investor can buy the mortgage. That is a very tough
competitor for thrifts.

Q. Thrifts are becoming less of a player in home finance. Is that going to
continue?

A. They are becoming less of a player, but they are still the dominant player
and that can't be ignored. To say that at the margin they're losing a share of
that market doesn't mean that they aren't incredibly important to that market
and that the pricing of mortgage credit wouldn't change if they were somehow
instantaneously eliminated.

Q. Without thrifts, would mortgage costs rise?

A. I think in the short run you might have a different pricing of mortgages.
It's quite possible that thrifts have demanded too little of a yield on
mortgages and that in fact a subsidy is occurring there. But it's a very
inefficient way to provide the subsidy if it's coming from thrifts not knowing
how to or not being able to properly price the mortgage instrument.

Q. Some argue that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are in effect destroying the
thrift industry.

A. That's back to the nub of the issue. If you really believe that housing needs
support, one may come to the conclusion that these agencies provide it at less
cost than supporting the thrift industry, which means that thrifts have to find
additional places to earn reasonable income and maybe need to grow more slowly
or to shrink relative to their past presence.

RICHARD T. PRATT: Subsidies Could Be Put to Better Use

Question. Do our home financing needs still require the existence of the thrift
industry?

Answer. The answer is - unambiguously - we no longer need a specialized housing
finance lender to provide subsidy for housing finance. The best indication of
that is how, during the 1980's, the percentage of mortgages and mortgage-backed
securities on the books of thrifts have declined 38 percent, while the thrifts'
assets have more than doubled.

Q. So what is the future of the thrift industry?

A. The development of mortgage-backed securities and other asset-backed
securities, plus commercial paper, threatens both thrifts and banks, but it
threatens thrifts first. By saying there's no need for a housing finance lender,
we're saying that the institutions that are going to survive need to diversify
away from housing finance.

Q. Should thrift industry subsidies be ended?

A. That is a secondary issue. The main issue is how these institutions are going
to make money. If we constrain them to the traditional balance sheet with the
domination of mortgages in their portfolio, I don't believe they're going to
make money. They exist because of imperfect information between borrowers and
lenders. But increasingly, borrowers and lenders get together [through the]
mortgage-backed security, which is eroding the income of these institutions.

Q. So we don't really need a base of Federally insured deposits to support
housing finance?

A. I think that's absolutely true. The mortgage banking industry, which does not
have insured liabilities, essentially sets the price for housing finance. If
that weren't true, thrift institutions would have 100 percent of the business
and they don't. And they're continuing to be eroded by mortgage bankers.

Q. If insured institutions compete with companies without that backing, what
should be done?

A. It strikes at something which Americans think is their birthright, which is
deposit insurance. The truth of the matter is that we could roll back deposit
insurance to a relatively small level to protect the relatively poor and
unsophisticated and at the same time protect the soundness of the financial
system.

Q. Right now, where does a home buyer find the least expensive mortgage?

A. It seems that thrift institutions are somewhat systematically underpricing
their adjustable rate mortgages. So at the moment, I think that there are great
bargains out there by thrift institutions. Over time, however, these sorts of
peculiarities will erode and I don't know exactly where in the future the best
product is going to be. If we were to completely deregulate thrift institutions,
we need not fear that individuals seeking a mortgage cannot find that mortgage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from 1946 film, ''It's a Wonderful Life''; graph showing
percent of mortgages on single-family homes held by savings and loans and
savings banks, 1965-1987 (Source: U.S. League of Savings Institutions)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 10, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Remarks by Counselor to the Secretary for Housing Finance Policy Dr.
Michael Stegman Before The North Carolina Bankers Association 2014 American
Mortgage Conference

LENGTH: 2690  words

DATELINE: Washington


Ministry Of Treasury, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:


Thank you so much for that kind introduction, Thad. It is a treat to come home
to participate in this important conference and to be able to personally
recognize you for your 37 years of consequential leadership of the North
Carolina Bankers Association.

Not only have you done an outstanding job of serving member interests to an
extraordinary degree, but you have also made the North Carolina Bankers
Association a powerful and influential voice in national policy debates around
banking, financial regulation, and reform.


And by example, you have made the name of this great organization and its
members synonymous with community service and compassion for the less fortunate
among us. Congratulations, Thad.

I come here with an appreciation for the view held by many in this room that
North Carolina families, communities and the state's economy have paid, and
continue to pay a dear price for the risky lending that for the most part
occurred elsewhere in the country.

The plausibility of this argument is reflected in the fact that over the course
of the financial crisis, North Carolina home prices fell by about 15 percent
compared to a decline of 21 percent nationally and nearly 50 percent in the
frothiest markets, according to Federal Housing Finance Agency's index of home
purchase transactions.

Since the depths of the crisis, average home prices in North Carolina have
almost made up all of the lost ground, with the latest data indicating they were
4 percent below peak levels, compared to 7 percent below peak levels nationally
and still 25-30 percent below peak levels in areas that experienced the largest
bubbles in home prices.

Nevertheless, the State's economy took a disproportionate hit--losing more than
335,000 jobs from peak to trough, or 8 percent of peak employment, more than the
6.3 percent shed nationally.

Since the economy's low-point in February 2010, North Carolina has regained more
than 300,000 of those lost jobs, bringing us closer to a breakeven point. While
we are not completely out of the woods yet, I believe that Treasury has played a
significant role in helping North Carolina's recovery.

Through the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, we injected capital and
liquidity into North Carolina financial institutions to stabilize the banking
sector, build confidence, and avert a potential collapse of the entire system.
Of the 33 small- and mid-sized North Carolina banks that received a combined
$3.7 billion of TARP support, all but one has repaid Treasury. The remaining
bank continues to pay dividends on its Community Development Capital Initiative
program investment today.

And, while the value of single-family residential loans held on balance sheets
of North Carolina-headquartered banks continues to drop, data indicate that this
decline is primarily attributable to portfolio run-off by the largest
institutions.

Smaller Tar Heel banks are actually seeing growth in this asset class. For
example, banks with assets of less than $10 billion have increased their
holdings of single-family residential loans by 13 percent between 2011 and the
second quarter of 2014, while large banks have reduced their holdings by 17
percent over the same period.

Moreover, like the broader banking industry, smaller North Carolina banks have a
strong capital position from which to grow their lending activities with an
average Tier 1 common capital ratio of about 20 percent.

The bottom line is there is strategic opportunity in residential lending for
North Carolina regional and community banks given their strong balance sheets
and appetite for residential credit.

Treasury also provided $111 million of capital support and liquidity to the
North Carolina Housing Finance Agency through our New Issue Bond Program,
enabling it to finance mortgage loans to first-time homebuyers during the
crisis.

Using resources from our Hardest Hit Fund, NCHFA has also helped over 17,000
families and provided over $300 million in assistance to unemployed homeowners
make their mortgage payments while they look for a job or retraining. This
program has had remarkable outcomes with over 99 percent of borrowers assisted
by the program retaining ownership of their home 24 months after first receiving
assistance.

While these data are encouraging, we are acutely aware that the housing recovery
is uneven and that pockets of continuing distress exist even in states and
markets that have experienced significant gains.

This is why Secretary Jack Lew recently announced an extension of our Making
Home Affordable programs through 2016 including our loan modification programs,
and we will continue to look for additional ways to refine and improve the types
of aid available to homeowners experiencing financial hardship.

And, while we are still committed to helping struggling families and healing
local housing markets, given the breadth and depth of the ongoing housing
recovery, we believe now is the time to reform the housing finance system and
begin the thoughtful transition to a safer, more sustainable housing marketplace
instead of waiting until the next crisis to address this important issue.

Housing Finance Reform Update

As you know, working with Congress to enact long-term housing finance reform
legislation consistent with the President's principles has been a focus of
Treasury since the onset of the financial crisis.

A few days ago marked the sixth anniversary of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
entering conservatorship. As I have said before, this status quo is
unsustainable, leaving taxpayers at risk and many credit-worthy borrowers
underserved. We owe the American people better.

The critical flaws in the legacy system that allowed private shareholders to
reap unlimited profits while leaving taxpayers shouldering enormous losses
cannot be fixed by a regulator or conservator. It requires legislation.

For those who think that the GSEs' structural problems are a thing of the past,
inaugural GSE stress test results published in April by the Federal Housing
Finance Agency pursuant to requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act reveal the folly
of those beliefs.

Under an economic stress scenario similar to the most recent crisis, forecasted
credit losses for the GSEs would be so great that they would have to draw up to
an additional $190 billion on Treasury's commitment over a two-year period.

This is slightly greater than the total amount that American taxpayers have been
forced to invest in these companies from the time they entered conservatorship.
Absent legislative reform, we could end up with history repeating itself.

And, let me be clear: given this unresolved state of affairs, the only thing
that gives capital markets and global investors confidence in the GSEs going
forward is Treasury's unconditional commitment to backstop them with up to $258
billion in additional capital support in the event of another economic crisis, a
commitment for which the GSEs are not paying.

This is undesirable and unsustainable. These companies must be wound down in an
orderly fashion as part of comprehensive housing finance reform.

As you know, this past May marked a significant and encouraging milestone in
this regard. The thoughtful bipartisan efforts by Senate Banking Committee
Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member Crapo have solidified points of broad
agreement on the principles that should underlie the future housing finance
system.

Among others, these include preservation of the 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage and
a liquid TBA market; a central role for private capital in taking first loss
mortgage credit risk; the extension of an explicit, and actuarially priced,
government guarantee on qualified mortgage-backed securities; the enhancement of
secondary market liquidity through a single securitization platform and
security; the separation of the system's securitization infrastructure from
private credit risk-taking firms; the need for a mechanism to ensure affordable
access to the system; and the establishment of a countercyclical role for
government.

These and related points of bipartisan agreement represent real progress that we
have banked and demonstrate that the Johnson-Crapo majority did not forge its
consensus by merely picking off low-hanging fruit.

Resolving many of the above issues required principled compromise and the
maintenance of good will and open lines of communication among members on both
sides of the aisle. But there is obviously more work to be done to broaden the
bipartisan coalition, and that work is ongoing.

As discussion around this legislation continues, and notwithstanding Director
Watt's publicly stated position that FHFA will not participate in the
legislative debate about the future of the GSEs, several of the conservator's
pending actions will not only affect the pricing of GSE mortgage credit and
their risk profile and footprint, but they may also influence the contours of
the future housing finance system.

And, while by no means determinative of the final outcome of the legislative
process, last week's report by the Congressional Budget Office notes that
adoption of Johnson-Crapo would save American taxpayers tens of billions of
dollars over ten years compared to the present GSE-centric system.

In conservatorship, FHFA has been moving the GSEs along a course that intersects
with housing finance reform and elements of the Johnson-Crapo consensus.

Three such actions include expanded efforts to transfer GSE mortgage credit risk
to the private sector through credit risk-sharing transactions; continued
progress on the development of the Common Securitization Platform; and, most
recently, a decision to transition the Enterprises towards the issuance of a
single security.

As these initiatives are implemented through non-legislative means, their
positive influence on market practices will ease the transition toward achieving
lasting legislated housing finance reform. As importantly, other near-term
decisions by FHFA will also help inform future legislative discussions.

These include decisions on how guarantee fees and loan-level price adjustments
related to borrower credit quality will be evaluated going forward and capital
standards that FHFA will require of private mortgage insurance companies that do
business with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Among the critical issues FHFA will address in re-setting g-fees and mortgage
insurance standards are the level and composition of capital to allocate against
expected and unexpected losses; the extent to which the loss-absorbing capacity
of MIs should include some portion of contractual, but unearned, future
premiums; and, the amount by which the strengthening of counterparties'
financial position reduces GSEs' residual risk positions, thereby meriting a
reduction in the overall g-fee structure.

In setting these policies for the GSEs, FHFA must make the same kinds of
tradeoffs between adequate risk management and taxpayer protection, maintaining
broad access to credit, while putting private capital in front of the government
guarantee, as policy makers and legislators must do in setting capital
requirements for guarantors in the future housing finance system.

By making their analytics and decision-making processes around these critical
issues transparent and public, FHFA's actions should provide invaluable insights
in the continuing discussions around legislative reforms.

And, it is not just in its conservator role that FHFA affects housing finance;
it does so also as prudential regulator of the Federal Home Loan Banks. Because
the vast majority of North Carolina's community and regional banks are members
of the Atlanta Federal Home Loan Bank, the North Carolina Bankers Association
and its members have good reason to stay abreast of FHLB initiatives and FHFA's
proposed regulatory changes to the system.

The Administration's vision for housing finance reform recognizes the importance
of ensuring that community lenders have the same access to the secondary market
as big banks.

And Johnson-Crapo would help fulfill this need by allowing FHLBs to serve as
loan aggregators either at a bank level or through a separate subsidiary.

FHFA has recently approved a pilot program that allows the Federal Home Loan
Bank of Chicago to become a Ginnie Mae issuer--enabling it to purchase and
securitize pools of FHA, VA, or USDA loans from its member banks and sell these
securities to investors.

This pilot represents the first time that a Federal Home Loan Bank will serve as
an aggregator rather than merely as a conduit, and if successful, could be
expanded to the rest of the System, thereby increasing small lender access to
the secondary market, as envisioned in Johnson-Crapo.

A similarly ambitious program recently approved by FHFA is the Chicago Home Loan
Bank's partnership with Redwood Trust, a mortgage real estate investment trust,
or REIT.

Through Redwood's captive insurance subsidiary, a new member of the Chicago
FHLB, this Mortgage Partnership Finance program (or MPF) would allow member
banks to sell their jumbo mortgage loans to Redwood without having to go through
a competitor large bank.

If successful, this partnership may create a new source of liquidity and access
to the secondary market for the roughly 1,500 community banks, thrifts, and
credit unions that participate in the MPF program.

I raise the Redwood Trust initiative because it is likely to be affected by
FHFA's recently proposed rule that would phase out FHLB membership of existing
captive insurers and prevent new captive insurers from future membership.

While not directly aimed at REITs, the outcome of this rulemaking will affect
the economics of taking mortgage credit risk for REITs, an important
consideration in the context of the future housing finance system.

It is true that funding REITs through their captive insurance subsidiaries poses
potential incremental risks to the FHLB System that are not associated with
lending to its traditional depository membership base.

For example, REITs are not subject to the same stringent prudential regulatory
oversight; do not have access to stable funding sources like deposits or
emergency funding tools such as the discount window that member depositories do;
and differ with respect to resolution and accounting standards.

However, many of the activities that REITs engage in appear to be aligned with
the FHLB System's core mission, and represent an important source of private
capital that should be at the core of the U.S. housing finance system.

While Treasury has not taken a position on the captive insurance issue, it is
important that the North Carolina Bankers Association join the conversation with
FHFA as it strives to strike a balance between ensuring safety and soundness of
the FHLB system and supporting residential lending and community investment by
member banks.

Conclusion

To conclude, private capital is expected to take an increasingly greater first
loss position in front of a government guarantee with respect to the GSEs in
conservatorship; in the activities of the Federal Home Loan Banks; and, in a
future system as envisioned in proposed housing finance reform legislation.

The willingness of owners of that capital to play this role in ways that will
ensure broad access and affordability, while reducing taxpayer exposure and
enhancing financial stability will depend upon near-term regulatory decisions
and legislative actions that will define the contours of a future system.

To paraphrase Finley Peter Dunne's aphorism that "politics ain't beanbag;" well,
housing finance reform ain't beanbag either. This is a tough, challenging, area
of public policy to be involved in. But the stakes are just too high for any of
us to sit back and be satisfied with an inadequate and ineffective status quo.

Resolving outstanding differences will be difficult and hard-fought, but the
results consequential. All of us must weigh in, and the North Carolina Bankers
Association and its members need to be part of the mix.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              282 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 9, 2014 Tuesday

Washington: Remarks by Counselor to the Secretary for Housing Finance Policy Dr.
Michael Stegman Before The North Carolina Bankers Association 2014 American
Mortgage Conference

LENGTH: 2690  words

DATELINE: Washington


Ministry Of Treasury, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:


Thank you so much for that kind introduction, Thad. It is a treat to come home
to participate in this important conference and to be able to personally
recognize you for your 37 years of consequential leadership of the North
Carolina Bankers Association.

Not only have you done an outstanding job of serving member interests to an
extraordinary degree, but you have also made the North Carolina Bankers
Association a powerful and influential voice in national policy debates around
banking, financial regulation, and reform.


And by example, you have made the name of this great organization and its
members synonymous with community service and compassion for the less fortunate
among us. Congratulations, Thad.

I come here with an appreciation for the view held by many in this room that
North Carolina families, communities and the state's economy have paid, and
continue to pay a dear price for the risky lending that for the most part
occurred elsewhere in the country.

The plausibility of this argument is reflected in the fact that over the course
of the financial crisis, North Carolina home prices fell by about 15 percent
compared to a decline of 21 percent nationally and nearly 50 percent in the
frothiest markets, according to Federal Housing Finance Agency's index of home
purchase transactions.

Since the depths of the crisis, average home prices in North Carolina have
almost made up all of the lost ground, with the latest data indicating they were
4 percent below peak levels, compared to 7 percent below peak levels nationally
and still 25-30 percent below peak levels in areas that experienced the largest
bubbles in home prices.

Nevertheless, the State's economy took a disproportionate hit--losing more than
335,000 jobs from peak to trough, or 8 percent of peak employment, more than the
6.3 percent shed nationally.

Since the economy's low-point in February 2010, North Carolina has regained more
than 300,000 of those lost jobs, bringing us closer to a breakeven point. While
we are not completely out of the woods yet, I believe that Treasury has played a
significant role in helping North Carolina's recovery.

Through the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, we injected capital and
liquidity into North Carolina financial institutions to stabilize the banking
sector, build confidence, and avert a potential collapse of the entire system.
Of the 33 small- and mid-sized North Carolina banks that received a combined
$3.7 billion of TARP support, all but one has repaid Treasury. The remaining
bank continues to pay dividends on its Community Development Capital Initiative
program investment today.

And, while the value of single-family residential loans held on balance sheets
of North Carolina-headquartered banks continues to drop, data indicate that this
decline is primarily attributable to portfolio run-off by the largest
institutions.

Smaller Tar Heel banks are actually seeing growth in this asset class. For
example, banks with assets of less than $10 billion have increased their
holdings of single-family residential loans by 13 percent between 2011 and the
second quarter of 2014, while large banks have reduced their holdings by 17
percent over the same period.

Moreover, like the broader banking industry, smaller North Carolina banks have a
strong capital position from which to grow their lending activities with an
average Tier 1 common capital ratio of about 20 percent.

The bottom line is there is strategic opportunity in residential lending for
North Carolina regional and community banks given their strong balance sheets
and appetite for residential credit.

Treasury also provided $111 million of capital support and liquidity to the
North Carolina Housing Finance Agency through our New Issue Bond Program,
enabling it to finance mortgage loans to first-time homebuyers during the
crisis.

Using resources from our Hardest Hit Fund, NCHFA has also helped over 15,000
families and provided over $230 million in assistance to unemployed homeowners
make their mortgage payments while they look for a job or retraining. This
program has had remarkable outcomes with over 99 percent of borrowers assisted
by the program retaining ownership of their home 24 months after first receiving
assistance.

While these data are encouraging, we are acutely aware that the housing recovery
is uneven and that pockets of continuing distress exist even in states and
markets that have experienced significant gains.

This is why Secretary Jack Lew recently announced an extension of our Making
Home Affordable programs through 2016 including our loan modification programs,
and we will continue to look for additional ways to refine and improve the types
of aid available to homeowners experiencing financial hardship.

And, while we are still committed to helping struggling families and healing
local housing markets, given the breadth and depth of the ongoing housing
recovery, we believe now is the time to reform the housing finance system and
begin the thoughtful transition to a safer, more sustainable housing marketplace
instead of waiting until the next crisis to address this important issue.

Housing Finance Reform Update

As you know, working with Congress to enact long-term housing finance reform
legislation consistent with the President's principles has been a focus of
Treasury since the onset of the financial crisis.

A few days ago marked the sixth anniversary of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
entering conservatorship. As I have said before, this status quo is
unsustainable, leaving taxpayers at risk and many credit-worthy borrowers
underserved. We owe the American people better.

The critical flaws in the legacy system that allowed private shareholders to
reap unlimited profits while leaving taxpayers shouldering enormous losses
cannot be fixed by a regulator or conservator. It requires legislation.

For those who think that the GSEs' structural problems are a thing of the past,
inaugural GSE stress test results published in April by the Federal Housing
Finance Agency pursuant to requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act reveal the folly
of those beliefs.

Under an economic stress scenario similar to the most recent crisis, forecasted
credit losses for the GSEs would be so great that they would have to draw up to
an additional $190 billion on Treasury's commitment over a two-year period.

This is slightly greater than the total amount that American taxpayers have been
forced to invest in these companies from the time they entered conservatorship.
Absent legislative reform, we could end up with history repeating itself.

And, let me be clear: given this unresolved state of affairs, the only thing
that gives capital markets and global investors confidence in the GSEs going
forward is Treasury's unconditional commitment to backstop them with up to $258
billion in additional capital support in the event of another economic crisis, a
commitment for which the GSEs are not paying.

This is undesirable and unsustainable. These companies must be wound down in an
orderly fashion as part of comprehensive housing finance reform.

As you know, this past May marked a significant and encouraging milestone in
this regard. The thoughtful bipartisan efforts by Senate Banking Committee
Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member Crapo have solidified points of broad
agreement on the principles that should underlie the future housing finance
system.

Among others, these include preservation of the 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage and
a liquid TBA market; a central role for private capital in taking first loss
mortgage credit risk; the extension of an explicit, and actuarially priced,
government guarantee on qualified mortgage-backed securities; the enhancement of
secondary market liquidity through a single securitization platform and
security; the separation of the system's securitization infrastructure from
private credit risk-taking firms; the need for a mechanism to ensure affordable
access to the system; and the establishment of a countercyclical role for
government.

These and related points of bipartisan agreement represent real progress that we
have banked and demonstrate that the Johnson-Crapo majority did not forge its
consensus by merely picking off low-hanging fruit.

Resolving many of the above issues required principled compromise and the
maintenance of good will and open lines of communication among members on both
sides of the aisle. But there is obviously more work to be done to broaden the
bipartisan coalition, and that work is ongoing.

As discussion around this legislation continues, and notwithstanding Director
Watt's publicly stated position that FHFA will not participate in the
legislative debate about the future of the GSEs, several of the conservator's
pending actions will not only affect the pricing of GSE mortgage credit and
their risk profile and footprint, but they may also influence the contours of
the future housing finance system.

And, while by no means determinative of the final outcome of the legislative
process, last week's report by the Congressional Budget Office notes that
adoption of Johnson-Crapo would save American taxpayers tens of billions of
dollars over ten years compared to the present GSE-centric system.

In conservatorship, FHFA has been moving the GSEs along a course that intersects
with housing finance reform and elements of the Johnson-Crapo consensus.

Three such actions include expanded efforts to transfer GSE mortgage credit risk
to the private sector through credit risk-sharing transactions; continued
progress on the development of the Common Securitization Platform; and, most
recently, a decision to transition the Enterprises towards the issuance of a
single security.

As these initiatives are implemented through non-legislative means, their
positive influence on market practices will ease the transition toward achieving
lasting legislated housing finance reform. As importantly, other near-term
decisions by FHFA will also help inform future legislative discussions.

These include decisions on how guarantee fees and loan-level price adjustments
related to borrower credit quality will be evaluated going forward and capital
standards that FHFA will require of private mortgage insurance companies that do
business with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Among the critical issues FHFA will address in re-setting g-fees and mortgage
insurance standards are the level and composition of capital to allocate against
expected and unexpected losses; the extent to which the loss-absorbing capacity
of MIs should include some portion of contractual, but unearned, future
premiums; and, the amount by which the strengthening of counterparties'
financial position reduces GSEs' residual risk positions, thereby meriting a
reduction in the overall g-fee structure.

In setting these policies for the GSEs, FHFA must make the same kinds of
tradeoffs between adequate risk management and taxpayer protection, maintaining
broad access to credit, while putting private capital in front of the government
guarantee, as policy makers and legislators must do in setting capital
requirements for guarantors in the future housing finance system.

By making their analytics and decision-making processes around these critical
issues transparent and public, FHFA's actions should provide invaluable insights
in the continuing discussions around legislative reforms.

And, it is not just in its conservator role that FHFA affects housing finance;
it does so also as prudential regulator of the Federal Home Loan Banks. Because
the vast majority of North Carolina's community and regional banks are members
of the Atlanta Federal Home Loan Bank, the North Carolina Bankers Association
and its members have good reason to stay abreast of FHLB initiatives and FHFA's
proposed regulatory changes to the system.

The Administration's vision for housing finance reform recognizes the importance
of ensuring that community lenders have the same access to the secondary market
as big banks.

And Johnson-Crapo would help fulfill this need by allowing FHLBs to serve as
loan aggregators either at a bank level or through a separate subsidiary.

FHFA has recently approved a pilot program that allows the Federal Home Loan
Bank of Chicago to become a Ginnie Mae issuer--enabling it to purchase and
securitize pools of FHA, VA, or USDA loans from its member banks and sell these
securities to investors.

This pilot represents the first time that a Federal Home Loan Bank will serve as
an aggregator rather than merely as a conduit, and if successful, could be
expanded to the rest of the System, thereby increasing small lender access to
the secondary market, as envisioned in Johnson-Crapo.

A similarly ambitious program recently approved by FHFA is the Chicago Home Loan
Bank's partnership with Redwood Trust, a mortgage real estate investment trust,
or REIT.

Through Redwood's captive insurance subsidiary, a new member of the Chicago
FHLB, this Mortgage Partnership Finance program (or MPF) would allow member
banks to sell their jumbo mortgage loans to Redwood without having to go through
a competitor large bank.

If successful, this partnership may create a new source of liquidity and access
to the secondary market for the roughly 1,500 community banks, thrifts, and
credit unions that participate in the MPF program.

I raise the Redwood Trust initiative because it is likely to be affected by
FHFA's recently proposed rule that would phase out FHLB membership of existing
captive insurers and prevent new captive insurers from future membership.

While not directly aimed at REITs, the outcome of this rulemaking will affect
the economics of taking mortgage credit risk for REITs, an important
consideration in the context of the future housing finance system.

It is true that funding REITs through their captive insurance subsidiaries poses
potential incremental risks to the FHLB System that are not associated with
lending to its traditional depository membership base.

For example, REITs are not subject to the same stringent prudential regulatory
oversight; do not have access to stable funding sources like deposits or
emergency funding tools such as the discount window that member depositories do;
and differ with respect to resolution and accounting standards.

However, many of the activities that REITs engage in appear to be aligned with
the FHLB System's core mission, and represent an important source of private
capital that should be at the core of the U.S. housing finance system.

While Treasury has not taken a position on the captive insurance issue, it is
important that the North Carolina Bankers Association join the conversation with
FHFA as it strives to strike a balance between ensuring safety and soundness of
the FHLB system and supporting residential lending and community investment by
member banks.

Conclusion

To conclude, private capital is expected to take an increasingly greater first
loss position in front of a government guarantee with respect to the GSEs in
conservatorship; in the activities of the Federal Home Loan Banks; and, in a
future system as envisioned in proposed housing finance reform legislation.

The willingness of owners of that capital to play this role in ways that will
ensure broad access and affordability, while reducing taxpayer exposure and
enhancing financial stability will depend upon near-term regulatory decisions
and legislative actions that will define the contours of a future system.

To paraphrase Finley Peter Dunne's aphorism that "politics ain't beanbag;" well,
housing finance reform ain't beanbag either. This is a tough, challenging, area
of public policy to be involved in. But the stakes are just too high for any of
us to sit back and be satisfied with an inadequate and ineffective status quo.

Resolving outstanding differences will be difficult and hard-fought, but the
results consequential. All of us must weigh in, and the North Carolina Bankers
Association and its members need to be part of the mix.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              283 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     March 26, 1991, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

Housing recovery may be building

BYLINE: Nancy Miller

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 405 words


The housing industry's nightmare may be just about over. Still, housing experts
say, recovery will be slow.

In February, existing home sales jumped to an annual pace of 3.1 million, 7.9%
higher than a month earlier, the National Association of Realtors said Monday.
It was the biggest monthly gain in five years and the first gain since November.

Just last week, the Commerce Department reported housing starts rose 16.4% in
February from January.

''It's the end of the 1989-to-1990 decline,'' says Michael Aronstein, president
of Comstock Partners, the New York investment firm that first predicted home
prices would fall.

Victory in the Persian Gulf is one reason for the turnaround. More important:
Both interest rates and prices fell in February, making homes more affordable
than they've been in 13 years.

''When the affordability improves, housing sales improve,'' says Barbara Allen,
analyst for Kidder Peabody.

The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. says the average 30-year fixed-rate
mortgage fell half a percentage point from January to February, hitting a low of
9.25%. The national median price slipped to $ 94,800 in February from January's
$ 95,600.

The median reflects the sales price midpoint - half of the homes sold for more
than the median, half for less. Lower medians usually mean prices are falling
and less costly homes are selling.

Sales improved in February in every region:

- The biggest improvement came in the West, where the resale market surged 20%
to an annual pace of 540,000 houses, the largest monthly jump in 15 years. The
median price sank 5.4% to $ 141,500,

- In the Northeast, single-family home sales rose 8.7% to an annual pace of
500,000 houses. The median edged up 0.6% to $ 137,700.

- In the Midwest, sales rose 8.6% to an annualized 880,000 houses. The median
price rose 2% to $ 76,000.

- Resales in the South grew 3.4% to 1.2 million houses. The median slid 0.7% to
$ 84,000.

Despite the good news, real- estate executives are cautious:

- The February sales rate remains 8.5% below the pace set in February 1990.

- Rising unemployment rates could stall the recovery.

- John Tuccillo, NAR chief economist, says tougher lending standards will
guarantee a slow recovery in the Northeast.

- Today's activity reflects pent-up demand from 1990. That could be exhausted in
a few months. Demand for housing still will be down for the 1990s, Aronstein
warns.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.


                              284 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                           November 15, 2011 Tuesday

The Bizz, Nov. 16

BYLINE: Staff Reports

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 445 words


Reports: Home prices fell in October

California home prices continued to trend downward in October, according to new
reports from the California Association of Realtors and DataQuick Information
Systems.

The two organizations use different methods to track home prices, but generally
both agree that October was a cool month for the housing market.

Also, the federal government's lowering of conforming loan limits - the maximum
mortgage amount that government-sponsored investors Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae
can guarantee - limited sales at the high end of the housing market, the
organizations reported.

The Realtors' report shows that the state's single-family home prices fell
roughly 9 percent to about $278,000 on a year-over-year basis.

In San Bernardino County, however, October's single-family median prices rose by
about one percent to just above $132,000 while sales volumes increased by about
4 percent.

Los Angeles County's median prices dipped by nearly 8 percent to about $308,000.
Sales volumes grew by 1 percent in October.

The Realtors group only counts homes that have had at least one owner.
DataQuick, a La Jolla-based analysis company, includes newly built houses and
condos.

DataQuick said Southern California housing prices fell 4.6 percent to $283,000
in October.

In San Bernardino County, median prices of $150,000 were the same as October
2010's pricing, according to DataQuick. Sales volumes fell nearly 2 percent.

Los Angeles County median prices fell 7.7 percent to $300,000 in the DataQuick
report.

Job fair today in Ontario

Aflac, Esri, Farmers Insurance, Loma Linda University Medical Center, the Los
Angeles Fire Department, New York Life, Prudential, Sam's Club, Verizon Wireless
and other employers are scheduled to participate in the Diverse Careers job fair
today.

The job fair is scheduled from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. at the Hilton Ontario Airport
hotel, 700 N. Haven Ave.

Admission is free.

Information: www.diversecareers.com

IT firm to lead workshop on cloud computing

Accent Computer Solutions Inc. and the San Bernardino Economic Development
Agency's Office of Business Development plan a workshop on cloud computing.

Cloud computing refers to the practice of companies or individuals storing data
on a third-party's device instead of on their own computers. Accent Marketing
Manager Courtney Kaufman will discuss the basics of cloud computing and various
options offered by companies such as Google and Microsoft.

The seminar is scheduled from 9 to 11 a.m. Thursday at the Office of Business
Development, 201 N. E St., Suite 200, San Bernardino.

Information and registration: Call 909-963-5026 or email rsvp@sbbizresource.com

bizz@inlandnewspapers.com

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              285 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                            East Anglian Daily Times

                             April 4, 2013 Thursday

A boost from the chancellor

SECTION: PROP

LENGTH: 1033 words


For those taking their first step onto the property ladder or those looking to
move up it, the surprise announcement by George Osborne in his Budget of the
Help to Buy scheme is welcome news.

The scheme, has two parts; one to help buyers by providing interest-free loans
from the Government and the other part where the Government is providing a
guarantee on part of the mortgage.



Both parts of the scheme will mean that prospective buyers can look to buy with
a 5% deposit.

The loan element of the new scheme, which is available from April on homes up to
a value of £600,000, differs from previous schemes as it is available to all
buyers, first time or not.

The loan can provide 20% on an interest-free basis for five years and will only
need to be repaid when the property is sold.

The guarantee element, to start in January 2014, will again help all buyers and
provide up to 15% to those with a 5% deposit. Effectively this guarantee means
that buyers would be getting a 95% mortgage with the bank lending just 80%.

Michael Cox, managing director of developers Hopkins Homes, said it could boost
the housing market.

"All governments since the 1980s have recognised that there is a chronic and
worsening shortfall in housing supply. At last this government seems determined
to do something about it.

" On the supply side of the equation, much needed changes to the Planning
System, resulting in the National Planning Policy Framework, have finally been
introduced with the objective of bringing more land forward to provide greater
opportunities for sustainable housing development.

"On the demand side, whilst theoretical demand for housing has never diminished,
'effective' demand has been severely suppressed due to the banking crisis and
the lack of mortgage products, especially for first time buyers. "The government
has also introduced initiatives to help turn this latent demand into new homes,
with FirstBuy and NewBuy and now the welcomed announcement of 'Help To Buy' in
this budget. This scheme will see the Government helping first time buyers and
those needing to buy larger homes for their growing families by providing up to
20% of the cost, interest free for five years, leaving the buyer to raise a
deposit of 5% with a 70% traditional mortgage.

"A second phase of Help To Buy comes on stream in 2014, by providing some form
of mortgage guarantee scheme, although we await more details on this initiative.


"Hopkins Homes has 21 sites under construction across East Anglia and before the
end of the year there willl be a dozen new homes sites under construction in
Suffolk itself.

Stacy Dornan, regional sales and marketing manager for Taylor Wimpey,  currently
building a new development at Needham Market, said:  "We at Taylor Wimpey
welcome the Government's Help-to-Buy announcement. The measures announced are
great news for those moving on to the housing ladder and for those moving up it,
and will help homebuilders get Britain building. "They will help current owners
and add a welcome vibrancy to both the new and second hand market over the next
three years.

"The country is desperately in need of more homes and we welcome the
Government's focus on addressing this."

Alex Leader, head of Savills new homes in Suffolk and Essex, said: "We believe
these initiatives will have a much bigger impact than previous Government
schemes, boosting the lower tiers of the housing market in particular.

"The equity loan measures, creating the ability to borrow 20% of the property's
value, will no doubt attract a new wave of purchasers who were not previously in
a position to buy.

"It isn't only first time buyers who will benefit, but also second steppers who
have found themselves stuck on the first rung of the housing ladder having seen
their housing equity at best stand still.

This will give them some hope of trading up.

"The new mortgage guarantee scheme, which is extended to existing homes as well
as new build, should give the market a further lift.

"If Help-to-Buy has the desired effect, we anticipate it will increase levels of
residential development, although Savills Research team still forecasts that
numbers will be below what is needed."

House builder Crest Nicholson, which is building Cedars Park in Stowmarket, at
Vista in Ipswich and Kings Warren in Red Lodge, has welcomed many of the
measures.

Annette Coles sales & marketing director for Crest Nicholson Eastern, said: "The
budget has been billed as 'a budget for an aspiration nation', and it was
certainly a real game changer for the property market. While pressure has been
mounting on George Osborne to abandon his austerity programme and increase
spending on growth-boosting programmes, many of the measures we saw unveiled
were aimed firmly at would-be homeowners struggling to find a deposit and
growing families finding it difficult to raise finance for a larger home

"Clearly any measures to inject more life into the UK housing market are
extremely welcome, and the Help to Buy scheme in particular, which promises to
underwrite £130 billion of new home loans over the next three years, is a great
commitment."

Robert Ulph, managing director of estate agents Pennington, said: "This is great
news for buyers and obviously we all welcome this announcement from the
vhancellor in his budget.

"This scheme has potential to stimulate house buying in our local area and
thousands of local people could benefit from taking their first step on the
property ladder, which otherwise we know they could not afford. In addition and
uniquely for schemes of this kind this also gives real help to those looking to
make their next move.

"The announcement is great for individuals and also can give a real boost to the
local economy through the invigorated property market - both for sales and
letting. "Obviously there are people who will always choose to rent for
different reasons, but previously when we've seen a pattern of families and
individuals moving on from rented accommodation to buying their own homes, now
many more are staying put for longer as they simply can't afford to make that
next step. The Help to Buy scheme has real potential to change that and really
help those who want to own their own homes."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EAD


                    Copyright 2013 Archant Regional Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              286 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2013 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                              GlobalData - Events

                               December 11, 2013

                     Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

                            8200 Jones Branch Drive
                             McLean,  VA 22102-3110
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * EVENTS * * * * * * * * * *


Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae To Launch Program To Aid Mortgage Banks

   Oct 07, 2009

   The program aims to curb risks that independent mortgage banks face so they
can obtain short-term creditUS government-controlled mortgage finance companies,
Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, are preparing to launch a program aimed to help
independent mortgage banks get access to short-term credit needed to make home
loans - reported THE WALL STREET JOURNAL, citing people familiar with the
matter. Fannie and Freddie are expected to provide advance commitments for the
purchase of home mortgages that meet certain standards. The program aims to curb
risks that independent mortgage banks face so they can obtain short-term credit.
Fannie and Freddie are planning to build on a undisclosed pilot program that
Freddie has with Provident Funding Associates LP, and with NattyMac, that
provides short-term funding to mortgage companies, reported the Journal.


New Credit Score Model Not Helping Home Buyers Says Credit Expert

   Sep 03, 2009

   As Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have not provided their schedule or intentions
for approving the FICO 08-based credit scoresEddie Johansson, president of
Credit Security Group, a credit analysis and rescoring firm, is of the opinion
that the upgraded FICO 08 credit scoring model will increase the credit scores
of a significant segment of borrowers. However, he believes that as Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac have not provided their schedule or intentions for approving the
FICO 08-based credit scores available from two major credit bureaus, the model
is not going to help home buyers. Reportedly, credit scores help lenders
determine whether a mortgage loan is approved and the interest rate offered. In
general, the higher the score, the easier it is to get a mortgage loan and the
lower the interest rate. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac own or guarantee almost 31
million home loans worth about $5.4 trillion, which makes it all the more
important that they approve the new score model. Speaking to 150 bank executives
at the independent bankers association of Texas leadership conference in San
Antonio and to banking educators attending the financial literacy summit at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Mr. Johansson said: "If it's implemented as
expected, it is a great opportunity to boost the housing market. When Fannie and
Freddie approve it, it has arrived - but not until then." "It takes into account
more of the borrower's history and penalizes them less for a single unusual
event. It also has more score card levels, allowing finer adjustment of credit
scores," he added.


Freddie Mac Names New COO

   Aug 18, 2009

   Previously, Mr. Witherell was managing director and global co-head of the
residential mortgage business at Morgan Stanley Freddie Mac has appointed Bruce
Witherell, as chief operating officer. In that position, he will oversee and
ensure effective integration across the company's three business lines - single
family credit guarantee, multifamily sourcing and investments and capital
markets - as well as its operations and technology division. Mr. Witherell will
report to CEO Charles Haldeman. Previously, Mr. Witherell was managing director
and global co-head of the residential mortgage business at Morgan Stanley where
he was responsible for the residential mortgage origination and servicing
platforms, mortgage operations in the US, England, Italy, Japan and Russia, and
global trading. Mr. Haldeman said: "I have asked Bruce, an experienced executive
with demonstrated expertise in mortgages and capital markets, to join Freddie
Mac's strong management team and help us execute our many functions and focus on
the right objectives. Mr. Bruce has an impressive track record of success and I
am thrilled to have him join our team.


Asset Property Disposition Joins Waterfall Asset Management To Launch APD
Solutions

   Jun 15, 2009

   The consulting firm will offer strategies to public and private institutions
on TARP related issues.Asset Property Disposition (APD) and Waterfall Asset
Management (WAM) have launched APD Solutions (APDS). Vaughn Irons, Nationally
recognized community development leader and former Freddie Mac National Director
of Expanding Markets, will serve as the firm's CEO. Waterfall's billion dollar
investment portfolio and experience in affordable housing finance, will provide
capital market support for socially responsible investing and other resources
needed to penetrate key markets and grow client base. APD will provide
neighborhood planning and strategic guidance as the two firms collaborate on
offerings. Mr. Irons said: The current housing industry crisis has created the
residual negative effect of eroding support for housing programs in targeted
markets and underserved households. There needs to be an ongoing commitment to
providing working families a safe path to responsible housing choices. One of
our goals is to provide strategic counsel and real estate expertise to those
local governments, and organizations that have secured federal funding through
the Neighborhood Stabilization Program. Tom Capasse, Principal of Waterfall
Asset Management, said: We are excited to partner with Vaughn and APD. He brings
a successful track record and keen understanding of the challenges community
leaders as well as, investment managers' face when confronting a crippled
housing market. Atlanta-based APD Solutions is a national Neighborhood
Revitalization Firm created to provide community development consulting and real
estate services to public and private sector clients. Waterfall Asset Management
is an SEC-registered Investment Advisor specializing in high-yield asset backed
securities and non-performing residential mortgage loans. Asset Property
Disposition is a minority-owned firm based in Jacksonville, Florida. It offers
program design, real estate and urban planning services.
* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Business Description                    Corporate Strategy
Company Overview                        Company Statement
Events                                  Financial Ratios
History                                 Key Employee Biographies
Key Employees                           Key Facts
Locations and Subsidiaries              SWOT Analysis
Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013


                              287 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Global Capital Euroweek

                               September 4, 2009

MBA calls it time for 'rogue elephants' Fannie, Freddie

LENGTH: 375 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Mortgage Bankers Association outlined a proposal this week to
reform the US mortgage agencies to prevent a repeat of the liquidity crisis that
afflicted the agency bond market last year.


Under the MBA plan, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would be replaced by a variety of
new, privately owned mortgage credit guarantor entities (MCGEs). The MCGEs,
which would be regulated on a utility basis for a "conservative" return on
equity and high capitalisation, would provide loan level guarantees for the
securities they issue but would not be allowed to hold large portfolios of
mortgages or securities on their balance sheet.

On top of these guarantees, a government insurance fund would provide a security
level guarantee on principal and interest, funded by risk-based fees.

Eligible loans would be "core" mortgage products, similar to those currently
eligible for funding through the government sponsored entities. Both single
family and multi-family homes would be covered, if the loans met the
underwriting guidelines.

The MBA emphasises that the mandate of the MCGEs should be restricted to
ensuring secondary mortgage market liquidity, with any social housing policy
role given to government bodies such as Ginnie Mae or the Federal Housing
Association.

"There are three super-high level and critical underlying pieces of our
recommendations for the industry," said Rick Jones, a partner at Dechert, who is
a member of the MBA's Council on Ensuring Mortgage Liquidity.

"Number one - these are not portfolio players. They are not holding vast
portfolios of paper. This is in some ways the most important. [Fannie and
Freddie] were gigantic regulatory rogue elephants on the landscape, with huge
unhedged positions that were off the banking regulatory ranch...

"The second thing is that these new enterprises should not be charged with a
dual, conflicting charter obligation of encouraging housing while making money.
The third is that there should be more than one and less than a hundred of these
things. The current enterprises should go, and we should encourage the
development of public/private structures where credit is guaranteed at a private
level and there is ultimately a government wrapper. It's hard to see the world
without a government wrapper at the moment."

The combination of private sector loan guarantees and a government security
guarantee is designed to maximise investor confidence while minimising the risk
to the government.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EUROW


              Copyright 2009 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              288 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               September 9, 1996

Broad Array of Debt Comes to Market

SECTION: SECURITIZATION; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: New York


A broad variety of mortgage-related debt, mortgage-backed and tax-exempt issues
have come to market or received new ratings.

The Federal Home Loan Banks sold $ 100 million of non-callable bonds due Sept.
30, 1997 at a yield of 5.98% through a Merrill Lynch underwriting.

The FHLB System also sold $ 150 million of bonds due Sept. 19, 1997 that are
non-callable for three months at a yield of 6.21% through HSBC Securities Inc.

Freddie Mac sold $ 125 million of callable pass-through certificates through
Morgan Stanley.  The collateral is 30-year, 8% coupon loans.

Freddie Mac also sold $ 150 million in callable pass-throughs offered by
PaineWebber Inc. and $ 150 million in a real estate mortgage investment conduit
through Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.

Merrill Lynch Credit Corp., a special purpose vehicle, sold $ 318.5 million of
global mortgage loans priced to yield 38 basis points above Libor.  The final
maturity is 2021.  The certificates were rated AAA because of 100% coverage by
AMBAC Indemnity Corp.

New York Mortgage Agency sold $ 75 million of mortgage revenue bonds through an
underwriting managed by Merrill Lynch.  Goldman, Sachs & Co. managed the sale of
$ 65 million in single-family mortgage bonds for the Alabama Housing Finance
Agency and Goldman also completed a $ 55 million sale for the Tennessee Housing
Development Agency.

The Federal Home Loan Banks sold $ 125 million of two-year bonds through a J.P.
Morgan & Co.-led underwriting group.  The bonds, priced to yield 6.44% and are
non-callable.

Feddie Mac sold two Remic issues $ 200 million through Donaldson, Lufkin &
Jenrette and $ 250 million through Smith, Barney & Co. The DLJ issue is
collateralized by issues from Rmic C23, backed by strip trust 178.  The Smith,
Barney offering in series 1889 is backed by 7.5% coupon mortgage securities.

The Federal Home Loan Bank System sold $ 100 million of one-year, non-callable
bonds through CS First Boston Inc., priced to yield 5.88%.

The New York State Mortgage Agency has scheduled $ 90 million in bonds through a
group headed by Merrill Lynch & Co.

GE Capital Mortgage Services Inc. $ 398.1 million mortgage pass-through
certificates, series 1996-13, classes A (class A 1 through A18).  R and RL
(senior certificates) were rated AAA by Fitch Investors Service.  In addition,
classes M ($ 7.4 million), B1 ($ 5.3 million) and B2 ($ 5.3 million) are rated
AA, A and BBB, respectively.

Green Tree Financial Corp.'s manufactured housing contract pass-through
certificates Series 1996-7 $ 405.6 million classes A-1 through A-6 (senior
certificates) were rated AAA by Fitch.

Additionally, the $ 38.4 million class M-1 were rated AA minus, $ 19.2 million
class B-1 were rated BBB plus and $ 16.8 million class B-2 were rated A.

The ratings for classes A-1 through A-6, M-1 and B-1 are based upon the quality
of the manufactured housing contracts, the respective levels of credit
enhancement, the integrity of the legal and financial structure and Green Tree's
servicing capabilities.

Class B-2's rating addresses Green Tree's ability to make payments under the
limited guarantee.

What's New on The Street?

Federal Home Loan Banks

* Sold $ 100 million of non-callable bonds at a yield of 5.98% through a Merrill
Lynch underwriting.

* Sold $ 125 million of twoyear bonds through a J.P. Morgan-led underwriting
group, priced to yield 6.44% and are non-callable.

Freddie mac

* Freddie Mac sold $ 125 million of callable pass-through certificates through
Morgan Stanley Collateral is 30 years, 8% coupon loans.

* Sold two Remic issues $ 200 million through DLJ, and $ 250 million through
Smith Barney.

Merrill Lynch Credit Corp.

* Sold a $ 318.5 million global mortgage loans priced to yield 38 basis points
above Libor.

New York Mortgage Agency

* Sold $ 75 million of mortgage revenue bonds through an underwriting managed by
Merrill Lynch.

GE Capital Mortgage Services Inc.

* It's $ 398.1 million mortgage pass-through certificates, series 1996-13,
classes A. R and RL were rated AAA by Fitch Investors Service.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1996 Faulkner & Gray


                              289 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            August 8, 2013 Thursday

Phasing out mortgage giants may create hurdles

BYLINE: JOHN HIELSCHER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1098 words


HOME BUYING: Plan could result in higher interest rates and larger required down
payments

Home buyers could be squeezed by higher interest rates and need larger down
payments if Congress agrees with an Obama administration plan to phase out
mortgage-guarantee giants Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae.

Southwest Florida lenders, home builders, real estate agents and other housing
industry participants agree on the need to reform the nation's housing finance
system, of which the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corp. are a large part.

But most echo national sentiments that the federal government needs to continue
to play some role as a backstop going forward.

In the short term, proposals to shut down Freddie and Fannie -- rescued by a
$187 billion taxpayer bailout during the late 2000s financial crisis -- could
spark more home buying and refinancing in Southwest Florida and elsewhere by
consumers trying to beat new regulations.

"It could cause a rush of buyers now trying to qualify for FHA financing, where
you can still get a loan with 3.5 percent down," said Jack McCabe, a real estate
consultant in Deerfield Beach. "It could boost home sales now, like when we've
seen interest rates rise and people get off the fence to buy."

But if more mortgage financing risk is shifted from the government to the
private sector -- as would likely occur under the proposal -- that could result
in required down payments of 20 percent or more.

If that occurs, some first-time and middle-class buyers could be priced out of
the housing market, experts say.

"If we have to rely on private industry solely for mortgage funding, then the
cost of acquiring a mortgage is going to increase because they are going to want
to increase their bottom lines," McCabe said.

Mixed opinions

That could significantly impact the real estate recovery in Southwest Florida,
even though hedge funds, baby boomers and retirees are currently paying cash for
at least half of all existing single-family home sales.

But others maintain that even scrapping Fannie and Freddie would not derail the
industry's regional rebound.

Leslie Swart, owner of Blue Skye Lending in Lakewood Ranch, said privatizing the
mortgage market should not stall Southwest Florida's real estate recovery.

"Our biggest problem right now is the same thing that has boosted values so
quickly over the past year -- lack of inventory," she said.

But Swart also believes the government needs to act. The price of doing nothing
could be costly, as well.

To that end, if the federal government does not lift restrictive lending
regulations to encourage the investor market, interest rates could increase and
affect home sales, Swart said.

"The rising rates may cause some homeowners who already live here to just stay
put vs. upsizing or downsizing," she said. "If my current home is at 3.5
percent, and buying a new home means my rate will be at 6 percent, I may just
decide to fix up the home I am in now.

"That is not to say that sales will dry up," Swart said. "There will be some
that want to move despite the rate and, of course, we still have our empty
nesters moving here to escape the cold weather."

Alan Anderson, executive vice president of the Home Builders Association
Manatee-Sarasota, agrees the time has come to wind down Freddie and Fannie.

But if that were to happen too abruptly, he believes, private lenders might
increase interest rates higher and faster than borrowers can handle.

"Even though the housing market recovery looks good, there are still some
fragile pieces to it," he said. "Taking it slow with this concept is what we'd
like to see."

Presidential support

This week, President Barack Obama threw his support toward a dormant
Congressional effort to overhaul the nation's mortgage finance system.

Obama said he backs changes that appear generally in a Senate plan that would
close Fannie and Freddie in five years. Even so, there would be a continued --
albeit more limited role -- for government in insuring mortgage securities.

One of the goals of shifting mortgage financing to the private sector is to
prevent taxpayers from having to pay for future bailouts.

But mortgage borrowers would still pay a price. Current estimates say interest
payments could rise from $75 per month under the Senate plan to $135 per month
in the House proposal, both based on a $200,000, 30-year loan requiring 20
percent down.

"It will mean higher mortgage rates. The question is how much higher," said Mark
Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics.

But that could be a boon to local and regional lenders.

Insignia Bank of Sarasota CEO Charlie Brown III said community banks like his
would likely get additional business during the shift to more private guarantees
.

"More loans through the transition will be moved to community banks that are
portfolio lenders. We customize our loan program and products to the market,"
Brown said.

He took issue with Obama's comments that too many potential borrowers were being
turned down for mortgages, after complaining that big banks were too liberal in
their lending.

The government-sponsored Fannie and Freddie, which include the Federal Housing
Administration, now back nearly 90 percent of new mortgage loans. Prior to the
financial crisis of 2008, that figure was less than 40 percent, according to
reports.

Fannie and Freddie buy mortgages from lenders, package them as bonds, guarantee
them against default and sell them to investors.

That helps banks move risk off their balance sheets and, in turn, frees up more
money to lend.

Like the local home builders group, the Sarasota Association of Realtors
believes measured change is necessary.

It supports its national parent's position, which includes some government
guarantee to protect the availability of 30- and 15-year fixed-rate loans.

"In a fully privatized market, many middle-class Americans and individuals on
fixed incomes would be unable to access affordable credit or be forced into
adjustable-rate mortgages pinned to interest rate variations after a limited
term," said Gary Thomas, president of the National Association of Realtors.

"These homeowners, faced with potentially dramatic rate increases, could
experience payment shocks that rattle their financial stability, which also
impacts mortgage markets and the greater economy."

Roger Piro, president of the Sarasota Association of Realtors, said he is
waiting for more details on the proposal.

"President Obama outlined a concept which has not yet evolved into an actual
plan," Piro said. "We won't speculate on outcomes because there is no firm plan
to evaluate."

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              290 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Treasury Asks Delay In Arbitrage Curbs On IDBs Until Jan. 1

                          February 22, 1984, Wednesday

By Craig T. Ferris

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 21


The Treasury urged Congress today to delay the proposed stringent curbs on
arbitrage profits from ''private-purpose'' industrial development bonds for one
year, until next Jan. 1.

However, the Treasury also proposed a one-year speed-up in the proposed
arbitrage curbs on student loan bonds that also would make those restrictions
effective next Jan. 1. And the Treasury asked for several other tight curbs on
arbitrage profits from IDBs and student loan bonds.

The Treasury did not ask for a delay of the effective date of Jan. 1, 1984, for
most of the provisions in the House Ways and Means Committee's pending bill,
including the $150-per-person state volume cap on most IDBs.

The Treasury proposed the changes in the effective dates for the arbitrage
limits as the Reagan administration sent its detailed proposals for curbing
private-purpose tax-exempt bonds to Capitol Hill. Private-purpose bonds are
those in which the proceeds or a major part of the benefits go to a company or
individual.

The Treasury proposed the following changes that would further restrict revenue
bonds:

§A ban on direct or indirect federal guarantees of multifamily housing bonds
issued after March 31 by the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or the Government National Mortgage Association.

§A requirement that any excess arbitrage profits on private-purpose IDBs and
student loan bonds be paid to the Treasury, rather than passed on to those
receiving the bond financing.

§A provision that would cut allowable arbitrage profits on student loan bonds by
requiring that federal interest subsidy payments be included in calculating the
yield on the bonds.

The Treasury's proposals, which were broader than those hinted at two weeks ago,
generally represent a refinement of the House Ways and Means Committee's
proposal to restrict the use of private-purpose bonds, including that panel's
plan to extend the existing arbitrage rules on single-family mortgage bonds to
IDBs and student loan bonds.

The plan generally would lower the allowable arbitrage on IDBs and student loan
bonds to 1 1/8% from 1 1/2%.

Despite the changes proposed in the arbitrage and federal guarantee provisions,
the Treasury's latest plan remains solidly behind the Ways and Means panel's
overall proposal to put a $150-per-person state volume limit on most IDBs and to
put specific new curbs on both small-issue and so-called exempt-issue IDBs.

The decision to delay the effective date of the proposed IDB arbitrage limits
until next Jan. 1 was made to prevent the market from coming to a halt while
Congress acts on the IDB proposals, a Treasury official said today.

The delay would also give the Treasury ample time to issue its regulations
governing the new limits if Congress eventually approves them, said Robert
Woodward, the Treasury's chief tax counsel. He also noted that the delay would
give bond counsel time to adjust to the changes.

Although Mr. Woodward said two weeks ago that the Treasury might delay the
effective date of the proposed arbitrage curbs only until the its revised
proposal was released, he said the much longer delay was proposed to prevent the
plan from ''hanging over existing bond deals. This will give issuers added time
to do deals, allow bond counsel time to figure out what the curbs will mean, and
give the Treasury time to write its regulations.''

However, he said, the Treasury proposed the one-year speed-up in the arbitrage
curbs on student loan bonds because the current rules ''allow a significant
arbitrage profit-making opportunity that is leading to dramatic increases in
volume.''

Although the Ways and Means bill exempts multifamily housing bonds from most of
the proposed curbs on federal guarantees on IDBs, Mr. Woodward said the proposed
ban on backing by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae as of this April 1 was
made to prevent an explosion in the use of those guarantees.

''Fannie Mae is already quite active in this area, and we are concerned that
backing by these agencies could trigger a large volume of bonds,'' he said.

The Treasury official said the proposal to require that excess arbitrage profits
from student loan bonds and IDBs - other than multifamily bonds - be turned over
to the Treasury is designed to prevent any added benefit from going to the users
of the bonds.

Under the current arbitrage rules for single-family mortgage bonds, excess
arbitrage profits can be used to lower the mortgage rate or can be turned over
to the Treasury.

Mr. Woodward also said the proposal to require that federal interest subsidy
payments be included in calculating the yield on student loan bonds was made to
cut the amount of arbitrage profit an issuer would be allowed to make.

Another Treasury official, who asked not to be identified, said the proposal was
made to make student loan bonds ''the same as other tax-exempt bonds.''

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 824 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1984 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              291 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                          September 13, 2008 Saturday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

Builders dig in to survive crisis;
CITY AND BUSINESS EDITED BY STEPHEN KAHN - Battered industry is fighting to
attract homebuyers, writes Peter Cunliffe

BYLINE: Peter Cunliffe

SECTION: CITY; 85

LENGTH: 458  words


BRITAIN'S housebuilders have been taking a severe battering since the credit
crunch struck a y ear ago but the good news for buyers is that they are fighting
back.

Faced with a sales drought, construction firms are slashing costs and offering
generous deals to customers to kick-start demand.

Barratt Developments this week unveiled one of the industry's most ambitious
incentive packages, including a price guarantee. Buyers who complete before
Christmas will be in line for a refund of up to 15 per cent of the value of
their home if they come to sell within three years and the price has fallen.

Other offers from Barratt - led by former British Gas executive Mark Clare -
include part-exchange deals, no stamp duty on homes up to GBP 500,000 and free
legal fees.

Visitors to rivals' sites will find similar deals available as builders adapt to
the dramatic changes in trading conditions. One analyst said: "They need to
think of new ways to reach out to customers who are feeling cash-strapped."
Builders report reasonably strong visitor numbers to their sites but the big
problem is the crisis in the financial sector. This triggered the near-collapse
of Northern Rock last September and has left a drought in the mortgage market.

Many buyers are keen to buy a new home only to find they cannot find a loan or
that the deposit required is out of their reach.

Richard Hunter, head of UK Equities at Hargreaves Lansdown Stockbrokers, said:
"The problem is not of the housebuilders' making.

The credit crunch means banks are unwilling to lend to each other, never mind
the man in the street.

"The builders are turning to self help. It will come at a cost to the companies
but they need the cashflow.

"It will help a little but the wider market won't improve until there is a
turning point, such as an interest rate cut or Government help." Builders'
shares slumped to a low point in July but have since recovered in response to
cost-cutting plans and continued support from the banks.

For instance, Barratt dived from 899p last year to as low as 34p, while
Persimmon fell as low as 208p from 1109p, and Taylor Wimpey hit 22p, against
346p. Broker UBS recently increased its price targets across the sector. It
raised Barratt (at 145 dp last night) from 71p to 157p, Persimmon (now 400 dp)
from 295p to 375p and Taylor Wimpey (now 54p) from 38p to 57p.

Analysts think interest rates could come down this month from the current 5 per
cent, possibly falling as low as 3.5 per cent in 2009.

And following the US bail-out of mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in
the US, the industry is also pressing for more government help to unfreeze
lending.

In the meantime, builders are doing all they can to persuade people to cross the
threshold of their show homes.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 XPRESS - Al Nisr Media FZ LLC
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              292 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             May 22, 2014 Thursday
                                Regional Edition

Fixed and broken

BYLINE: Charles Lane

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 835 words


Today's subject is housing, and as part of my research I've been going through
the U.S. Constitution, looking for the exact words that guarantee Americans
access to a 30-year, fixed-rate home mortgage.

I haven't found the provision yet, but it must be in there somewhere: As
everyone knows from listening to the debate over fixing our damaged housing
finance system, the long-term fixed, or FRM for short, is as essential to
America as free speech or the right to a jury trial.

President Obama, leading Republicans and Democrats on the Senate Banking
Committee, the top Republican on the House Financial Services Committee, the
mortgage bankers' lobby  and affordable-housing advocates all have pledged that,
whatever else happens in housing reform, we must protect the FRM.

"Across the world, homeownership is too often reserved for the well-off," Sen.
Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) declared last October. "But in America, thanks to
lower down-payment requirements and the prevalence of the 30-year fixed
mortgage, homeownership is widely accessible."

Moistens my patriot's eyes. Still, I admit that my difficulty, thus far, in
locating the FRM clause has started me thinking: What if the FRM is not actually
in the Constitution - or even a very sound idea? What if this country has
actually paid dearly, financially and socially, to perpetuate it?

Every home loan carries credit risk - the risk of borrower default - and
interest-rate risk - the risk that rates will go up during the life of the loan.

Lenders manage credit risk by reviewing customers' finances and requiring down
payments. They can manage interest-rate risk through such devices as
adjustable-rate loans, whose rates can go up at predetermined intervals, and
prepayment penalties, which discourage borrowers from refinancing when rates
fall.

Such provisions were common in U.S. mortgages until the Great Depression more or
less destroyed the single-family housing market - and paved the way for federal
interventions, from the Federal Housing Administration to Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac, the consistent feature of which was support for the long-term, fixed-rate
loan. Today, more than 90 percent of all U.S. mortgages take that form .

Unlike prewar mortgages, the FRM offered a simple-to-understand loan whose
monthly payment and other terms never varied, unless it was to the borrower's
advantage - that is, unless rates went down and the borrower refinanced, which
he or she could usually do without a penalty.

No wonder people liked it. Rates go up and down a lot over 30 years, but the FRM
left all the interest-rate risk with lenders. In theory, that would have driven
them out of business, but in practice the government enabled mortgage lenders to
package home loans into securities and sell them to agencies such as Fannie and
Freddie, which were "government-sponsored" and thus implicitly
taxpayer-guaranteed.

Fannie and Freddie raised funds by selling their debt to investors, who
considered it safe since home prices always rise (or so it was believed) and
because the government implicitly stood behind Fannie and Freddie.

All was well - except that the system was steadily, but not transparently,
shifting credit and interest-rate risk associated with millions of FRMs to
government, i.e., taxpayers. The bailout of Fan and Fred cost $187 billion.

We don't have much to show for all this drama. The U.S. homeownership rate
peaked at 68.9 percent in 2006; now it's 64.8 percent, a mere 0.9 percent higher
than it was in 1965, according to the Census Bureau. And it's still dropping.

Contrary to advocates' descriptions of the 30-year FRM as a "plain vanilla"
loan, it is actually quite "exotic" in comparative terms: With the partial
exception of tiny Denmark, no other developed nation bases its housing finance
system on a long-term FRM.

In Canada and Europe, the typical instrument is a medium-term adjustable-rate
mortgage with a prepayment penalty. Banks, not investors in securities, provide
funding. (In Australia, 92 percent of all home loans are ARMs.) Notably, these
are not "subprime" loans, as many ARMs were during the U.S. housing bubble;
lenders, watched by regulators, enforce strict down-payment requirements and
other credit risk-reduction measures.

Credit risk and interest-rate risk are more transparent and, crucially, shared
by lenders and borrowers, not taxpayers. Contrary to Warren's claim, such
systems have produced homeownership rates comparable to those in the United
States. Britain, Canada and Australia hit nearly 70 percent homeownership in
recent years, according to economist              Michael Lea of San Diego State
University.

In other countries, apparently, homeownership isn't seen as a middle-class
entitlement program, nor do government planners dictate a one-size-fits-all home
loan. The business is left up to mature adults, one with money to lend and
another with the intention and capability to use the funds sustainably.

But that would never work in America. This is a free country!

lanec@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              293 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                               May 6, 2016 Friday

As Investment Portfolio Dwindles, Fannie Looks Elsewhere for Growth

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: LAW & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 87

LENGTH: 615  words


WASHINGTON - Fannie Mae's investment portfolio - once the source of a bulk of
its revenues - continued its rapid decline in the first quarter, but executives
said they are comfortable focusing on other areas for growth going forward.

The government-sponsored enterprise's holdings of mortgage-backed securities and
other mortgage-income producing assets fell to below $200 billion.

"Today we have wound down the investment portfolio from a historic high of $900
billion to less than $200 billion with further reductions underway," said
Timothy Mayopoulos, the GSE's chief executive, during an earnings conference
call Thursday.

While profitable, reliance on these investments made the company's earnings
volatile, subject to the ups and down of interest rates and hedging strategies.
Going forward, Fannie will be relying more on loan guarantee fee income from its
single-family and multifamily businesses.

"It is a stable source of revenue and much less subject to interest rate and
market volatility," Mayopoulos told reporters.

Fannie generated $3.2 billion in single-family guarantee income in the first
quarter of 2016 and fourth quarter of 2015. Multifamily guarantee income totaled
$333 million in both quarters.

Overall, Fannie's single-family business posted net income of $2.4 billion in
the first quarter, compared to a $464 million loss by its capital markets
business, which reflects the GSE's investment portfolio results.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency hiked Fannie and Freddie Mac's single-family
guarantee fees in 2012 and now a large portion of its single-family portfolios
are benefiting from the higher fees.

"Approximately 85% of our loans are 15- and 30-year fixed rate loans,"
Mayopoulos said. "These mortgages remain the loan of choice of the vast majority
of homebuyers."

Overall, Fannie Mae posted $1.1 billion in net income for the first quarter,
compared to net income of $1.9 billion in the first quarter of 2015. Despite a
shift in revenue sources, Mayopoulos said he expects Fannie will "remain
profitable on an annual basis for the foreseeable future."

Freddie Mac issued its earnings on Tuesday and reported a $200 million loss.
This loss raised concerns that the reduction in the investment portfolios and
the new emphasis on risk sharing transactions will reduce the GSEs' earnings
potential. In addition, the both GSEs are in conservatorships and
undercapitalized for their size.

Fannie has a net worth of $2.1 billion, compared to Freddie's $1 billion.

When asked about Fannie's capital cushion, Mayopoulos noted that the GSEs have a
line of credit with the U.S. Treasury.

"We try to keep credit standards high so as to minimize losses. We have been
aggressive in addressing loss mitigation when loans go delinquent," he added.

The serious delinquency rate (90 days or more past due) on Fannie loans has been
declining since 2010. Its $2.8 trillion single-family loan guarantee portfolio
had a 1.44% serious delinquency rate as of March 31 and 55% of its delinquent
loans were originated in 2005 through 2008.

During the conference call, Mayopoulos also stressed Fannie's commitment to
credit risk transfers.

"We are moving from being a company that stores credit risk to being one that
also matches credit risk by intelligently distributing it other market
participants. We do this through capital market transactions, reinsurance
transactions and other types of transactions," he said.

Over the past two years, Fannie has sold a portion of the credit risk on $590
billion of single-family loans, which represents 18% of its single-family
guarantee portfolio. Those investors are taking a portion of the first loss
portion and receive a share of the guarantee fees.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              294 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                                  May 5, 2016

As Investment Portfolio Dwindles, Fannie Looks Elsewhere for Growth

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: SECONDARY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 615  words


WASHINGTON - Fannie Mae's investment portfolio - once the source of a bulk of
its revenues - continued its rapid decline in the first quarter, but executives
said they are comfortable focusing on other areas for growth going forward.

The government-sponsored enterprise's holdings of mortgage-backed securities and
other mortgage-income producing assets fell to below $200 billion.

"Today we have wound down the investment portfolio from a historic high of $900
billion to less than $200 billion with further reductions underway," said
Timothy Mayopoulos, the GSE's chief executive, during an earnings conference
call Thursday.

While profitable, reliance on these investments made the company's earnings
volatile, subject to the ups and down of interest rates and hedging strategies.
Going forward, Fannie will be relying more on loan guarantee fee income from its
single-family and multifamily businesses.

"It is a stable source of revenue and much less subject to interest rate and
market volatility," Mayopoulos told reporters.

Fannie generated $3.2 billion in single-family guarantee income in the first
quarter of 2016 and fourth quarter of 2015. Multifamily guarantee income totaled
$333 million in both quarters.

Overall, Fannie's single-family business posted net income of $2.4 billion in
the first quarter, compared to a $464 million loss by its capital markets
business, which reflects the GSE's investment portfolio results.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency hiked Fannie and Freddie Mac's single-family
guarantee fees in 2012 and now a large portion of its single-family portfolios
are benefiting from the higher fees.

"Approximately 85% of our loans are 15- and 30-year fixed rate loans,"
Mayopoulos said. "These mortgages remain the loan of choice of the vast majority
of homebuyers."

Overall, Fannie Mae posted $1.1 billion in net income for the first quarter,
compared to net income of $1.9 billion in the first quarter of 2015. Despite a
shift in revenue sources, Mayopoulos said he expects Fannie will "remain
profitable on an annual basis for the foreseeable future."

Freddie Mac issued its earnings on Tuesday and reported a $200 million loss.
This loss raised concerns that the reduction in the investment portfolios and
the new emphasis on risk sharing transactions will reduce the GSEs' earnings
potential. In addition, the both GSEs are in conservatorships and
undercapitalized for their size.

Fannie has a net worth of $2.1 billion, compared to Freddie's $1 billion.

When asked about Fannie's capital cushion, Mayopoulos noted that the GSEs have a
line of credit with the U.S. Treasury.

"We try to keep credit standards high so as to minimize losses. We have been
aggressive in addressing loss mitigation when loans go delinquent," he added.

The serious delinquency rate (90 days or more past due) on Fannie loans has been
declining since 2010. Its $2.8 trillion single-family loan guarantee portfolio
had a 1.44% serious delinquency rate as of March 31 and 55% of its delinquent
loans were originated in 2005 through 2008.

During the conference call, Mayopoulos also stressed Fannie's commitment to
credit risk transfers.

"We are moving from being a company that stores credit risk to being one that
also matches credit risk by intelligently distributing it other market
participants. We do this through capital market transactions, reinsurance
transactions and other types of transactions," he said.

Over the past two years, Fannie has sold a portion of the credit risk on $590
billion of single-family loans, which represents 18% of its single-family
guarantee portfolio. Those investors are taking a portion of the first loss
portion and receive a share of the guarantee fees.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              295 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                          November 23, 2016 Wednesday

Sonoma County homebuyers receive good news on Fannie, Freddie loans

BYLINE: Bill Swindell, The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 385 words


Nov. 23--The Federal Housing Finance Agency on Wednesday announced an increase
in home mortgage loan limits that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will guarantee, one
that will benefit local homebuyers in 2017.

In Sonoma County, the agency increased the loan limit for a single-family
mortgage by 7.5 percent to $595,700 from $554,300.

The boost will aid buyers because loans insured under Fannie and Freddie come
with a lower interest rate, given they are backed by the federal government
rather than the private marketplace. The two businesses, which originated as
government-sponsored enterprises, were placed into conservatorship by the FHFA
in 2008 during the financial crisis.

The increase for next year is timed well to keep pace with the local market. The
median price for a single-family home in Sonoma County was $595,000 last month,
which is a 1 percent decrease from September, according to statistics compiled
by Pacific Union International senior vice president Rick Laws.

In Napa and Marin counties, the loan limit will increase from $625,500 to
$636,150, the maximum amount that will be covered by Fannie and Freddie. That
level also applies to high-priced areas such as San Francisco, Alameda and
Contra Costa counties.

Nationwide, the agency bumped up its maximum loan limit from $417,000 to
$424,100, the first time the baseline has increased since the housing crisis.
That will be a benefit to buyers in Mendocino and Lake counties.

Besides the lower interest rates for loans that conform within the new limits,
it will also help buyers who are struggling to come up with a down payment, said
Otto Kobler, branch manager of Summit Funding Inc. in Santa Rosa.

Those who can't qualify for Fannie or Freddie-backed loan are left to go find a
mortgage in the jumbo market. The problem is that a down payment in the jumbo
market is about 10 percent because of more risk assumed by investors, compared
to 5 percent under loans backed by the federal government.

"That's a big deal," Kobler said. "That's make or break for people."

You can reach Staff Writer Bill Swindell at 707-521-5223 or
bill.swindell@pressdemocrat.com On Twitter @BillSwindell.

___ (c)2016 The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) Visit The Press Democrat
(Santa Rosa, Calif.) at www.pressdemocrat.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20161123-UR-Sonoma-County-homebuyers-receive-good-news-on-Fannie-Freddie-loans-1
123-20161123

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UR


                       Copyright 2016 The Press Democrat


                              296 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             May 10, 2012 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

Fannie Mae reports profit of $2.7 billion

BYLINE: Brady Dennis

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 572 words


Mortgage giant Fannie Mae on Wednesday reported a $2.7 billionprofit during the
first three months of the year, saying it would not require additional taxpayer
aid for the first time since the government seized the troubled firm in 2008.

The company had reported a $2.4 billion loss the previous quarter and a $6.5
billion loss during the same period a year ago.

Fannie Mae attributed its positive numberslargely to improvements in the
nation's housing market, including stabilizing home prices, falling mortgage
delinquency rates and brisk sales of foreclosed homes.

In addition, the firm said that it plans to set aside fewer reserves against
potential lossesas the housing market beginsto heal and that it expects its
financial results in 2012 to be "significantly better" than last year.

"It's an indication of what the earnings power of the company is and can be in
the future and an indication that Fannie Mae has the potential to deliver alot
of value to the taxpayers," the firm's chief financial officer, Susan McFarland,
said of the first-quarter results in an interview.

Fannie Mae cleared enough profit during the quarter to make a $2.8 billion
dividend payment to the government and did not require another influx of
taxpayer funds to stay afloat. It was the first time that has been the case
since the financial crisis.

McFarland said there is no guarantee that the mortgagegiant will not have to ask
for more federal aid down the line, but she said the company seems to be close
to turning a corner and is posting solid operating profits on a more consistent
basis.

Fannie Mae has received about $116 billion in taxpayer funds since the
government put it into conservatorship 3â[#x20ac][#x160]Â½ years ago, while
returning about $23 billion to the government in dividends.

Freddie Mac, which also was rescued by a federal bailout, has received about $72
billion in aid during the same period, while returning about $18 billion to the
government.

Freddie Mac last week reported a first-quarter profit of $577 million but said
it would request an additional $19 million in taxpayer funds.

Together, Fannie and Freddie own or guarantee a majority of home loans in the
United States and have long been a key source of funding for the nation's
mortgage market. Their portfolios amount to about $5 trillion in assets.

Fannie Mae's first-quarter profits on Wednesday offered the latest sign that the
country's housing market is inching toward recovery - although many local
markets remain weak, many homeowners are struggling to keep up with their
payments and many foreclosures remain in the pipeline.

The National Association of Realtors reported Wednesday that sales of existing
single-family homes continued to improve during the first quarter, with prices
rising in roughly half of the nation's metropolitan areas. Inventories have
shrunk to more normal levels in many markets.

In addition, fewer homeowners have been falling into foreclosure. Permits for
new housing construction have surged. The confidence level among U.S. home
builders has remained at its highest point since 2007, and sales expectations
have continued to climb.

If the housing market continues to stabilize or even improve, that could mean
significant improvements to Fannie Mae's bottom line and good news for
taxpayers.

"It's a pretty simple cause and effect," McFarland said. "If housing gets
better, our financial performance gets better."

dennisb@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              297 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 6, 2014 Thursday

FORM 8-K: FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP FILES Current report

LENGTH: 733  words

DATELINE: Washington


FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP, Federally, has filed FORM 8-K (Current report)
with Securities and Exchange Commission on November 06, 2014

State or other Jurisdiction of Incorporation: Federally

Item 2.02. Results of Operations and Financial Condition.

On November 6, 2014, Freddie Mac (formally known as the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation) announced its results of operations for the quarter ended
September 30, 2014. A copy of the related press release for the quarter ended
September 30, 2014 is being filed as Exhibit 99.1 to this report and is
incorporated herein by reference. In addition, a copy of the Third Quarter 2014
Financial Results Supplement is being furnished as Exhibit 99.2 to this report
and is incorporated herein by reference.

Exhibit 99.1 submitted herewith shall be deemed to be "filed" for purposes of
Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.

Exhibit 99.2 submitted herewith shall not be deemed to be "filed" for purposes
of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or otherwise subject to
the liabilities of Section 18, nor shall it be deemed to be incorporated by
reference into any disclosure document relating to Freddie Mac, except to the
extent, if any, expressly set forth by specific reference in such document.

Item 9.01. Financial Statements and Exhibits.

(d) Exhibits.

The following exhibits are being filed or furnished as part of this Report on
Form 8-K:

Exhibit Number


Description of Exhibit


99.1
     Press release, dated November 6, 2014, issued by Freddie Mac

99.2
     Third Quarter 2014 Financial Results Supplement

FREDDIE MAC REPORTS NET INCOME OF $2.1 BILLION,

COMPREHENSIVE INCOME OF $2.8 BILLION FOR THIRD QUARTER 2014

Company to Return Additional $2.8 Billion to Taxpayers in Fourth Quarter

Single-family Seriously Delinquent Rate Hits Five Year Low

Third Quarter 2014 Financial Results
   --

Net income was $2.1 billion - the company's twelfth consecutive quarter of
positive earnings, compared to $1.4 billion in second quarter of 2014
   --

Comprehensive income was $2.8 billion, compared to $1.9 billion in second
quarter of 2014
   --

Third quarter financial results were primarily driven by the following
significant items:

¡     Higher net interest income of $3.7 billion versus $3.5 billion in second
quarter

¡     Lower derivative losses of $0.6 billion versus $1.9 billion in second
quarter

¡     Higher income from legal settlements on private-label securities of $1.2
billion versus $0.4 billion in second quarter

¡     A shift to credit provision of $0.6 billion from $0.6 billion credit
benefit in second quarter

Treasury Draws and Dividend Payments at September 30, 2014
   --

Based on September 30, 2014 net worth of $5.2 billion, the company's December
2014 dividend obligation will be $2.8 billion, bringing total cash dividends
paid to Treasury to $91.0 billion
   --

Senior preferred stock held by Treasury remains $72.3 billion, as dividend
payments do not reduce prior Treasury draws

Housing Market Support Since January 1, 2009
   --

Provided $2.4 trillion of liquidity to the mortgage market, including $201
billion in the first nine months of 2014

¡     8.1 million refinancings (nearly 439,000 in the first nine months of 2014)

¡     2.5 million home purchases (over 445,000 in the first nine months of 2014)

¡     1.8 million units of multifamily rental housing (nearly 214,000 in the
first nine months of 2014)
   --

Helped 1.0 million borrowers to avoid foreclosure (nearly 94,000 in the first
nine months of 2014)

Credit Quality at September 30, 2014
   --

Post-2008 book of business continued to grow and represented 58 percent of
single-family credit guarantee portfolio; HARP and other relief refinance loans
represented an additional 20 percent of that portfolio
   --

Delinquency rates remained below industry benchmarks:

¡     Single-family serious delinquency rate declined to 1.96 percent

¡     Multifamily delinquency rate was 0.03 percent
   --

Continued to shift mortgage credit risk to private capital markets through
innovative STACR®, ACISSM and K-deal offerings, transferring a significant
portion of credit risk on $266.1 billion of mortgages since the start of these
efforts through September 30, 2014

For more information please visit: http://www.sec.gov

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              298 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 6, 2014 Thursday

FORM 8-K: FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP FILES Current report

LENGTH: 733  words

DATELINE: Washington


FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP, Federally, has filed FORM 8-K (Current report)
with Securities and Exchange Commission on November 06, 2014

State or other Jurisdiction of Incorporation: Federally

Item 2.02. Results of Operations and Financial Condition.

On November 6, 2014, Freddie Mac (formally known as the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation) announced its results of operations for the quarter ended
September 30, 2014. A copy of the related press release for the quarter ended
September 30, 2014 is being filed as Exhibit 99.1 to this report and is
incorporated herein by reference. In addition, a copy of the Third Quarter 2014
Financial Results Supplement is being furnished as Exhibit 99.2 to this report
and is incorporated herein by reference.

Exhibit 99.1 submitted herewith shall be deemed to be "filed" for purposes of
Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.

Exhibit 99.2 submitted herewith shall not be deemed to be "filed" for purposes
of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or otherwise subject to
the liabilities of Section 18, nor shall it be deemed to be incorporated by
reference into any disclosure document relating to Freddie Mac, except to the
extent, if any, expressly set forth by specific reference in such document.

Item 9.01. Financial Statements and Exhibits.

(d) Exhibits.

The following exhibits are being filed or furnished as part of this Report on
Form 8-K:

Exhibit Number


Description of Exhibit


99.1
     Press release, dated November 6, 2014, issued by Freddie Mac

99.2
     Third Quarter 2014 Financial Results Supplement

FREDDIE MAC REPORTS NET INCOME OF $2.1 BILLION,

COMPREHENSIVE INCOME OF $2.8 BILLION FOR THIRD QUARTER 2014

Company to Return Additional $2.8 Billion to Taxpayers in Fourth Quarter

Single-family Seriously Delinquent Rate Hits Five Year Low

Third Quarter 2014 Financial Results
   --

Net income was $2.1 billion - the company's twelfth consecutive quarter of
positive earnings, compared to $1.4 billion in second quarter of 2014
   --

Comprehensive income was $2.8 billion, compared to $1.9 billion in second
quarter of 2014
   --

Third quarter financial results were primarily driven by the following
significant items:

¡     Higher net interest income of $3.7 billion versus $3.5 billion in second
quarter

¡     Lower derivative losses of $0.6 billion versus $1.9 billion in second
quarter

¡     Higher income from legal settlements on private-label securities of $1.2
billion versus $0.4 billion in second quarter

¡     A shift to credit provision of $0.6 billion from $0.6 billion credit
benefit in second quarter

Treasury Draws and Dividend Payments at September 30, 2014
   --

Based on September 30, 2014 net worth of $5.2 billion, the company's December
2014 dividend obligation will be $2.8 billion, bringing total cash dividends
paid to Treasury to $91.0 billion
   --

Senior preferred stock held by Treasury remains $72.3 billion, as dividend
payments do not reduce prior Treasury draws

Housing Market Support Since January 1, 2009
   --

Provided $2.4 trillion of liquidity to the mortgage market, including $201
billion in the first nine months of 2014

¡     8.1 million refinancings (nearly 439,000 in the first nine months of 2014)

¡     2.5 million home purchases (over 445,000 in the first nine months of 2014)

¡     1.8 million units of multifamily rental housing (nearly 214,000 in the
first nine months of 2014)
   --

Helped 1.0 million borrowers to avoid foreclosure (nearly 94,000 in the first
nine months of 2014)

Credit Quality at September 30, 2014
   --

Post-2008 book of business continued to grow and represented 58 percent of
single-family credit guarantee portfolio; HARP and other relief refinance loans
represented an additional 20 percent of that portfolio
   --

Delinquency rates remained below industry benchmarks:

¡     Single-family serious delinquency rate declined to 1.96 percent

¡     Multifamily delinquency rate was 0.03 percent
   --

Continued to shift mortgage credit risk to private capital markets through
innovative STACR®, ACISSM and K-deal offerings, transferring a significant
portion of credit risk on $266.1 billion of mortgages since the start of these
efforts through September 30, 2014

For more information please visit: http://www.sec.gov

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              299 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                January 24, 1994

FHA, VA Activity Surges 64% for 1993

BYLINE: TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 453 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The government's two major mortgage insurance programs saw a 64% surge in
business during 1993, reflecting low interest rates that brought first-time
buyers to the market.

Together, the FHA and VA insured $ 120.7 billion in residential mortgage loans
in 1993, compared with $ 73.5 billion in 1992.

The Federal Housing Administration broke the one million loan mark, insuring
1.07 million loans with a total volume of $ 79.1 billion in calendar 1993.

The Department of Veterans Affairs home loan program guaranteed 458,000 loans in
1993 with a total loan balance of $ 41.6 billion.  Refinancing activity
accounted for $ 18.8 billion of the VA total.

Both the FHA and VA single-family mortgage programs, which allow private lenders
to originate loans with a government guarantee, saw substantial increases over
their 1992 volume, especially in the second half of last year.

In 1992, the FHA insured 680,000 loans with a total principal balance of $ 48.3
billion.  The VA insured 290,000 loans with a total balance of $ 25.2 billion in
1992.

Congress in 1992 revised FHA underwriting to reduce the amount of closing costs
that borrowers must pay upfront.  In addition, earlier legislation gradually has
reduced the upfront mortgage insurance premium that FHA home buyers must pay.

Currently, the upfront premium is 3% of the loan and will drop to 2.25% next
October.  FHA home buyers also pay an annual premium built into the monthly
payment.

Congress also expanded eligibility for the VA home loan program by opening it to
members of the National Guard and National Reserve.

However, an aging population of veterans and a declining pool of active-duty
service persons means there are fewer potential buyers among the groups most
accustomed to using the VA programs.

In recent years, the government programs, particularly the FHA, have lost market
share to conventional loans.

Forrest Pafenberg, an economist with the National Association of Realtors, said
that trend may continue despite the Clinton Administration's effort to
revitalize the FHA.

"The product still is priced higher than the conventional market," Mr. Pafenberg
said.

Private mortgage insurers have begun targeting their products at first-time and
moderate-income home buyers, making conventional financing more competitive with
the FHA.

In addition, administrative requirements still hamper the FHA, he said.  The
FHA's two-part calculation of equity requirements can make it difficult to
determine if borrowers will qualify for the FHA.

As result, borrowers who can qualify for conventional financing are often
steered in that direction.

"There still are significant bottlenecks which need to be eliminated," Mr.
Pafenberg said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, Title Search Activity, DJ Telerate data (Released Tuesdays 4 pm
EST), Title search activity, a barometer of mortgage-lending activity, fell
21.8% in the week ended Jan. 7, according to Dow Jones Telerate. The index stood
at 141.6 in the latest week down from 181.0 a week earlier. The peak in the
title-search measure was in the Sept. 17 week at 311.5, according to the Title
Search Index produced by the Mortgage Securities division of Dow Jones Telerate.

                   Copyright 1994 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              300 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               September 13, 1993

Labor, Agencies Act on Multifamily

BYLINE: By CATHY ASATO

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: HOMESTEAD, Fla.


President Bill Clinton, in a Labor Day address here, announced a $ 660 million
multifamily housing effort financed by the pension plans of the nation's labor
movement.

The AFL-CIO Housing Investment Trust and the Building Investment will invest $
660 million in eligible housing and economic development projects in 30 cities
over the next five years.

The program aims to build 12,000 affordable housing units and create 15,000 new
jobs in construction and related industries, in addition to producing one
million square feet of job-creating commercial activity.

Other private and public sources have contributed $ 550 million.

The Federal National Mortgage Association and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
will securities the loans.  Fannie Mae will securitize $ 400 million of the
programs and already has done about $ 50 million.

Freddie Mac will launch its efforts with a 59.5 million loan purchase which
provides permanent financing for 328 recently renovated apartments in Opa-Locka,
Fla.

The innovated $ 1.2 billion program, called National Partnership for Community
Investment, undertaken by the AFL-CIO and the Clinton Administration seeks to
establish an on-going framework to facilitate secure pension fund investment in
affordable housing and economic development through the creation of jobs in
American cities.

The AFL-CIO, supported by the two agencies, will rebuild and create affordable
housing across the country, with a significant percentage, approximately 20%,
going to regions which have been struck by hurricanes or the Mid West
communities devastated by the floods, the President said.

"This is the kind of thing we ought to be doing together.  The government can
guarantee the security of the pension funds.  The unions can put up those
pension funds to invest in houses.  The Labor Department can help to provide the
funds to train people," Mr Clinton said.

"We'll have more houses, more investment, more jobs, and a better America
starting right here in this community," he said.

Dennis Beal, public affairs officer for AFL-CIO, said he hopes the partnership
acts as a "viable model to the rest of the pension world."

Housing Investment Trust will purchase $ 200 million of Freddie Mac
participation certificates backed by mortgages on multifamily housing
development for low- and moderate income families over the next three years.
The Trust will buy $ 400 million of Fannie Mae MBS, both affordable multi- and
single family mortgages.

According to the agreement with both agencies, 20% of the funds to be invested
will be targeted for areas affected by Hurricane Andrew and the floods in the
Midwest.

The remaining funds will be invested in housing projects in 30 targeted cities,
including New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Atlanta, Chicago,
Detroit and Los Angeles.

Fannie has agreed to reduce some of its fees and both Fannie and Freddie will
streamline the processing of mortgages originated under the program.

The Trust has developed joint marketing strategies with each of the agencies to
inform developers and nonprofit groups about the program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              301 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             June 12, 2014 Thursday

Underused VA Mortgage Program Makes Inroads as FHA Costs Rise

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 179 No. 90

LENGTH: 854  words


Of the 16.4 million active-duty service members and military veterans with
mortgages, less than 12% have a loan guaranteed by the Department of Veterans
Affairs.

Some blame this low participation rate on a lack of promotion for the VA home
loan program, which was created in 1944. Many loan officers don't even ask
potential clients if they are veterans. And many veterans don't know enough
about the program to ask for a VA loan.

Others blame lenders and real estate agents who have preferred the loan products
guaranteed or purchased by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mae and Federal Housing
Administration.

But things are looking up for VA lending as specialists in the product redouble
their efforts to get the word out and other low-down-payment products grow more
expensive.

A sharp increase in Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance premiums
is making VA more competitive, according to Megan Booth, senior policy
representative at the National Association of Realtors.

"There is not a Realtor alive today that thinks FHA is better deal" for
veterans, Booth said. "That is helping the VA grow and it will continue to help
the VA grow."

VA lenders originated a record 629,300 single-family loans in fiscal 2013, which
ended Sept. 30.

The agency endorsed 90,820 single-family loans in the fiscal second quarter,
totaling $20.1 billion, down 10.5% from the prior quarter. Sixty-three percent
of VA loans are going to homebuyers rather than for refinancing, according to
agency officials.

The Veterans Association of Real Estate Professionals, a trade group launched in
2011 to promote the VA program, held its first Washington conference last week.

"There are a lot of misconceptions about the VA home loan program among real
estate, lending and housing professionals" says Son Nguyen, the group's
co-founder and president. "We want to change that through education and
outreach."

The trade group will provide VA with "honest feedback," he says.

VA officials told the conference they will be issuing a proposal soon that will
clarify the agency's rules on negotiating fees with sellers. VA rules currently
limit the amount veterans can be charged for closing costs and fees for termite
and other inspections.

Real estate agents have been pressing VA for a clarification because veterans
are often disadvantaged when competing with non-veterans to buy a house,
particularly when there are multiple bidders.

The fee rule would have been out by now, but the work had to take a backseat to
the agency's version of the qualified mortgage rule, the VA's assistant director
for loans, John Bell, told the conference.

The VA issued an interim final QM rule on May 30. The VA version essentially
provides a safe harbor for home purchase loans that meet the agency's
traditional lending standards. VA has the lowest delinquency rate of any
government loan program.

But VA used the QM rule to stop lenders from repeatedly refinancing veterans who
fall behind on their payments.

Interest rate reduction refinancing loans were "never intended to be a loss
mitigation tool," Bell said. It was intended to reduce monthly payments, not add
fees to their loan balances which the veteran couldn't repay.

"Some predatory lenders took advantage of that situation," Bell said. "We had to
stop it."

Under the VA's QM rule, performing loans can be refinanced after six months.
These rate-reducing refis can qualify for a safe harbor if the borrower can
recoup the refinancing costs within 36 months.

VA loans that don't meet that refinancing standard will be considered
"rebuttable presumption" loans, subject to greater litigation risk than safe
harbor loans.

Meanwhile, lenders continue to complain that there is a shortage of VA-approved
appraisers and underwriters, which slows processing times.

"I can't tell how many times the appraisal is the hiccup in the process," said
David Gibbons, the national VA mortgage program manager at Wells Fargo Home
Mortgage.

But VA is becoming more responsive. "VA is trying to get more appraisers and
weeding out the bad ones," Booth said at the conference.

VA is recruiting new appraisers every month, Bell said. And the agency is
reviewing appraisals for quality as well as monitoring and scoring appraiser
performance.

However, the VA will not use appraisal management firms. "Not while I am at VA,"
Bell said. (He didn't say why, but appraisers and other critics of AMCs often
complain that these outfits often employ second-rate appraisers who don't know
the local markets.)

VA is becoming more responsive to industry concerns, Nguyen said, noting that
the agency is working on seven proposed changes to the home loan guarantee
program. "It shows willingness that I have not seen before."

The Navy veteran stressed that his organization wants to become "eyes and ears"
for the VA program.

VAREP has a web portal for real estate professionals and will soon announce a
consumer portal for service members and veterans.

"There is a large percentage of people who are eligible for a VA loan but don't
want to use it because they don't understand it. That is where education and
outreach could be effective," said Wells Fargo's Gibbons.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              302 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             June 6, 2007 Wednesday

2 mortgage lenders are heroes after subprime fallout;
MARKETPLACE by Bloomberg

BYLINE: Jody Shenn and James Tyson - Bloomberg News

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, once derided as white elephants of the mortgage
market, are benefiting from the subprime-lending debacle and trampling just
about anything in their way.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which are U.S. government-chartered companies and
the biggest source of money for Americans buying houses, accounted for 46.9
percent of all mortgage bonds sold through April, according to Inside Mortgage
Finance, a newsletter. Their share rose from a record low 37.3 percent in last
year's second quarter.

The biggest slump in U.S. home prices since 1991 is reviving Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac after $11.3 billion of accounting errors led to the ousters of their
chief executives and the threat of tighter government regulation.

Now, the companies are getting praise in Congress after promising to spend at
least $20 billion to keep the mortgage market afloat by purchasing loans made to
people with poor credit histories or high debt burdens.

''The political tide is definitely running in their favor,'' said David Dreman,
who manages investments including 12.8 million Freddie Mac shares at Dreman
Value Management in Jersey City, New Jersey. The companies ''are re-establishing
their credibility,'' he said.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which together own or guarantee about $4.5 trillion
of residential mortgage assets, are offering the capital after foreclosures
increased 62 percent in April from a year earlier, according to a recent report
by RealtyTrac, which sells information on defaults.

Home prices dropped last quarter for the first time in almost 16 years. More
than 50 mortgage companies have halted operations, gone bankrupt or sought
buyers since the start of 2006.

While subprime mortgages got battered, the fixed-rate loans that Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac prefer to package into bonds and guarantee increased to 82 percent
of new mortgages from 63 percent in mid-2005. The amount of mortgage bonds sold
or guaranteed by the companies rose by a net $93 billion this year, up 38
percent from the same period in 2006, according to estimates by Credit Suisse.

Fannie Mae is ''confident'' about increasing its share of bond sales, Thomas
Lund, senior vice president for single-family mortgages, said in an interview
last month.

Shareholders are reaping the benefits. Fannie Mae rose 19 percent since the end
of March and Freddie Mac gained 14 percent, beating the 8.1 percent increase in
the Standard & Poor's 500 index.

''The fact they did not get mired in the subprime market and are now able to
pick up the pieces is positive for Fannie and Freddie,'' said Marshall Front,
whose Chicago money management firm, Front Barnett Associates, owns 337,000
Fannie Mae shares.

The subprime turmoil, Front said, ''is one of the few opportunities in recent
memory when they have been able to demonstrate to the media and to members of
Congress that they are going to help with a problem as opposed to being the
cause of a problem.''

Fannie Mae was created in 1938 as part of the New Deal, the economic recovery
and social welfare program of the 1930s. The government took Fannie Mae public
in 1968 and Congress created Freddie Mac in 1970.

The companies buy mortgages from financial institutions, providing money for new
loans. They profit by holding mortgages and mortgage bonds as investments, and
by charging a fee to guarantee securities backed by packages of home loans.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac finance about 40 percent of the $10.9 trillion of
U.S. residential mortgages. More than $6 trillion of mortgage bonds are
outstanding, making it the largest debt market in the world and about 50 percent
more than the amount of U.S. Treasury securities. The prices that investors pay
for the bonds help determine the rates lenders charge consumers.

The companies' shares also got a boost after Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac told
Congress in April that they had committed to provide money to subprime lenders
as home prices weakened. The Joint Center for Housing Studies, based at Harvard,
estimates residential real estate accounts for 23 percent of the economy.

A month later, the U.S. House of Representatives watered down legislation
creating a new regulator for the companies. The bill allows the government to
require Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to sell investments only if they threaten
their own financial health.

Kenneth Posner, an analyst with Morgan Stanley in New York, raised his 12-month
target price for Fannie Mae shares to $81 from $69 while maintaining an
''overweight/attractive'' rating on last week.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac lost market share starting in 2002 as the housing
boom began and the companies became mired in accounting scandals.

Leland Brendsel left as chief executive of Freddie Mac in June 2003, and
Franklin Raines stepped down as chief executive of Fannie Mae in December 2004
after disclosing bookkeeping errors that included improper reserves to smooth
earnings.

***

James Tyson reported from Washington.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2007 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              303 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          December 21, 2016 Wednesday

FHFA outlines 2017 priorities for GSEs, single-security platform

LENGTH: 314  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the
following news release:



 The Federal Housing Finance Agency last week cited building a new single-family
securitization infrastructure as one of its 2017 goals for Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac and Common Securitization Solutions, the limited-liability company
developing the necessary technology to issue single securities.





 The other two goals noted in the FHFA's 2017 scorecard include reducing
taxpayer risk and maintaining credit availability and foreclosure prevention
activities for new and refinanced mortgages.



 More specifically, the FHFA expects the government-sponsored enterprises to,
among other things:



     work to increase access to single-family mortgage credit for creditworthy
borrowers, including the underserved segments of the market;

     finalize post-crisis loss mitigation activities; and

     assess the current mortgage servicing business model.



 Regarding the single-security platform, the GSEs are to focus on the functions
necessary for current single-family securitization activities and allow for the
integration of additional market participants in the future. The FHFA recently
announced that the first part of its Common Securitization Platform was
successfully implemented in November.



 NAFCU has previously lodged concerns about this platform possibly making it
more difficult for credit unions to sell their loans to Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac.



 Treasury Secretary nominee Steven Mnuchin and leaders on Capitol Hill have
indicated that GSE reform will be a priority next year. NAFCU continues to
advocate for housing reform that guarantees access for credit unions to the
secondary mortgage market, and fair prices based on loan quality rather than
volume.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              304 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          December 21, 2016 Wednesday

FHFA outlines 2017 priorities for GSEs, single-security platform

LENGTH: 314  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the
following news release:



 The Federal Housing Finance Agency last week cited building a new single-family
securitization infrastructure as one of its 2017 goals for Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac and Common Securitization Solutions, the limited-liability company
developing the necessary technology to issue single securities.





 The other two goals noted in the FHFA's 2017 scorecard include reducing
taxpayer risk and maintaining credit availability and foreclosure prevention
activities for new and refinanced mortgages.



 More specifically, the FHFA expects the government-sponsored enterprises to,
among other things:



     work to increase access to single-family mortgage credit for creditworthy
borrowers, including the underserved segments of the market;

     finalize post-crisis loss mitigation activities; and

     assess the current mortgage servicing business model.



 Regarding the single-security platform, the GSEs are to focus on the functions
necessary for current single-family securitization activities and allow for the
integration of additional market participants in the future. The FHFA recently
announced that the first part of its Common Securitization Platform was
successfully implemented in November.



 NAFCU has previously lodged concerns about this platform possibly making it
more difficult for credit unions to sell their loans to Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac.



 Treasury Secretary nominee Steven Mnuchin and leaders on Capitol Hill have
indicated that GSE reform will be a priority next year. NAFCU continues to
advocate for housing reform that guarantees access for credit unions to the
secondary mortgage market, and fair prices based on loan quality rather than
volume.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              305 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                October 26, 1992

FHA Single-Family Program May See Surge

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 64

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Federal Housing Administration single-family mortgage program may see a
surge in business during the coming year.

More people will be able to participate in the FHA and Veterans Affairs mortgage
programs as a result of recent legislation.

Several economists predicted that more than 800,000 borrowers may use FHA
mortgage insurance in the coming year.

In fiscal 1992, which ended Sept. 30, FHA guaranteed 660,000 single-family
mortgages with a total balance of $ 46.5 billion.

The VA Home Loan Program, which guaranteed 266,000 mortgages with a total
balance of $ 23 billion in FY 1992, also may see an increase.

Brian Chappelle, a staff vice president for residential finance at the Mortgage
Bankers Association, said estimates for future growth in the government housing
programs assume that interest rates will remain low and home prices stable.

Other economic variable such as employment growth also will affect the volume of
FHA and VA business.

Both mortgage guarantee programs got a boost from Congress, which raised the top
FHA mortgage limit and allowed the VA Home Loan Program to use negotiated
interest rates.

In addition, Congress repealed a ban on financing more than 57% of an FHA
borrower's closing costs into the loan.

"This is a good step to help revitalize the government housing programs," Mr.
Chappelle said.

Forrest Pafenburg, director of real estate finance research for the National
Association of Realtors, agreed that the changes will substantially increase
participation in the FHA program.

In addition, he said the FHA changes will bring low-risk homebuyers into the FHA
portfolio.

"You will see more activity, but more importantly, you will have higher quality
activity," Mr. Pafenberg said.  "The program should be stronger in the out
years."

He said home sales in general should pick up next year as consumers, who have
been reducing their debt burdens, regain economic confidence.

MBA, NAR, and the National Association of Home Builders persuaded Congress to
make changes in the programs.

They hope the changes will increase the appeal of the government mortgage
programs both for lenders and buyers.

The optimistic outlook for FHA and VA programs comes on the heels of a year when
the FHA program saw a decline in business while the VA program saw an increase.

The trade groups attributed much of the decline in FHA activity to the
Department of Housing and Urban Development's limitation on rolling closing
costs into FHA loans.

Coming up with the downpayment and closing funds is one of the biggest obstacles
to homeownership for young buyers, especially in an era when many people have
substantial debts when they graduate from college.

FHA activity declined in 200 housing markets nationwide last year after HUD
implemented the limitation on financing closing costs, according to NAR.

MBA estimated that the 57% limit may have deterred 100,000 homebuyers from using
the FHA program over the course of the year.

Repeal of the limit could boost FHA business by the same amount, according to
MBA.

Maximum, loan-to-value ratios that remain in effect will limit the ability of
some buyers to finance their closing costs, however.

The maximum LTV for an FHA loan is 97.75% (98.75% for home values below $
50,000).

An increase in the top FHA mortgage limit to $ 151,725 in high-cost markets may
add another 20-30,000 mortgages to the FHA program annually, Mr. Chappelle said.

A 10% downpayment will be required on mortgage amounts above $ 125,000.

HUD already has issued a mortgagee letter alerting field offices to the repeal
of the 57% limitation.

HUD officials are working on a new directory of top mortgage limits for
high-cost areas.

In addition, the FHA upfront mortgage insurance premium declined from 3.8% to 3%
as of Oct. 1, as had been scheduled under the 1990 housing bill.

The FHA changes will likely reverse a trend of declining FHA activity.

FHA endorsed 660,000 1-4 family mortgages for insurance in FY 1992, down from
720,000 in FY 1991.

FHA's failure to keep pace with increase in conventional mortgage and VA
activity in the past year in part reflects the refinancing boom, which largely
bypassed FHA.

Because FHA charged streamline refinance borrowers as upfront and an annual
mortgage insurance premium during the early 1992 refinancing boom, many of its
borrowers found it less expensive to refinance into conventional mortgage loans.

Mr. Chappelle said the decision to raise the top FHA mortgage limit and repeal
the limit on financing closing costs will encourage lenders and real estate
agents to market the FHA program.

"You are going to see a rekindling of interest in the FHA.  These changes show
Congress wants to see a viable FHA," he said.  "It is going to tell the industry
that the FHA is not going to be shut down."

The VA program had already shows significant growth in fiscal 1992, in part
because of refinancing activity.

In FY 1992, the VA home loan program insured 266,000 mortgages, compared with
181,000 in FY 1991.

The FY 1992 total included 66,200 refinancings.

The average mortgage insured in the VA program was $ 86,300 in FY 1992.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, Government Mortgages Rise In FY 1992, Fueled by a sharp increase
in the number of VA loans insured by FHA, total government insured loans
increased to 925,000 in FY 1992, up from 901,000 in FY 1991 (figures in 000s),
Source: HUD

                   Copyright 1992 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              306 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 July 20, 2009

Ginnie Issuance Sets New Record

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2 Vol. 33 No. 41

LENGTH: 224  words


WASHINGTON-Ginnie Mae issued $43.6 billion in mortgage-backed securities in June
- setting another monthly record as issuance during the first half of this year
has nearly doubled from a year ago.

Ginnie Mae guaranteed $207 billion in MBS during the first six months of this
year, compared to $107 billion in the first half of 2008.

"The extraordinary strength of our MBS program clearly demonstrates the
continuing need for Ginnie Mae securities in the secondary market," Ginnie
president Joseph Murin said.

Ginnie Mae issuance records are being broken almost every month, including May,
when issuance of Ginnie Mae securities totaled $39 billion.

High demand for FHA-insured single-family loans is fueling this upswing. The
Federal Housing Administration endorsed 94,069 single-family mortgages in June,
the highest number in nine years, according to the agency.

The secondary market agency guarantees mostly single-family MBS. It guaranteed
only $584 million in multifamily mortgages in June and $319 million in May.

The June monthly report also shows a 125% jump in the issuance of MBS backed by
FHA-insured reverse mortgages.

Ginnie issuers securitized $590 million in Home Equity Conversion Mortgages in
June, the highest level ever.

For example, Bank of America issued $267.3 million in HMBS in June and Metlife
Home Loans issued $214.9 million.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              307 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FORECLOSURES ON HOMES RISE AS INFLATION FALLS

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


The rate of home mortgage foreclosures has increased to a level close to the
record set in the 1973 recession, causing anguish for tens of thousands of
Americans evicted from homes for which they can no longer afford monthly
payments.

Many housing economists cast an unexpected player as a main villain in the rise:
the rollback of inflation, particularly in housing prices. It has removed one
safety net for homeowners at the same time that the customary causes of
foreclosure continue: loss of a breadwinner's job, or of a spouse's second
income, or exhaustion of unemployment benefits or cuts in pay.

In earlier recessions home owners could often avoid foreclosure by selling a
house for more than they had bought it for, paying off the mortgage and moving
into a cheaper house.

Today, with the abrupt slowing of a decade of inflation and with outright
declines in house prices in some places, housing officials say many young
families are moving at a loss.

From abandonments of Texas condominium units by unemployed oilfield workers to
foreclosure auctions that have uprooted families in many communities in the
industrial East and Middle West, officials here sketch a picture of distress
that has been little noticed outside the housing and home finance industries.

The inventory of foreclosed homes held by the Federal Housing Administration,
which guarantees about 13 percent of all home mortgages, has risen to 40,000, up
from 28,000 18 months ago. These houses must now be sold, sometimes in a soft
market.

Alan J. Kappeler, director of single- family housing at the F.H.A., called the
high foreclosure numbers ''alarming, from the standpoint that so many people are
losing their houses.''

''You cannot say that the change in housing inflation is entirely the cause of
this,'' he said. ''But had home inflation not halted, it might have bailed out
most of those who got in trouble.''

The Veterans Administration, which guarantees 11 percent of all new mortgages,
took over 29,000 foreclosed houses last year, 10 percent more than in 1983. The
agency's foreclosure rate in the third quarter of last year reached a record,
according to the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.

According to the most recent nationwide figures, 25 foreclosures were begun in
the third quarter of 1984 for every 10,000 mortgages, the same rate as in 1973.
The rate surpassed 20 in 1982, for the first time since 1975, at the same time
that inflation was dramatically slowing.

In recent months, says Robert M. O'Toole, director of the V.A.'s loan guarantee
service, the six states with the highest and most static inventory of houses
foreclosed by the agency have been Michigan, Ohio, Illinois, Indiana, Texas and
California. The F.H.A,'s 10 highest foreclosure cities as of Nov. 1 were, in
descending order, Cleveland; Camden, N.J.; Las Vegas, Nev.; Milwaukee; Chicago;
Newark; Philadelphia; Indianapolis; Columbus, Ohio, and Tulsa, Okla.

The homeowner who paid, say, $80,000 for a house in 1980, when interest rates
were high, may find himself among the thousands who have overextended their
budgets. Selling the house now for the purchase price, without the added lift of
inflation, would not net enough for a down payment on a more manageable home. In
some places, the house would go for less than $80,000, if at all, which would
leave the owner still in debt to the lender and certain of foreclosure.

The new surge of foreclosures has hurt mortgage lenders and insurers. It has
also heavily burdened the Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans
Administration, the two Federal agencies that guarantee home financing. The
agencies, most of whose clients have low or middle incomes, have record
inventories of foreclosed homes.

The Reagan Administration is proposing steep increases in fees to be paid by
those who receive home loans guaranteed by the two agencies. Furthermore,
housing officials say the loss experience of the home mortgage industry is
likely to add to pressures for stiffer credit standards for qualifying for
loans. That could put loans out of reach for many.

Insurers Are Hit Hard

''No doubt about it, we've taken a tremendous hit,'' said Steven P. Doehler,
executive vice president of the Mortgage Insurance Companies of America, the
Washington-based trade association of underwriters of home mortgages not covered
by the two Federal agencies. These conventional loans constitute about
three-fourths of the 30 million home mortgages in force. Mr. Doehler projects
his industry's payments on lenders' insurance claims for home foreclosures at
$425 million this year, ''three times what they were in 1982.''

Within the national trend of rapidly rising foreclosure rates, there were wide
regional variations. In fact, on Long Island the number of foreclosures has
declined in recent years.

''That was generally true for most of the New England area and the entire
Northeast,'' Mr. Doehler said. ''Most of the northeastern part of the country
has not been experiencing the same kind of jump in foreclosure rates. He
estimated that the Northeast, including the New York metropolitan area, did ''as
much as 50 percent better than the national picture.''

But in Tulsa, hit hard by the oil slump, the F.H.A. is now foreclosing on
mortgages at a rate of more than 100 for each 10,000. Houston and Denver, also
hit by declines in oil or oil shale development, are not far behind. ''Texas in
the late 1970's was the garden spot,'' Mr. Doehler said. ''Now, because of
unemployment and overbuilding, it's a swamp.''

''Take a typical Houston condominium,'' he said. ''The builder can't sell the
units, so he starts offering buy- downs - lowering his prices. Of course, prices
of units bought earlier for much more money and at higher interest rates fall,
too. And the people say, 'Why should I do this - go on making these high
mortgage payments?' And they stop paying and just walk away and move into the
rental building across the street. That's a foreclosure. We pay the claim on
it.''

A Typical Foreclosure

Most foreclosures, however, are not so casual.

''Your typical guy in a V.A. foreclosure is a Vietnam veteran, blue collar, in a
home with an average price of $43,000,'' Mr. O'Toole said. ''The home loan was
originally qualified based on two incomes, his and his wife's, and that's where
most of the problems start. When the hard times come, the first people laid off
are the part-timers, and that is often the wife. Then, even where we see these
people returned to work, it is at severly reduced incomes. The jobs that put
them back in the 'employed' column are just not as good.

''Then these people in difficulty are not able to sell the house at an advantage
because the prices have stopped escalating. That is a contributing factor in the
foreclosures.''

Thomas R. Harter, chief economist of the Mortgage Bankers Association, noted
that unemployment has always been a cause for mortgage delinquencies, ''a
problem of a month or two in arrears, but short of foreclosure.''

''With continued inflation,'' Mr. Harter said, ''you could have sold that house
off and paid back the lender and it would never show up as a foreclosure.''

In part, Mr. Harter blames the home finance industry for its own problems.
''When home inflation disappeared they just didn't believe it,'' he said. ''They
didn't adjust. They thought it would all come back. They didn't tighten up the
standards on which they had made a lot of these risky loans. They took risks
because they thought, no matter what happened, they would be covered by
home-price inflation. Delinquency and foreclosure is the result of that process,
and now they are writing off a lot of those loans.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of percentage of mortgages foreclosed from '72 to '84 (page A15)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 24, 2014

FHA Struggles with Fewer Buyers

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12 Vol. 38 No. 26

LENGTH: 370  words


Homebuilders and lenders know that the upper end of the housing market is the
place to be these days.

Demand for home purchase loans above $417,000 is strong, while demand for lower
balance loans is weak, according to Mike Fratantoni, the chief economist for the
Mortgage Bankers Association. "There is a real strong demarcation in the
market," he said.

That is one reason builders appear to be catering to move-up buyers while paying
little attention to first-time borrowers.

Overall, the entire MBA purchase mortgage application index is down 15% from a
year ago. Yet applications for loans below $417,000 is where the real decline
shows up.

This trend is impacting all government-backed lending and especially the Federal
Housing Administration's single-family program. "FHA in particular seems to be
doing even worst," said Frantantoni.

The FHA depends on first time buyers for over 50% of its business. In January,
the FHA endorsed 45,800 single-family loans, including 26,500 loans for
first-time buyers.

The weak first-time home buyer market is part of the reason it has experienced
such a large drop in purchase mortgage volume over the six-month period ending
in January 2014.

Data from HUD show that the FHA endorsed 291,200 purchase loans in August 2013
through January 2014. That is a 15% decline from the 343,100 purchase loans FHA
endorsed during the same six-month period a year ago (August 2012 through
January 2013).

The FHA also is being boxed out of housing markets due to a series of mortgage
insurance premium over the past four years. In healthy housing markets where
private mortgage insurance is available, homebuyers can get a better deal on a
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac conventional loan than a FHA loan if they have a 5%
downpayment and a strong credit score.

Considering the higher FHA premiums, "it isn't surprising that they are trailing
the market," Fratantoni said. The loan guarantee program for the Department of
Veterans Affairs is also taking market share from FHA.

MBA's latest survey of builder mortgage banking subsidiaries found that VA is
trailing FHA by only three percentage points-16% of new homebuyers applied for a
FHA-insured loan and 13% of home buyers applied for a VA-guaranteed loan.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              309 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 June 12, 1995

FNMA ARMs Up, Delinquencies Down

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 351 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When a company guarantees more than $ 700 billion in mortgage debt, investors
have good reason to worry about credit risk.  Last week, the Federal National
Mortgage Association tried to put some of those concerns to rest.

Serious delinquencies in Fannie Mae's single-family mortgage portfolio, at
0.57%, are within one basis point of a 15-year low.  Delinquencies in the
multifamily mortgage portfolio are near a five-year low.

Multifamily delinquencies have dropped steadily, from 3.62% in 1991 to 1.21% in
1994, according to Fannie Mae.  Credit losses also have dropped steadily in the
multifamily sector.  In addition to keeping delinquency rates low, Fannie Mae
officials say they are working to deorease losses when a default occurs.  On the
single family side, temporary forbearance, loan modification, and
pre-foreclosure sales are being used to mitigate losses.

Despite growth in the volume of mortgage debt guaranteed by Fannie Mae,
officials at the agency expect credit losses to be flat or down in 1995.

"Today, our franchise is stronger than ever before," Fannie Mae Chairman James
Johnson said at the company's biennial investor conference.

Moreover, Fannie Mae officials said they see continued opportunity for
double-digit growth in business volume through the 1990s, fueled in part by a
growing population and favorable housing affordability conditions.

"We feel very strongly that the portfolio will continue to have strong growth
prospects over the long term," said Thomas Lawler, senior vice president for
portfolio management.  Since 1990, the Federal National Mortgage Association has
purchased or securitized over $ 1 trillion in mortgage debt, double the amount
of business the company did in its previous 52 years, Mr. Johnson said.

Fannie Mae officials presented a confident, optimistic show for the investment
community that sometimes served to highlight the competition between Fannie Mae
and its chief rival the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.

"We intend to remain the leader of our industry.  We would never be satisfied in
second place," Mr. Johnson said.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, FNMA MF Delinquencies, Source: FNMA data

                         Copyright 1995 Faulkner & Gray


                              310 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          International New York Times

                             August 21, 2015 Friday

U.S. sets new low-income housing goals;
Mortgage finance firms nudged to make more available to poor people

BYLINE: DIONNE SEARCEY

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 692 words

ABSTRACT

The Federal Housing Finance Agency clarified rules for determining affordability
and put in place clearer procedures in establishing housing goals.

FULL TEXT

The American agency that regulates the mortgage finance companies Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac set goals on Wednesday for the next two years to nudge them to
provide mortgages to more low-income borrowers and to landlords who offer low
rents to poor people.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency is required by a 2008 law that took effect
after the collapse of the housing market to set annual targets for mortgages
bought by Fannie and Freddie, the government-run institutions that back most
home loans.

The goals act as directives for Fannie and Freddie to focus more of their
business on affordable housing. The companies buy loans from private lenders,
package them into mortgage-backed securities and provide a credit guarantee to
investors to ensure timely payment.

Some advocates of housing for the poor expressed disappointment that the goals
were not more ambitious. But the agency hailed the rules as an important lever
for helping more low-income families buy homes and for improving access to
mortgages for landlords who rent out affordable apartments to low-income tenants
in poverty-stricken neighborhoods.

''These goals establish a solid foundation for affordable and sustainable
homeownership and rental opportunities in this country,'' Melvin L. Watt, the
agency's director, said in a news release.

The housing market is improving, but still lags behind the boom years before the
market collapsed. Many potential buyers still complain that they have trouble
getting mortgages, that few homes are on the market and that rents are soaring.

The agency set separate targets for single-family housing, including categories
for mortgages for low-income families, very low-income families and families in
low-income areas, and for refinancing mortgages. The goals for mortgages for
owners of multifamily property also include separate targets for low- and very
low-income families.

The agency said 24 percent of mortgages should be bought by Freddie or Fannie
for homes for low-income borrowers, or those with incomes no greater than 80
percent of an area's median income. That goal is one percentage point higher
than the goal for 2014.

The National Community Reinvestment Coalition, which advocates affordable
housing, said that the new target fell short of expectations.

''With demand up and the economy stronger, to say 24 percent is to create a
standard that isn't as helpful as what is needed,'' said John Taylor, president
of the organization, who called the new goals ''a lost opportunity.''

The agency also set a goal of 6 percent of mortgages for borrowers considered
very low income, who have incomes no greater than 50 percent of the median
income of the area. That is slightly less ambitious than last year's goal of 7
percent.

For multifamily units, the agency wants the lenders to back mortgages for
300,000 units a year through 2017 for low-income units and 60,000 a year for
very low-income units.

For mortgages for small apartment complexes, the goals are 48,000 total
low-income units for the next two years, less than half of the 105,000 total
units originally proposed. The higher goals would have risked ''crowding out''
smaller lenders, the agency said, acknowledging that the final goals are modest
but are intended to keep Fannie and Freddie active in this market.

The agency said that Fannie and Freddie had not fallen short of similar housing
goals in the past, but that it could take action to ensure the goals are met if
problems arise.

During the housing crisis, the federal government placed Fannie and Freddie in
conservatorship, and they received a taxpayer bailout to avoid bankruptcies.
They now pay their profits to the Treasury.

The agency said it had received 144 comment letters from advocacy groups and
others on its proposed goals. A ''significant number'' of those letters
questioned whether Fannie and Freddie should still be under conservatorship or
were about unrelated matters. ''Those comments are beyond the scope of this
rule-making,'' the agency said.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2015 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              311 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 4, 1988

Another Group Asking To Privatize Agencies

SECTION: Pg. 43

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A 12-member Presidential commission has added its voice to the growing chorus of
calls to strip the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corp. of their government ties.

The President's Commission of Privatization has advocated "full privatizing"
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac by "eliminating all Federal benefits and
limitations."

The commission said it found "no compelling reason to justify the special
advantages the two corporations continue to enjoy over private-sector
institutions engaged in similar activities.

These advantages result in implicit interest subsidies for government-sponsored
borrowing and higher interest rates for private borrowers," the commission said
in a 278-page report.

In addition to the call for privatizing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the
commission recommended a reduction in the Federal Housing Administration's
mortgage insurance activities.

The commission report also urged the government to "adopt a more neutral
position with respect to direct housing finance programs," including those of
FHA, the Veterans Administration, the Government National Mortgage Association,
and the Farmers Home Administration.

In addition, the report urged that the government require lending agencies to
sell all newly originated loans; step up sales of non-recourse loans; and
privatize Federal loan guarantees by purchasing reinsurance for all loans it
backs.

Extensive ties to the Federal government enable Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to
compete with the private mortgage market on an unfair basis, the commission
report said.

In addition, it maintained, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have grown beyond their
mandate to eliminate regional differences in the availability of capital for
FHA-and VA-backed mortgages and conventional mortgages, respectively.

Although Fannie Mae was partially privatized in 1954, and again in 1968, the
association "maintains important ties to the Federal government that give it an
edge over competitors in obtaining credit," the commission report said.

In addition, its Federal charter "fosters a sense of government involvement and
responsibility" that makes Fannie Mae less susceptible to market discipline and
enables it to operate with less capital than the market would require.

The commission noted Fannie Mae's debt issues require Treasury approval.  Its
securities can be used as collateral by depository institutions, are treated on
par with Treasury bonds by the Federal Reserve Board and are exempt from
Securities and Exchange Commission registration requirements.

Under the commission proposal, all these ties would be severed.  At the same
time, however, Fannie Mae would be freed from charter limitations that forbid it
to enter into fields other than real estate.

As for Freddie Mac, the commission cited testimony that strongly urged
limitations on its "competitive advantages over savings institutions, by
establishing higher capital requirements and more substantial user fees."

The commission stopped short of recommending a schedule for privatizing Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac, saying only that changes should proceed on "an appropriate
schedule and with an announced transition period."

During the phase-out of the agencies' government ties, Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac should be required to pay fees for their Federal attributes, increase their
equity-to-assets ratios, and satisfy SEC registration requirements, among other
things, the commission said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1988 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              312 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 22, 2016 Thursday

FHFA outlines 2017 priorities for GSEs, single-security platform

LENGTH: 309  words

DATELINE: New York



 Chicago: American Bar Association has issued the following news release



 The Federal Housing Finance Agency last week cited building a new single-family
securitization infrastructure as one of its 2017 goals for Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac and Common Securitization Solutions, the limited-liability company
developing the necessary technology to issue single securities.





 The other two goals noted in the FHFA's 2017 scorecard include reducing
taxpayer risk and maintaining credit availability and foreclosure prevention
activities for new and refinanced mortgages.



 More specifically, the FHFA expects the government-sponsored enterprises to,
among other things:



     work to increase access to single-family mortgage credit for creditworthy
borrowers, including the underserved segments of the market;

     finalize post-crisis loss mitigation activities; and

     assess the current mortgage servicing business model.



 Regarding the single-security platform, the GSEs are to focus on the functions
necessary for current single-family securitization activities and allow for the
integration of additional market participants in the future. The FHFA recently
announced that the first part of its Common Securitization Platform was
successfully implemented in November.



 NAFCU has previously lodged concerns about this platform possibly making it
more difficult for credit unions to sell their loans to Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac.



 Treasury Secretary nominee Steven Mnuchin and leaders on Capitol Hill have
indicated that GSE reform will be a priority next year. NAFCU continues to
advocate for housing reform that guarantees access for credit unions to the
secondary mortgage market, and fair prices based on loan quality rather than
volume.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              313 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 22, 2016 Thursday

FHFA outlines 2017 priorities for GSEs, single-security platform

LENGTH: 309  words

DATELINE: New York



 Chicago: American Bar Association has issued the following news release



 The Federal Housing Finance Agency last week cited building a new single-family
securitization infrastructure as one of its 2017 goals for Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac and Common Securitization Solutions, the limited-liability company
developing the necessary technology to issue single securities.





 The other two goals noted in the FHFA's 2017 scorecard include reducing
taxpayer risk and maintaining credit availability and foreclosure prevention
activities for new and refinanced mortgages.



 More specifically, the FHFA expects the government-sponsored enterprises to,
among other things:



     work to increase access to single-family mortgage credit for creditworthy
borrowers, including the underserved segments of the market;

     finalize post-crisis loss mitigation activities; and

     assess the current mortgage servicing business model.



 Regarding the single-security platform, the GSEs are to focus on the functions
necessary for current single-family securitization activities and allow for the
integration of additional market participants in the future. The FHFA recently
announced that the first part of its Common Securitization Platform was
successfully implemented in November.



 NAFCU has previously lodged concerns about this platform possibly making it
more difficult for credit unions to sell their loans to Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac.



 Treasury Secretary nominee Steven Mnuchin and leaders on Capitol Hill have
indicated that GSE reform will be a priority next year. NAFCU continues to
advocate for housing reform that guarantees access for credit unions to the
secondary mortgage market, and fair prices based on loan quality rather than
volume.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              314 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   October 29, 1977, Saturday, Final Edition

Short Takes on Real Estate

BYLINE: By John B. Willmann

SECTION: Real Estate; E24

LENGTH: 404 words


On an evening earlier this month, 100 friends of Charles Patrick McMahon
gathered at the University Club to tell the retiring senior vice president of
the National Association of Home Builders that they think he's a nice guy.
Robert F. Loftus, who once headed the public relations department at NAHB,
credited McMahon with coming up with the bestever slogan for National Home Week:
"If you don't believe that home builders care about little people, just look at
the houses we build for them."

Private mortgage insurance was used to help finance 188,190 single-family houses
in a recent three-month period while the FHA and VA provided mortgage insurance
or guarantees for home loans for a total of 172,792 dwellings.  That, according
to the area-based Mortgage Insurance Companies of America, is the first time
that the private sector outdid the federal sector in that field.  Meanwhile, the
Department of Housing and Urban Development has been working to revive its FHA
program of mortgage insurance that once dominated the market for low- and
moderately-priced houses.

If you have to be convinced that people never really leave Washington, consider
that Oliver H. Jones and wife have moved into a smashing contemporary house in
the mountains of southern Pennsylvania since he exited from the top staff post
with the Mortgage Bankers Association here.  But the Jones' have rented an
apartment on Connecticut Avenue NW, opposite the Washington Hilton, to be their
residence when they are in town.

Higher-priced, single-family houses tend to have some special features.  At the
newly opened Langley Oaks subdivision of the Centex Corp. on a wooded 300-acre
tract next to the Langley High School, the four models have large master
bedrooms.  But they also have something unusual in tract house master bedrooms -
tubs as well as shower stalls.  This feature has caught the eyes of buyers, who
are willing to wait months for completion of the $130,000 houses.

House & Home magazine, a trade publication beamed to home builders and
developers, gives the Veterans Administration high marks in an article in the
October edition.  Quote: "The government's best-run, least troublesome, most
scandal-free housing program is financing new housing at a level about one-third
higher this fiscal year than last." In March, April, May and June, the VA
mortgage guaranty program was used for 12,000 new houses earch month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1977 The Washington Post


                              315 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 17, 2009 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

Local Digest

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 341 words


EXECUTIVES

FHA Set to Hire Freddie Mac Official

 The Federal Housing Administration plans to tap Bob Ryan, a longtime Freddie
Mac executive, as its first chief risk officer, according to an internal Freddie
Mac e-mail obtained by The Washington Post.

Ryan, a 27-year veteran of the McLean-based mortgage finance company, oversees
the pricing, securitization and credit-portfolio functions within the
single-family credit guarantee business. His last day at Freddie Mac will be
Oct. 23, according to the e-mail from Donald Bisenius, an executive vice
president at the company.

The FHA confirmed that Ryan will fill the newly created chief risk officer
position but said his start date has not been determined.

FHA Commissioner David H. Stevens has said that the chief risk officer will
oversee a division devoted to managing and mitigating risk to FHA's insurance
fund. The agency insures loans so that private lenders are protected against
default-related losses.

As FHA's volume of loans has exploded, some lawmakers have raised concerns about
whether the agency has the resources or policies to track risk or weed out
abusive lenders.

On Friday, the Inspector General of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, which includes FHA, said the agency lacks the ability to ensure
that lenders meet its requirements.

The report also said that FHA did not obtain or consider negative information on
lenders from other HUD offices, follow up on whether the required fees or
documentation were collected, or properly dispose of lender application files
containing personally identifiable information.

-- Dina ElBoghdady

INSURANCE

Geico to Expand Fredericksburg Office

 Geico is expanding its mid-Atlantic operations in Fredericksburg. The insurer
said Friday that it plans to hire 70 customer service counselors and sales
counselors by the end of the year. The Fredericksburg office currently has more
than 3,500 workers. Geico plans to hold career fairs at the Fredericksburg
office on Wednesday, Nov. 4, Nov. 18, Dec. 2 and Dec. 16.

-- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              316 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                            March 29, 2007 Thursday

U.S. home builder's shares fall as FBI starts inquiry;
MOVERS;
MARKETPLACE by Bloomberg;
E by Bloomberg

BYLINE: Bob Ivry and Andrew Blackman - Bloomberg News

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 381 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Shares of Beazer Homes USA plummeted Wednesday after the FBI started an
investigation into the home builder and government prosecutors requested
documents on its mortgage business.

Beazer, the ninth-largest U.S. home builder by revenue, said Thursday that there
have been no allegations that it did anything wrong and it will cooperate with
the request.

The Charlotte Observer, a North Carolina newspaper, reported Sunday that Beazer
sold homes to low-income buyers who could not afford them, and the FBI and the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development said they would investigate.
The FBI on Tuesday confirmed it had launched an inquiry.

The investigation comes as home builders are reporting increasing inventories
and declining sales in the deepest U.S. housing slump in 15 years. Rising
defaults among so-called subprime borrowers, whose poor or limited credit
histories force them to pay higher interest rates on home loans, may raise the
supply of houses and push prices down further.

''There have been no allegations of any wrongdoing,'' Beazer said Wednesday.
''Based on our internal investigations to date, we have found no evidence to
support the allegations in these articles.''

The Charlotte Observer reported that Beazer arranged 147 loans for buyers in its
Southern Chase development of 406 houses in Concord, North Carolina. The loans
were based on the assumption that the buyers' incomes would rise. The Federal
Housing Administration, which provides loan guarantees for lower-income
borrowers, restricted that practice in 2004, the newspaper said.

''The FBI is conducting a potential fraud investigation regarding Beazer, and
further comment will come from the U.S. Attorney's office, Western District of
North Carolina,'' the FBI said in a statement distributed Tuesday by its field
office in Charlotte, North Carolina.

Shares of Beazer fell $2.97, or 9.5 percent, to $28.44 in late trading on the
New York Stock Exchange. The stock had lost 5.3 percent this week through
Tuesday.

The company builds houses in more than 20 states with an average home price of
$287,000. A subsidiary, Beazer Mortgage, finances, originates, processes and
brokers mortgages to homebuyers and provides title services, according to a
regulatory filing.

Acer stock tumblesas price cuts erode net

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2007 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              317 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 August 5, 2013

Creating a Housing Finance System That Is Built to Last

BYLINE: Sandra Thompson

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 4 Vol. 37 No. 44

LENGTH: 1822  words


Community-based lenders play an important role in the provision of housing
credit. In addition to broadly supporting the financial services needs of their
customer base, this role is particularly important for certain areas of the
country, for certain types of borrowers, and for certain types of mortgage
products.

There is no generally accepted definition of "small lender" or "community bank"
within the industry or between the enterprises. Federal bank regulators
generally define them as institutions with under $1 billion in assets, while
employing various exceptions to this definition. The enterprises generally
define community-based lenders as lenders originating less than $1 billion of
mortgages per year regardless of the institution's total asset size.

Despite the fact that community-based lenders account for a small percent of the
residential mortgage lending market, they have a vital role in serving rural and
underserved markets nationally. Most importantly, community-based lenders are
committed to the people and the places where they lend money. They are a
stabilizing force in their local markets and generally engage in responsible
lending. Community-based lenders have a long history of making sound mortgage
loans, choosing not to originate the kinds of abusive and predatory loans that
contributed to the housing and financial crisis. This type of responsible
lending helps local economies thrive.

Community-based lenders are particularly important in smaller and rural
communities where lending can be challenging. Standard documentation that
aggregators or large lenders require from mortgage originators before accepting
loans for securitization may be more difficult to produce in smaller and rural
communities. For example, appraisals for collateral located in rural areas and
documentation for self-employed and seasonally employed borrowers may not be
acceptable to a larger lender and therefore may not be acceptable for secondary
market participation, resulting in many small lenders retaining loans in their
portfolios. Having lenders active and involved in smaller markets can be the
difference in local borrowers having access to single family home financing.

For many community-based lenders, participation in the primary mortgage market
is predicated on their ability to access the secondary market. This requires an
established relationship with a secondary market participant. Historically,
these lenders have maintained relationships with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the
Federal Home Loan Banks, Government National Mortgage Association, private-label
securitizers and correspondent banks.

Since the financial crisis, private-label securitizers have been almost entirely
absent from the single-family market, while a number of correspondent banks have
either curtailed or abandoned that business. Today, a large number of
community-based lenders continue to depend on relationships with Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac and/or the Federal Home Loan Banks for access to the secondary
mortgage market. They also interact with Ginnie Mae when originating FHA and VA
loans.

Also, some community-based lenders that are members of a Federal Home Loan Bank
are opting to sell their loans directly through the Federal Home Loan Bank
System's Acquired Member Asset program. In some cases, the Federal Home Loan
Bank buys loans outright for its portfolio, but increasingly the Federal Home
Loan Bank acts as an aggregator for small lenders, buying loans from members and
then selling them to Fannie Mae.

The Chicago Federal Home Loan Bank sponsors and administers the Mortgage "MPF
Xtra" program, where whole loans are aggregated directly from members and sold
to Fannie Mae for securitization. The "MPF Xtra" program is the largest seller
using cash execution at Fannie Mae, delivering over $6.9 billion in residential
mortgage whole loans during 2012. Members of seven different Federal Home Loan
Banks, including Chicago, utilize this cash execution in the secondary market.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac offer mortgage originators two options for delivering
loans for securitization. Mortgage originators may either sell loans for cash
through Freddie Mac's "cash window" or Fannie Mae's "whole loan conduit" or they
may exchange loans for mortgage-backed securities in an MBS swap transaction. In
this testimony we use the term cash window to refer to both enterprises'
mechanisms for delivering loans for cash. Through the cash window, the
enterprises purchase loans that meet their standards directly from lenders,
packaging them into securities and selling the securities to the market. The
cash window is a mechanism designed to enhance the liquidity of the lender.

Smaller lenders who do not have the scale to participate in the guarantor
business generally use the cash window, although lenders of all sizes sell loans
through this path. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac each have an existing selling
and/or servicing customer relationship with over 1,000 community-based lenders.
Some institutions have relationships with both enterprises.

Across all entities conducting business with the enterprises-including banks,
credit unions and mortgage bankers-cash window volumes at Fannie Mae tripled
from 2007 to 2012 and doubled at Freddie Mac over the same period. In 2012, over
2,200 customers sold $286 billion in loans for cash (one loan at a time or in
bulk) representing 25% of Fannie Mae's purchase volumes and 19% of Freddie Mac's
purchase volumes.

Over the past five years, the total volume of loans delivered to the enterprises
by community-based lenders has increased substantially. For example, in 2007,
only 3.6% of loans delivered to Freddie Mac came from outside the top 100
lenders. In 2012, this increased to 15.1% of all loans at Freddie Mac, more than
a fourfold increase. From 2007 to 2012, the number of community-based lenders at
both enterprises increased by 18%.

FHFA has undertaken initiatives that maintain and help ensure community-based
lenders have equal access to the secondary market. Last fall, FHFA mandated an
increase in guarantee fees for mortgage-backed security swap transactions
relative to those charged for cash window transactions. Since large lenders tend
to engage in swap transactions and small lenders tend to engage in cash
transactions, the intended effect of these changes was to level the playing
field between small and large lenders. This action followed price adjustments
earlier in the conservatorships that had already significantly reduced the
substantial pricing advantages large customers of the enterprises historically
used. Data provided to FHFA by both enterprises indicate this objective has been
achieved.

FHFA has also directed both enterprises to align and streamline their servicing
standards, and has encouraged consistent customer access and management through
standard eligibility and counterparty requirements. In this regard, FHFA has
discouraged the implementation of new minimum customer annual activity
thresholds for selling, servicing and utilizing the enterprises' automated
underwriting systems. Freddie Mac's proposed "low activity" fee of $7,500 would
have created a significant financial burden on smaller community-based lenders
and discouraged their ability to obtain liquidity in the secondary mortgage
market. With FHFA encouragement, the fee was changed and now there is only a
minimal fee for community-based lenders who have not delivered a loan within the
past three years. This fee allows small lenders to maintain their approved
seller status, which is important because it keeps the option open to make
future sales to the enterprise.

FHFA believes it is critical to include community-based lenders as we take steps
to prepare the foundation for a new housing finance system. There should not be
a significant difference in how large and small lenders are treated when
securitizing residential mortgage loans. We are developing and executing
alignment activities between the enterprises, by establishing common data
standards and uniform legal and contractual documents. Standardization of both
data requirements and contractual language necessary for securitization will go
a long way toward leveling the playing field between large and small
securitizers.

In 2010, FHFA directed the enterprises to initiate, develop and deploy a Uniform
Mortgage Data Program. This effort is designed to capture consistent and
accurate mortgage data, improve loan quality, and enhance risk management
capabilities.

A solid foundation of data standards is crucial to the future of housing finance
and will allow lenders of all sizes to participate in the marketplace on equal
footing. Developing an industry standard makes it far easier and cheaper for all
lenders, including community-based ones, to acquire the necessary technology
from a third-party vendor and apply it within their institution.

A component of UMDP that is currently underway is the Uniform Mortgage Servicing
Data project. UMSD will expand and standardize the servicing dataset used for
managing performing and nonperforming loans and for disclosure reporting. FHFA
and the enterprises are working with the industry to define the complete UMSD
dataset requirements at this time; full build-out and industry adoption is
expected to take several years. FHFA and the enterprises are working with the
Mortgage Industry Standards Maintenance Organization to ensure that UMSD data
points are accurately defined and specified for industry adoption. We are also
working with other agencies and the enterprises to standardize origination data
collected through the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Closing
Disclosure Form, which integrates parts of the HUD-1 and the final Truth in
Lending forms. The enterprises are also working to expand and reorganize the
data collected on the Uniform Residential Loan Application.

FHFA has also made the enterprises' development of the technical and functional
capabilities of the Common Securitization Platform a key component of the
strategic goal to build a new infrastructure for the secondary mortgage market.
The Common Securitization Platform is the technological means for packaging
mortgages into a variety of security structures. It also provides the
operational support to process and track the payments from borrowers to
investors. Initially, the platform will be the infrastructure the enterprises
use for data validation, issuance, disclosure, master servicing and bond
administration for their securities. This framework will connect capital markets
investors to homeowners and is being developed with the potential to be used by
other issuers in the future in a housing finance system with or without a
government guarantee. It is also vitally important that all lenders, large and
small, have access to the Common Securitization Platform.

Sandra Thompson is deputy director for the Division of Housing Mission and
Goals, FHFA.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              318 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         The Daily News of Los Angeles

                             April 22, 2007 Sunday
                                 VALLEY EDITION

SUBPRIME PROBLEMS HAD LOTS OF ORIGINS

BYLINE: GREGORY J. WILCOX

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 456 words


I knew it would come to this. Regulators, lenders and lawmakers falling all over
themselves to come up with a way to keep holders of subprime loans in their
homes and out of foreclosure.

Last week mortgage giant Freddie Mac and Seattle-based Washington Mutual on the
same day came riding to the rescue. Sort of.

Freddie, which buys and guarantees home loans, pledged to purchase up to $20
billion in adjustable- and fixed-rate loans.

Washington Mutual pledged to refinance $2 billion in subprime loans.

One big piece of the picture remains unclear, though, especially in the Southern
California market.

How widespread will this carnage be?

Consider this. In Los Angeles County, home sales took a huge slide starting at
the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2005.

The median price of a house (new and previously owned single-family homes and
condos) continues to set records.

Last month, the median price of a home in the six-county region rose an annual
4.6 percent to $505,000, according to La Jolla-based DataQuick Information
Systems. It's the first time the median price moved above $500,000, and it was a
$10,000 gain from the prior record of $495,000 in February.

DataQuick also doesn't expect a major meltdown here.

``Perception has outstripped reality on that,'' DataQuick analyst John Karevoll
said at the time. ``The loans at risk are a subcategory of a subcategory, and a
small percentage of those are going to go into default. It's a problem, but not
as big an issue as it's made out to be.''

The company also notes that financing with adjustable-rate mortgages is
declining significantly while foreclosure activity is rising, but it is still
within the normal range.

Some people are still feeling pain,. I bumped into an acquaintance last week who
moved from his house into an apartment. He was out of work for a while and
burned through savings.

He and his partner put the house, which they bought about 15 months ago, up for
sale last year but haven't had any offers.

Now they are resigned to slipping into foreclosure.

I asked about the lender and suggested trying to work something out. He said the
lender wouldn't even consider a short sale, or taking slightly less than what is
owed on the loan.

Now might be a good time to try some more negotiations.

But this is a fix a lot of people helped create.

Lenders came up with adjustable products that let people buy houses not caring
that a foreclosure could have a short event horizon.

Buyers fudged their finances to qualify.

Regulators didn't do much about liberal underwriting standards.

Buyers who could least afford it were getting pushed into the subprime, more
expensive loan market.

And a reliable fix to what's a troubling problem remains elusive.

greg.wilcox@dailynews.com

(818) 713-3743

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 Digital First Media
                              All Rights Reserved


                              319 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                            April 14, 2005 Thursday

Farm Credit Grabs Some Attention in GSE Debate

BYLINE: ROB BLACKWELL and Damian Paletta

SECTION: WASHINGTON; Pg. 1 Vol. 170 No. 71

LENGTH: 1118  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Limiting the mortgage holdings of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continued to

dominate discussion of reform of the regulation of the government-sponsored

enterprises, but several lawmakers branched out into other controversial

topics Wednesday.

Those included adding the Farm Credit System to the reform bill, making

guarantee fees public, requiring GSEs to comply with the Bank Secrecy Act,

and allowing the proposed supervisor to raise the conforming loan limit in

certain areas. Lawmakers and Bush administration officials also weighed in on

whether Congress should make the separation between the primary and secondary

mortgage markets clearer.

It was too soon to tell whether any of these proposals will be included

in the final legislation, but the discussion proved that many lawmakers have

moved beyond the traditional fault lines of debate into new territory.

Leading the charge at a House Financial Services Committee hearing was

Rep. Jim Leach, R-Iowa, who said the Farm Credit System and Farmer Mac must

be regulated by the same supervisor proposed for the housing GSEs.

Rep. Leach, who was the chairman of the old House Banking Committee,

accused them of violating their charters in stretching well beyond serving

farmers. He was most critical of the Farm Credit System, echoing longtime

banker complaints that it uses its tax-exempt status to undercut banks on

loan rates.

Lawmakers should be "very, very concerned" about "this issue of the Farm

Credit System as a banking institution with GSE powers that wants to operate

as a bank and is not simply serving the farming economy," Rep. Leach said.

"It is potentially far more explosive than the two housing GSEs. If we don't

deal with it today, it becomes more explosive tomorrow."

In response, Treasury Secretary John Snow said he had not looked into the

matter but noted that all GSEs have "commonalities." He did not say whether

he favored including the farming GSEs in the bill. Such a provision is

favored by the American Bankers Association and the Independent Community

Bankers of America.

Rep. Spencer Bachus, R-Ala., meanwhile, urged Mr. Snow to force Fannie

and Freddie to disclose guarantee fees, the premium the companies charge

banks for assuming the credit risk of purchased loans. He said that some

banks appear to be getting more favorable rates on guarantee fees based on

the volume of their sales to Fannie and Freddie, and not because of any

differences in credit risk.

"They are charging different people different rates," Rep. Bachus said.

"When these rates can amount to 15-20 basis points, that is a big difference.

They can be showing favoritism. I think as a public policy, they ought to

reveal their guarantee rates. It ought to be based on creditworthiness of the

mortgages, as opposed to volume. I think there is a strong right to know by

the public."

Mr. Snow replied that the issue "certainly deserves consideration" but

did not say whether it should be tackled in the legislation.

Rep. Sue Kelly, R-N.Y., said she believed all the GSE should have to

comply with the Bank Secrecy Act, including having to file

suspicious-activity reports. She said that could prevent mortgage fraud.

"The filing of SARs might have allowed fraud against taxpayers to be

detected sooner," Rep. Kelly said. "A sound public policy ought to demand, I

think, that all financial institutions should be subject to this key

component of our fight against money laundering and terrorist financing."

Mr. Snow said he did not yet have a position on the issue but would get

back to Rep. Kelly on it soon.

Much of the discussion also centered around the "bright line" between

primary and secondary market activities. A bill introduced by Sen. Chuck

Hagel, R-Neb., includes definitions of the two areas and would confine Fannie

and Freddie to secondary market activities. But a bill from Rep. Richard

Baker, R-La., would let the new GSE regulator define the line and enforce it

when approving new activities by the companies.

Some lawmakers, and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Alphonso

Jackson, said that was not enough.

The line "should be defined in the legislation," Mr. Jackson said. "We

have tried in many cases to deal with the situation -- that has been a very

difficult process."

Mr. Jackson also said the new regulator should have flexible authority

over setting the conforming loan limits. The limits used to be determined

based on home data by the GSEs themselves, but are now set by the Office of

Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. OFHEO sets the maximum size of loans

Fannie and Freddie may buy.

But Rep. Gary G. Miller, R-Calif., complained that median home prices in

certain markets, such as Los Angeles, far exceed the $330,000-plus limit for

single-family homes and put borrowers there at a disadvantage. Mr. Jackson

acknowledged the problem, and said a new regulator should have the power to

adjust the limits.

"I would hope that any regulator have the flexibility to look at this,"

he said. "It has to be addressed."

For the most part Mr. Snow emphasized the same points he did last week,

telling lawmakers they must create a new regulator with power over the

mortgage portfolios of Fannie and Freddie. He said the new supervisor should

be given specific guidance that the GSEs only be allowed to hold as much in

their portfolios as they need for their mission.

Separately, Senate Banking Committee Chairman Richard Shelby appeared

Wednesday to be leaning towards allowing Federal Home Loan banks to purchase

and sell mortgage-backed securities. He said this ability would increase

competition for Fannie and Freddie and help protect the banks from interest

rate risk.

But he said he still was not convinced that the banks had the expertise

to manage securitization. He pointed to problems at the Federal Home Loan

Bank of Seattle, which earlier this month submitted a mandatory three-year

management and capital plan to the Federal Housing Finance Board because of

lax risk management and low profitability.

"I think we have to be careful, especially in view of what has happened

in Seattle," Sen. Shelby told reporters after the hearing. "I think you have

to have sophisticated, well-trained people to create mortgage-backed

securities. If you did otherwise, you make a mistake."

Martin Eakes, the chief executive officer of the Self-Help Credit Union

in Durham, N.C., said allowing each Home Loan bank to create its own

securitization program could lead to problems -- especially if the goal is to

compete with Fannie and Freddie.

"It terrifies me that we might have 12 little Fannie Maes running around

doing their own activities, because I don't think we really want to have any

one of them fail," he said.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.

http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo, Leach

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: a


                        Copyright 2005 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              320 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                                January 31, 2017

Mortgage Bankers Offer New Vision for Housing Finance Reform

BYLINE: Ian McKendry

SECTION: COMPLIANCE & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 389  words


The Mortgage Bankers Association unveiled a new housing finance reform plan on
Tuesday designed to kick-start congressional discussions over what to do with
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

The thrust of the plan would create a system with multiple privately owned
utilities that act as "guarantors" for mortgages. Those firms could in turn buy
an explicit federal guarantee from a proposed government insurance fund for
eligible securities that they would issue. Under the plan, the securities would
be federally guaranteed, but the companies would not be.

"Today's paper is intended to provide thoughtful recommendations on how to
reform the [government-sponsored enterprises] while ensuring a healthy, robust
secondary mortgage market emerges for both single-family and multifamily
mortgages," said Rodrigo Lopez, executive chairman of NorthMarq Capital and
chairman of the MBA, in a press release.

Housing finance reform discussions have moved in fits and starts since Fannie
and Freddie were seized by the government and put into conservatorship during
the financial crisis.

But reform talks are heating up again this year as the new administration has
pledged to tackle the issue and the government-sponsored enterprises are
projected to run out of capital by the end of next year.

The MBA's decision to weigh in with its own plan is a clear sign that they
believe the dynamics that hampered previous attempts to find a permanent
solution have changed.

The trade group listed the availability of the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage and a
deep liquid market for single-family loans as top priorities, but acknowledged
that achieving those goals without putting taxpayer dollars at risk is
difficult.

The MBA said its proposed insurance fund would be funded by premiums from the
guarantors, who would have a regulated rate of return. The guarantors would also
have mandated affordable housing goals.

The MBA's plan builds on steps the Obama administration took to create a Common
Securitization Platform that would allow for guarantors to issue a single
security rather than two competing securities.

"This paper was developed with an eye toward serving the broadest range of
housing options, and thus includes both single- and multifamily approaches for
homeowners and renters," said Mike May, executive managing director at Berkeley
Point Capital.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              321 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           February 1, 2017 Wednesday

Mortgage bankers offer new vision for housing finance reform

BYLINE: Ian McKendry

SECTION: Vol. 1 No. 21

LENGTH: 401  words


WASHINGTON - The Mortgage Bankers Association unveiled a new housing finance
reform plan on Tuesday designed to kick-start congressional discussions over
what to do with the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

The thrust of the plan would create a system with multiple privately owned
utilities that act as "guarantors" for mortgages. Those firms could in turn buy
an explicit federal guarantee from a proposed government insurance fund for
eligible securities that they would issue. Under the plan, the securities would
be federally guaranteed, but the companies would not be.

"Today's paper is intended to provide thoughtful recommendations on how to
reform the GSEs while ensuring a healthy, robust secondary mortgage market
emerges for both single-family and multifamily mortgages," Rodrigo Lopez,
executive chairman of NorthMarq Capital and the MBA's chairman, said in a press
release.

Housing finance reform discussions have moved in fits and starts since Fannie
and Freddie were seized by the government and put into conservatorship during
the financial crisis.

But reform talks are heating up again this year as the new administration has
pledged to tackle the issue and the government-sponsored enterprises are
projected to run out of capital by the end of next year.

The MBA's decision to weigh in with its own plan is a clear sign that the group
believes the dynamics that hampered previous attempts to find a permanent
solution have changed.

The trade group listed the availability of the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage and a
deep liquid market for single-family loans as top priorities, but acknowledged
that achieving those goals without putting taxpayer dollars at risk is
difficult.

The MBA said its proposed insurance fund would be funded by premiums from the
guarantors, which would have a regulated rate of return. The guarantors would
also have mandated affordable housing goals.

The MBA's plan builds on steps the Obama administration took to create a Common
Securitization Platform that would allow for guarantors to issue a single
security rather than two competing securities.

"This paper was developed with an eye toward serving the broadest range of
housing options, and thus includes both single- and multifamily approaches for
homeowners and renters," said Mike May, executive managing director of Berkeley
Point Capital, a provider of multifamily capital solutions.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/news/mortgage-bankers-offer-new-vision-for-
housing-finance-reform

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              322 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 9, 2012

Truth in Government Lending Long Overdue

BYLINE: Edward Pinto

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 4 Vol. 36 No. 28

LENGTH: 1027  words


The federal government has taken over large swaths of consumer lending, most
notably the $10 trillion home mortgage and $1 trillion student lending markets.
The government's share of new loans for each now approaches 100%.

The housing and education lobbies strongly favor government involvement in
financial services. Their actions are based on two beliefs: (1) that the
government is able to charge lower rates for loans-which comes as no surprise
given the numerous advantages the government has over the private sector, and
(2) that since the programs are designed to be self-sufficient, they pose no
risk to the taxpayer.

If only this were true. Over the years, taxpayers have had to bail out failed
government insurance programs such as the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
Corp., Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Others are insolvent: the Federal Housing
Administration, the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corp. and the National Flood
Insurance Program to name but a few.

The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. avoided insolvency thanks to the Troubled
Asset Relief Program and the Fed's imposition of artificially low rates for
years, resulting in the transfer of hundreds of billions of dollars from savers
to debtors.

Government insurance programs suffer from three fundamental flaws: (1) the
government cannot successfully price for risk, (2) government backing distorts
prices, resource allocation, and competition, and (3) political pressure and
congressional demands for a quid pro quo inevitably arise, politicizing the
programs.

This last point was central in the growth of the housing bubble and ensuing
bust. Home lending had become politicized as low- and moderate-income housing
mandates and demands for innovative and flexible lending standards impacted the
entire market.

The federally guaranteed student loan program may be creating yet another
bubble. The cost of four-year private and public college educations has gone up
by 27% and 49%, respectively, (in constant dollars) since 2001, yet federally
guaranteed student loans have increased by over 100% (in constant dollars). How
fast can you say Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac?

Government insurance programs consistently underprice risk

A feature of the government's inability to price for risk is a conscious
decision by Congress to underprice risk. The worst risks are inevitably priced
about the same as the best ones and the lowest risk guarantees are used to
cross-subsidize those with the highest risk.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's single-family guarantee program is the
poster child for underpricing risk. A borrower with a FICO score of 620 (a score
in the twentieth percentile) is able to get a zero downpayment loan of say
$150,000.

The all-in cost of the USDA loan is at least $12,000 below what Freddie Mac
would require for the same borrower paying five percent down. Up until recently,
Freddie didn't price for risk. This has changed, at least while it is in
conservatorship. The risk premium required by Freddie is high because about one
in every five of borrowers with these characteristics is expected to fail.

When the government treats high- and low-risk borrowers in the same way, those
with poor savings and bad credit habits are rewarded, while the low risk
borrowers are penalized. At the same time, this policy encourages low-risk
borrowers to take on more risks.

The FHA's pricing experience demonstrates this: it requires a minimum
downpayment of 3.5% and has an average downpayment of 4%. Whether one makes a
3.5% or a 20% downpayment, the insurance premium is virtually the same. There is
therefore no incentive to make a bigger downpayment, and the policy sends the
wrong message to the homebuyers.

A twofold solution is needed

First, government insurance programs must be restricted to being prudent
providers of guaranteed financial services to low- and moderate-income
Americans. These programs must end their promotion of high-risk behavior.

Second, consumers themselves must be protected from the lack of pricing
transparency in government insurance programs. This lack of transparency is used
to mask imprudent guarantees from credit applicants. The solution is to pass a
Truth in Government Lending Act.

Each consumer applying for a government guarantee would be given an easily
understandable disclosure form within 72 hours of application and at closing.
The document would explain the expected failure rate of individuals with risk
characteristics similar to the applicant's.

The federal student loan program also clearly demonstrates the need for TIGLA.
The Department of Education reports that early default rates for guaranteed
student loans range from about 5% for four-year public and private four year
colleges to 15% for for-profit four year colleges with the average for all
students being about 9%.

While this wide difference is a serious enough problem, a new study published by
the New York Federal Reserve Bank found that actual student loan default rates
are more likely 27% or triple the rate reported by the Department of Education.

Like the FHA and other government insurance programs, the student loan program
uses specialized accounting and reporting rules not applicable to other types of
consumer credit. After adjusting for these effects, the New York Fed study
concluded that about 27% of students who had graduated and were in the student
loan repayment phase were delinquent.

Equally ominous, 75% of these past due borrowers were over the age of 30.
Providing this information would help new students evaluate the relative risks
and returns of their chosen institution of higher learning and field of study.

Ignoring risk does not eliminate it

Today, the four fastest growing government insurance programs are the FHA, the
USDA's single-family guarantee program, Ginnie Mae and the direct federal
student loan program.

We have seen this movie before and a bad ending is inevitable. Government
insurance programs must be reined in before the government's control of multiple
financial sectors leads not only to further bailouts, but to uninformed and
imprudent risk-taking by consumers.

Edward Pinto is a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              323 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                             March 8, 2011 Tuesday

Opinion: Government must step in to prevent rental housing shortage

BYLINE: By David Abromowitz Special to the Mercury News

SECTION: NEWS; Opinion

LENGTH: 588 words


What is the single biggest monthly budget item for most families? A payment for
housing, often a rent check.

Rents are starting to rise dramatically and in every major metropolitan area are
expected to rise from 3 percent to 10 percent in 2011 and beyond. That means a
family paying $1,700 a month for an average two-bedroom apartment in San Jose
might see a rent hike to nearly $2,000 for the year.

For many families, the extension of middle-class tax cuts will go out the door
to their landlord. Economic recovery could be stopped in its tracks by sudden
rent shock unless Congress and the administration adopt a balanced approach to
rental housing finance.

While rising rents are good for apartment owners, it leaves many of the
one-third of Americans who rent with less money in their pockets, just as the
economy needs them to spend a little more.

Rising rents reflect increasing demand and constrained supply. Nearly 80 million
aging boomers are entering their prime renting years, along with 4.5 million
people who lost their houses to foreclosure. Yet multifamily construction starts
plunged from nearly 350,000 units annually before the 2008 financial collapse to
barely 100,000 annually.

Rising rents over time spur increased production. But over the next 30 years, we
may need to add more than 40 million new housing units of all types to meet the
demand. We cannot get on track without a strong rental housing finance system.

Clouding this issue is a loud, ideologically tinged call to get government out
of housing, especially in the single-family mortgage market. Despite the flawed
underpinnings of this extreme free market view, apartment finance could be held
hostage as the debate rages.

Yet apartment finance with government help was not responsible for the financial
crises beginning in 2007. Apartment loans held or guaranteed by Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac have default rates of under 1 percent, while private securitized
loan defaults are over 10 percent.

Private developers may want to create rental housing to meet the exploding
demand. But without sufficient long-term financing options, few can take the
risk of starting construction.

To avoid shrinkage in the apartment market just when we need expansion, a
multifamily housing task force convened by the Center for American Progress
proposed reforms to establish a responsible role for government.

It calls for a limited program to provide government insurance to guarantee
timely payment to investors. It involves securitization of housing loans to
expand the financing market by spreading risk, increasing access to private
capital and enabling longer-term, fixed-rate mortgage options.

Like the FDIC, which insures bank deposits but not the bonds or stock of a bank,
the government would not guarantee the debt or equity. Instead, this guarantee
would be just of payment on the mortgage securities, and it would be financed by
an assessment on the securities insured.

It is tempting to believe that the private market can do it all without any
government role. But a long history in American finance has shown that not to be
true. Carefully tailored and limited government aid is a key part of what we
need to avert the rental housing shortage on the horizon.

DAVID ABR0MOWITZ, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress, is a
founding member of the Lawyers' Clearinghouse on Affordable Housing and
Homelessness and of the American Bar Association's Forum Committee on Affordable
Housing and Community Development. He wrote this article for this newspaper.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              324 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               MortgageDaily.com

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 5, 2013 Tuesday

Bankers, Lenders Testify on Secondary Market Reform

BYLINE: Mortgage Daily

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1139 words


Nov. 05--The nation's trade groups representing mortgage lenders and financial
institutions delivered their suggestions for improving the secondary mortgage
market to Congress, with much emphasis placed on protecting smaller players.

The Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs held a hearing
Tuesday entitled, Housing Finance Reform: Protecting Small Lenders Access to the
Secondary Market.

Testifying at the hearing were officials from the American Bankers Association,
the Independent Community Bankers of America and the Mortgage Bankers
Association.

MBA Chairman-Elect Bill Cosgrove said in prepared testimony that 7,400 lenders
originated mortgages in 2012. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac each have a thousand of
those lenders approved as direct sellers, and Ginnie Mae has 250 issuers
approved.

"The vast majority of these lenders are smaller independent mortgage bankers and
community banks," Cosgrove testified. "In fact, according to the most recent
HMDA data, independent mortgage bankers represent 11 percent of all lenders
nationwide, yet they originated 40 percent of all purchase money mortgages in
2012."

ICBA Chairman Bill Loving noted that community bankers account for around 20
percent of the mortgage market. Around 30 percent of this group sell their home
loans on the secondary market.

MBA's Cosgrove -- who is chief executive officer of Union Home Mortgage Corp., a
278-employee firm based in Cleveland that reports 50,000 loans originated since
1999 -- said he sees the importance of small lenders rising over the next year
as the mortgage market transitions from refinance to purchase.

Both banking groups called for protection to secondary market access by small
financial institutions.

"In reforming the housing finance system, policymakers must be careful not to
create a new system that eradicates liquidity for all but the few largest
players, limits access to the market or narrows options for smaller lenders, and
imposes requirements that make it too costly for smaller lenders and servicers
to participate," stated ICBA Chairman Bill Loving, who also noted that his group
welcomes the return to a more balanced and less concentrated housing finance
system.

MBA's Cosgrove said that the secondary mortgage market needs to provide price
certainty that matches the risk of the underlying loan. It needs to maintain
ease of delivery while executing quick fundings. The secondary system also needs
to allow for execution of servicing-retained and servicing-released
transactions.

In addition, a reformed second market should enable execution of single-loan
sales and small pool execution with a low minimum pool size, the MBA official
said.

"Single-family lenders should be able to utilize familiar credit enhancement
options, such as mortgage insurance, to facilitate secondary market transactions
in a timely and orderly way," Cosgrove stated. "Key functions present in today's
secondary market system should be preserved, while allowing new forms of private
credit enhancement to develop over time."

He called on Congress to ensure a smooth transition in secondary market reform.

The associations called for caution in transitioning from the
government-sponsored enterprise model, which the ICBA said worked well for its
members.

"Key GSE assets, including technology, systems, data, and people, should be
preserved and redeployed as part of any transition associated with GSE reform,"
MBA's Cosgrove explained. "For example, certain assets could be moved into the
Common Securitization Platform."

Other GSE assets like automated underwriting systems could be made available
through a public leasing program. They could also be auctioned with the
condition that all market participants are insured access.

Community bankers called for a gradual and transparent transition from the GSEs
to any new secondary market structure.

MBA is asking Congress to consider expanding membership in the Federal Home Loan
Bank System to non-depository mortgage lenders. Cosgrove says this group
consists of smaller, community-based mortgage bankers or servicers focused on
providing mainstream mortgage products and services.

ABA Chairman Jeff Plagge testified that limited expansion of the FHLB's role may
also be an option as long as community banks' access to traditional advances
aren't harmed.

ICBA's Loving told lawmakers that the FHLBs need to be preserved as an access
point to the national secondary market for community banks.

Cosgrove highlighted S. 1217, Housing Finance Reform and Taxpayer Protection Act
of 2013, which he said proposes a system that is closer in many respects to
Ginnie's model. Lenders are issuers who are responsible for obtaining private
credit enhancement before delivering pools of loans to the central
securitization platform for the government guaranty.

But while the approach might work for some lenders, it could be too
operationally difficult for many smaller lenders.

The senate bill, which was introduced in June by Sens. Mark Warner (D-Va.) and
Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), does provide an alternative for smaller lenders in the
form of a mutual securitization cooperative, but the mortgage bankers cautioned
that broad standards for a mutual should ensure a fair governance process that
doesn't advantage one class of mutual shareholders over another.

ABA's Plagge acknowledged the need for a government guarantee available to banks
of all sizes and charter types. He supports the creation of a mutual entity as
long as it is economically viable has an appropriate governance structure.

Plagge noted that any government guarantee must be explicit, priced into the
cost of each loan and -- most importantly -- available to eligible primary
market lenders of all sizes, charter types, geographic locations secondary
market volumes.

"It's equally important to ensure that end state reforms address the variety of
ways that small lenders access the secondary market, and that any mutual company
created is not the only option for small lenders," Cosgrove stated.

The ICBA said that only Qualified Mortgages should be eligible for
securitization or sale to the secondary market and contain a government
guaranty.

Plagge said that mortgage market should be predominantly filled by the private
sector. He said that equal access, equal pricing, multiple channels and
reasonable capital requirements are needed to ensure community banks have access
to a federally guaranteed secondary market.

"Reforming the mortgage market will be a complex undertaking with far-reaching
consequences for our economy," Plagge testified. "It must be undertaken in a
thoughtful, orderly manner, and done with a careful transition over a number of
years to ensure that the mortgage markets are not destabilized."

___ (c)2013 Mortgage Daily Visit Mortgage Daily at www.mortgagedaily.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20131105-1MG-Bankers-Lenders-Testify-on-Secondary-Market-Reform-1105-20131105

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1MG


                                 Copyright 2013


                              325 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           December 11, 2008 Thursday

Ex-officer cites 'orgy' of junk loans;
Scathing testimony at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac hearings

BYLINE: Lynnley Browning - The New York Times Media Group

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 670 words


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac engaged in ''an orgy of junk mortgage development''
that turned the two U.S. mortgage-finance giants into vast repositories of
subprime and similarly risky loans, according to testimony by a former Fannie
executive.

The mortgage development, which began in 2005 and lasted until at least last
year, happened as senior executives at the two government-sponsored enterprises
ignored repeated warnings from internal risk officers that they were too deep in
dangerous territory, according to internal documents released at a congressional
hearing in Washington on Tuesday. The two companies have been taken over by the
government.

The former executive, Edward Pinto, who was chief credit officer at Fannie Mae,
told the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee that the mortgage
giants now guarantee or hold 10.5 million nonprime loans worth $1.6 trillion -
one in three of all subprime loans, and nearly two in three of all so-called
Alt-A loans, often called ''liar loans.''

Such loans now make up 34 percent of the total single-family mortgage portfolios
at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, a level that will link them to 8 million
foreclosures, or one in six, in coming years, Pinto said. The nonprime loans
''have turned the American dream of homeownership into the American nightmare of
foreclosure,'' he said.

The hearing was the latest by Congress on the collapse of the two companies,
which guarantee half of all mortgages nationwide and are the engine of the
housing market. The former chief executives of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
Daniel Mudd and Richard Syron, and their predecessors, Franklin Raines and
Leland Brendsel, faced pointed questioning from lawmakers.

Referring to what he called ''the total denial that's going on here today and
the refusal to answer simple questions,'' Representative Stephen Lynch, Democrat
of Massachusetts, told the executives that ''if you have accomplished anything
here today, you have made conservatorship look very, very good.''
Conservatorship refers to the government's taking control of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.

But the testimony of Pinto, who was Fannie Mae's chief credit officer in the
late 1980s and who has studied its financial statements, and other private
analysts shed new light on the role of the housing giants in the subprime
crisis.

That role has not been fully recognized, in part because many subprime and Alt-A
loans show up as prime loans.

Arnold Kling, an economist who once worked at Freddie Mac, testified that a
high-risk loan could be ''laundered,'' as he put it, by Wall Street and return
to the banking system as a triple-A-rated security for sale to investors,
obscuring its true risks.

Charles Calomiris, a finance professor at Columbia University, testified that
nobody saw the crisis coming because the two mortgage giants ''adopted
accounting practices that masked their subprime and Alt-A lending.''

The former executives at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were questioned relentlessly
on why they did not foresee the collapse in housing prices and why they ignored
warnings from risk officers about buying nonprime loans.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have long insisted that their involvement with
subprime and other nonprime loans has been minimal.

Asked about the increased purchases, Mudd insisted that ''Alt-A loans were
essentially a subset of overall A loans,'' and not subprime.

But internal e-mail messages the committee obtained told a different story.

A June 2005 presentation by Mudd described the crossroads faced by the company,
focused on prime loans while the subprime market was expanding. ''We face two
stark choices: one, stay the course; two, meet the market where the market is,''
he wrote. Another 2005 Fannie Mae document referred to ''underground efforts to
develop a subprime infrastructure and modeling for alternative markets.''

And in March 2006, Enrico Dallavecchia, Fannie Mae's chief risk officer, wrote
to Mudd to say, ''Dan, I have a serious problem with the control process around
subprime limits.''

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              326 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                             January 7, 2007 Sunday

SECTION: MONEY

LENGTH: 906 words


Stockert hired

Gate City Bank hired Stacy Stockert as a customer service and sales supervisor
at its downtown Bismarck office at 304 E. Rosser Ave.

Stockert has several years of banking experience. She is a graduate of Century
High school.

Stockert and her husband, Brian, live in Bismarck with their chidren, Taylor and
Braydon.

Helfrich attends

Diane Helfrich, president and co-owner of America's Home Loans LLC attended the
2006 Mortgage Management Conference held in Orlando, Fla. The conference
featured top trainers, speakers and networking opportunities from across the
U.S. for the mortgage banking industry.

Olsen begins work

Michelle Olsen has started work as the research analyst for North Dakota Career
Resource Network in Bismarck.

Olsen has master's degrees in computer education and human resource training and
development from Idaho State University and Lesley College in Massachusetts. She
most recently worked at Bismarck State College as an Instructional systems
designer.

Bruce added

Dakota Eye Institute recently added Patti Bruce as an optician at the main
clinic and Janel Buchholtz as an administrative assistant at the retina clinic.

Bruce has more than 15 years experience in the optical field and her duties
include selling and assisting patients with the fitting and styling of
eyeglasses in the optical store.

Larson attends

Sarah Larson, an accountant with Brady, Martz & Associates, P.C., recently
attended a 2006 QuickBooks Consultant's University seminar. This Sleeter Group
seminar covered networking QuickBooks software, the new features of QuickBooks
2006, and new ways to remotely transfer data from client to accountant. Larson
is an accountant with Brady Martz and focuses on the area of QuickBooks services
to clients.

Two appointed

Tonya White Mountain, loan packager for Standing Rock Housing Authority in Fort
Yates, was recently appointed to serve on the Federal Home Loan Bank of Des
Moines' Affordable Housing Advisory Council. Her three-year term began Jan. 1.

White Mountain has more 15 years of experience at the Standing Rock Housing
Authority. She provides personal assistance to families seeking loans to
purchase or build a home or repair one they already own. In her current
position, she packages home loans and grant applications for USDA Rural
Development programs, the HUD 184 Loan Guarantee program and VA Direct Home
Loans for Native Americans.

Paul E. Rechlin, executive director, CommunityWorks North Dakota in Bismarck,
was recently re-appointed to serve on the Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines'
Affordable Housing Advisory Council. He will serve a three-year term beginning
Jan. 1.

Since 1984, Rechlin has been the executive director of the Lewis and Clark
Regional Development Council, a 10-county community and economic development
organization. He also has been the executive director of CommunityWorks North
Dakota, a statewide nonprofit that provides affordable housing programs,
services and financing throughout North Dakota since it was created in 1995.

Two promoted

Stacey Kunze has been promoted to assistant vice president and retail banking
supervisor at the downtown Mandan location of Starion Financial.

While continuing to develop retail banking relationships including consumer
lending and deposits, Kunze will assume supervision of Mandan personal bankers,
lead teller and customer service representatives, and staff of the Starion Dan's
SuperMarket location.

Katie Simmers will fill the retail banking supervisor post at the downtown
Bismarck location and take on additional responsibilities for assisting business
clients with their personal banking needs. She will supervise personal bankers,
customer service and teller staff.

Fuchs promoted

Bryon Fuchs has been promoted to supervise the local government division's
county program as a transportation engineer III, according to the North Dakota
Department of Transportation.

Fuchs formerly served in the materials and research division as a research
engineer developing pavement designs. He has more than five years of service
with NDDOT. Fuchs also worked as an engineering consultant for four years.

Three named

Wells Fargo Bismarck-Mandan has named Jamie Klein agricultural industry
specialist, Lee Weisbeck business banking specialist and Lindsay Kostelecky
business banking associate.

Klein brings 10 years of financial services experience - including ag banking,
credit and crop insurance - to his role. Most recently, he was an ag banker in
Detroit Lakes, Minn.

Most recently, Weisbeck was an assistant store manager for Wells Fargo
Financial. He also served as a Wells Fargo financial credit manager. Weisbeck
graduated from the University of Mary with a bachelor's degree in business
administration.

Kostelecky has been a lead teller and teller for Wells Fargo. From Bismarck, she
holds a bachelor's degree in business administration from Dickinson State
University.

Braley hired

Atlas Inc. has hired Jim Braley as the general manager of the company's Ready
Mix Division.

Braley comes to Atlas from JTL Group Inc., a Knife River Corp. subsidiary
headquartered in Billings, Mont.

Braley began working at JTL Group-Belgrade in October 2001 as the quality
control manager and was promoted to ready-mix concrete manager in May 2002.
Prior to joining JTL Group, he had worked in the materials testing and
inspection field for more than 20 years. Braley holds an associate degree in
applied science from SUNY at Morrisville, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2007 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              327 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 March 8, 2010

FHFA Had No Choice on Refinancing Extension

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2 Vol. 34 No. 23

LENGTH: 471  words


WASHINGTON-Extending the Home Affordable Refinance Program for one year must
have been a no-brainer for the nation's GSE regulator.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are stuck with billions of dollars worth of high LTV
and underwater mortgages - and the HARP initiative offers the GSEs the only
reasonable avenue in dealing with troubled borrowers who are hanging on.

In Fannie's case, 37% of its $2.8 trillion single-family book-of-business has a
loan-to-value ratio above 80%. Freddie reported that 28% of its $1.9 trillion
book has LTVs above 90%. (Comparable numbers on the same LTV were not
available.)

The two requested a HARP extension through June 2011 with the Federal Housing
Finance Agency approving it last week.

Launched last April, HARP gives the government-sponsored enterprises the
flexibility to go beyond their normal underwriting guidelines (and mortgage
insurance restrictions) to refinance mortgages they already own or guarantee.

Without HARP, the GSEs could not refinance loans with LTVs above 80%. The
program even grants the authority to refinance mortgages where a new appraisal
results in an LTV as high 125%.

Freddie allows borrowers to finance up to $5,000 in closing costs into the loan.
Fannie doesn't limit the amount of closing costs that can be rolled into a
HARP-refinanced loan. Borrowers can finance the payment of closing costs,
prepaid items and points into the new loan.

The GSEs, not surprisingly, are suffering their highest credit losses in history
thanks to sky-high delinquencies on alt-A loans and interest-only mortgages.

If a GSE owns such a loan and it isn't yet delinquent, chances are the homeowner
might be "underwater" on equity or headed in that direction.

Fannie owns/guarantees $183 billion in interest-only and $248 billion in alt-A
mortgages. Roughly 23% of its IO loans and 15% of its alt-A have LTVs north of
100% (but less 125%).

Freddie has $148 billion in alt-A and $130 billion of IO mortgages. Roughly, 38%
of its alt-A product and 52% of its IOs have LTVs above 100%.

In 2009, HARP enabled the GSEs to refinance 190,000 loans, allowing borrowers to
lower their monthly payments. But less than 2,000 of those refis involved loans
with LTVs above 105%.

Federal Housing Finance Agency acting director Ed DeMarco said an extension will
"support and promote market stability" and encourage more lenders to "fully
adopt the HARP program."

HARP was due to expire June 10. However, five industry groups urged the GSE
regulator to act quickly in extending HARP to avoid any disruptions.

"By April 1, lenders will no longer be able to extend even 60-day rate locks,"
according a joint letter written by the groups. The American Bankers
Association, American Financial Services Association, Consumer Mortgage
Coalition, Housing Policy Council and Mortgage Bankers Association signed the
letter.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              328 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 11, 2008 Tuesday

Fannie Mae posts record loss;
Foreclosures, credit-related expenses push third-quarter loss to $29-billion
(U.S.)

BYLINE: JAMES R. HAGERTY AND APARAJITA SAHA-BUBNA, WALL STREET JOURNAL STAFF

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: INTERNATIONAL; HOUSING; Pg. B11

LENGTH: 1005 words


Fannie Mae posted a record $29-billion (U.S.) loss for the third quarter and
said it is losing money so rapidly that it may need a cash infusion from the
U.S. Treasury by year's end.

The company, which along with rival Freddie Mac owns or guarantees nearly half
of all U.S. mortgages, said the loss reflected $9.2-billion in credit-related
expenses, including losses on foreclosures and provisions for future losses.
That is up from credit-related expenses of $1.2-billion a year earlier.

The biggest factor in Fannie's loss was a $21.4-billion charge to reflect the
likelihood that the company will not be able to make use of tax credits listed
on its balance sheet as assets. Fannie acquired many of the tax credits through
financing of low-income housing developments.

By writing off the tax credits, the company is acknowledging that the worst
housing downturn in decades is showing no signs of letting up. In its earnings
report, the company said it concluded as of Sept. 30 that "it was more likely
than not" that it won't produce enough taxable income in future quarters to
realize the full value of those tax credits. Critics have long argued that
Fannie would have to write down the tax credits. A spokesman said the company is
not granting interviews.

Howard Shapiro, an analyst at Fox-Pitt Kelton Cochran Caronia Waller in New
York, called the losses "a form of housecleaning" by Fannie's new chief
executive officer, Herbert Allison, who is moving quickly to clean up the
company's books while also responding to pressure from the Treasury Department
to support the housing market by purchasing mortgages.

Mr. Allison was installed in early September by Fannie's regulator, the Federal
Housing Finance Agency. Mr. Shapiro noted that Fannie and Freddie are no longer
"being run for profit" but rather as instruments of government policy aimed at
propping up the housing market.

Fannie's loss for the latest quarter worked out to $13 a share. A year earlier,
Fannie surprised investors with what then seemed like a huge loss of
$1.4-billion or $1.56 a share.

Federal regulators in early September took control of the management of Fannie
and Freddie under a legal process known as conservatorship, citing the risk that
default-related losses would wipe out their thin layers of capital. At the time,
the Treasury pledged to provide as much as $100-billion of capital to each
company if needed.

Fannie said its net worth, or assets less liabilities, totalled $9.4-billion as
of Sept. 30, down from $41.4-billion three months earlier. To remain in
business, Fannie would need funding from the Treasury if its net worth fell
below zero. Fannie said that may happen "if current trends in the housing and
financial markets continue or worsen."

Fannie and Freddie are still owned by private sector shareholders, but the
Treasury, in return for agreeing to provide capital if needed, in September
obtained warrants allowing it to acquire stakes of 79.9 per cent in the
companies for a nominal sum. Because of expectations that there will be little
value left for other shareholders, the companies' share prices have collapsed in
recent months.

Fannie's shares traded at a 52-week high of $50.44 last Nov. 14. Freddie's
52-week high was $45.85, also on Nov. 14, 2007. Freddie hasn't set a date for
releasing third-quarter results, a spokesman said.

Fannie is struggling to sell foreclosed homes as their prices drop. Its
inventory of single-family foreclosed homes on Sept. 30 was 67,519, up from
54,173 three months earlier and 33,729 at the end of 2007. Net sales prices for
foreclosed homes fell to an average of 70 per cent of the unpaid loan balance in
the latest quarter from 78 per cent in 2007 as a whole.

More and more borrowers are falling behind as job losses prevent some from
paying and falling home values discourage others from trying. At the end of the
latest quarter, non-performing loans totalled $63.6-billion, or 2.2 per cent of
mortgages guaranteed by Fannie, up from 1.6 per cent as of June 30. Loans
generally are classed as non-performing when payments are three months or more
overdue.

California accounted for about 31 per cent of Fannie's single-family credit
losses in the third quarter, while Michigan accounted for 11 per cent, Florida
for 10 per cent and Arizona for 9 per cent. About 4.4 per cent of single-family
loans backed by Fannie in Florida were 90 or more days overdue, compared with
1.4 per cent in California and a national average of 1.7 per cent.

Fannie and Freddie buy home loans from lenders and bundle them into securities,
many of which are sold to other investors. Fannie and Freddie collect fees for
guaranteeing that payments will be made on those loans, and take losses when
defaults occur. As Fannie and Freddie have faltered in recent months, a rapidly
growing share of U.S. mortgage lending is being insured by the Federal Housing
Administration, which insures lenders against the risk of default on loans that
meet FHA standards.

During the housing boom, Fannie and Freddie avoided some of the worst excesses
of lax lending to subprime borrowers, or those with poor credit histories. But
both companies, seeking to regain market share, lowered their standards in 2006
and 2007, particularly on Alt-A loans, or those to borrowers who do not fully
document their incomes. Alt-A loans made up 10 per cent of Fannie's
single-family-home loan book as of Sept. 30 but accounted for 48 per cent of
credit losses in the latest quarter. Fannie and Freddie also were big buyers of
securities created by Wall Street firms and backed by dubious subprime and Alt-A
loans.

*****

Vulnerable spots

Percentage of loans backed by Fannie Mae that are 90 days or more overdue
              September 30,     September 30,
                       2008              2007
Florida               4.37%             0.99%
Nevada                 3.08              0.74
Ohio                   2.19               1.6
Arizona                2.14              0.42
Michigan               1.86              1.22
Californi              1.44               0.3
a

 THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

SOURCE: FANNIE MAE

FANNIE MAE (FNM)

Close: 72 cents, down 2 cents

FREDDIE MAC (FRE)

Close: 88 cents, down 2 cents

© 2008 Dow Jones & Co. Inc.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              329 of 998 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2017 Hoover's Inc., All Rights Reserved

                  Hoover's Company Records - In-depth Records

                                 March 29, 2017

                     FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION

                             3900 Wisconsin Ave Nw
                           Washington,  DC 20016-2806
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: 202-752-7000
FAX: 202-752-0170
URL: www.fanniemae.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
TICKER: FNMA
HOOVER ID: 10553

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
LEGAL STATUS: Public

EMPLOYEES:  7,000
ONE YEAR EMPLOYEE GROWTH:  (4.1%)

FORTUNE 500 (June 2016) RANKING:  16
FORTUNE 1000 (June 2016) RANKING:  16

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *

OFFICER                 TITLE             AGE     SALARY      BONUS TOTAL_COMP
                                                                      ENSATION
William B (Bill)        Vice President      -          -          -          -
Senhauser
Christine (Chrissy)     Vice President      -          -          -          -
Reddy                   Corporate
                        Governance
                        Deputy General
                        Counsel
Jeffery R. Hayward      EVP and Head,      60 $475,000.0          -          -
                        Multifamily
James (Jamie) Horne     Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Accounting
                        Systems
Ramon Richards          Vice President,     -          -          -          -
                        Finance And
                        Corporate
                        Technology
Andrew Bon Salle        EVP                 - $500,000.0          -          -
                        Single-Family
                        Underwriting,
                        Pricing, and
                        Capital Markets
Bruce Lee               SVP Operations      -          -          -          -
                        and Technology
Nigel D Brazier         Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Business Unit
                        Controller
David C. Benson         EVP and CFO        57 $600,000.0          -          -
Carlos Perez            Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Risk Management
Christine (Chrissy)     Vice President      -          -          -          -
Wolf                    of Benefits
                        Compensation
Beth Applegate          Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Information
                        Technology
Brian P. Brooks         EVP, General        - $500,000.0          -          -
                        Counsel and
                        Corporate
                        Secretary
Timothy J. (Tim)        President, CEO,    57 $600,000.0          -          -
Mayopoulos              and Director
Kimberly H. Johnson     SVP and Chief       -          -          -          -
                        Risk Officer
Steve Spies             Vice President      -          -          -          -
Don Farineau            Vice President      -          -          -          -
                        Of Internal
                        Audit Technology
Brian (Bri) Graham      Vice President      -          -          -          -


DIRECTOR                    TITLE                AGE
Timothy J. (Tim) Mayopoulos President, CEO, and   57
                            Director
Egbert L. J. Perry          Chairman              60

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *


   The Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, has helped more
than 50 million low- to middle-income families realize the American Dream. Like
its brother Freddie Mac , the government-supported enterprise (GSE) provides
liquidity in the mortgage market by buying mortgages from lenders and packaging
them for resale, transferring risk from lenders and allowing them to offer
mortgages to those who may not otherwise qualify. It owns or guarantees about
more than $3 trillion in home loans, or nearly 30% of all outstanding
residential mortgages in the US. Due to losses caused largely by the subprime
mortgage crisis, the government seized both Fannie and Freddie in 2008. It plans
to wind the GSEs down over time.

   Operations

   The institution operates three segments: Single-Family Credit Guaranty,
Multifamily, and Capital Markets.

   The Single-Family Credit Guaranty segment, which made up 58% of Fannie Mae's
revenue during 2015, focuses on providing funds to the mortgage market by
acquiring single-family loans through lender swap transactions or -- alongside
Fannie Mae's Capital Markets group -- through purchases of loans. The segment
prices and manages the credit risk on its single-family guaranty book of
business, which consists of single-family mortgage loans underlying Fannie Mae
MBS and single-family loans held in its mortgage portfolio.

   Its Multifamily segment (7% of revenue) works with lenders to provide funds
to the mortgage market by securitizing multifamily mortgage loans into Fannie
Mae MBS. The segment also buys multifamily mortgage loans and provides credit
enhancement for bonds issued by state and local housing finance authorities to
finance multifamily housing. The Multifamily segment works with Fannie Mae's
Capital Markets group to facilitate the purchase and securitization of
multifamily mortgage loans and securities for Fannie Mae's portfolio. It is
responsible for pricing the credit risk on the multifamily guaranty book of
business and for managing the credit risk on multifamily loans and Fannie Mae
MBS backed by multifamily loans held in its mortgage portfolio.

   The Capital Markets segment (23% of revenue) manages Fannie Mae's investment
activity in mortgage-related assets and other interest-earning non-mortgage
investments. The group concentrates on making short-term use of its balance
sheet, rather than on long-term investments.

   Geographic Reach

   Fannie Mae, based in Washington, DC, operates a handful of regional offices
in Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Pasadena, and Philadelphia.

   Sales and Marketing

   Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. , along with its affiliates, accounted for about 13%
of Fannie Mae's single-family business volume in 2015 (down from 20% in 2013).
Besides Wells Fargo, Fannie Mae serves mortgage banking companies, savings and
loan associations, savings banks, commercial banks, credit unions, community
banks, insurance companies, and state and local housing finance agencies.

   Financial Performance

   Fannie Mae's revenues and profits have been falling on declining loan assets
in recent years. As part of the GSE's long-term conservatorship status plan,
Fannie Mae has been reducing its retained mortgage portfolio as part of
requirements related to the Treasury 's purchase of senior preferred stock.

   The institution's revenue slipped 5% to $110.36 billion during 2015 on lower
mortgage interest income as Fannie Mae continued to wind down its mortgage
portfolio balance.

   Revenue declines coupled with higher single-family foreclosed properties
expenses in 2015 caused Fannie Mae's net income to fall 23% to $10.95 billion
for the year. Its operations used $6.67 billion for the year, or nearly four
times more than in 2014, mostly because its cash-denominated earnings declined.

   Strategy

   Fannie Mae in early 2016 emphasized that with its strengthened underwriting
and eligibility standards, it was moving from a portfolio-focused business to
back to a guaranty-focused business in moving more of its credit risk to its
guaranty books. The change marks a milestone since receiving its conservatorship
status years ago which forced the GSE to take a defensive position.

   As part of its efforts to make housing affordable for more Americans, Fannie
Mae continues to introduce new home financing products and services even years
after the housing market crash and financial crisis. In 2015, for example, the
GSE introduced its HomePath Ready Buyer program, where buyers could receive
closing cost assistance worth up to 3% of the purchase price of a home upon
completing an online homebuyer education course.

   Fannie Mae has also been assisting in some of the hardest-hit markets facing
foreclosures. In 2014, the group partnered with the Detroit Land Bank Authority
to help stabilize foreclosure-laden neighborhoods. Under the agreement, GSE
would sell foreclosed properties to the Land Bank for a nominal fee and help
fund the demolition of certain properties. Land Bank would determine whether the
land or property could be used to benefit the local community, and make a
decision to rehabilitate or demolish the property to make room for new property.
Conservatorship

   Ironically, the companies contributed to the financial crisis in their
mission to provide housing funds to more citizens. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
were unable to recover from their exposure to mortgages that had gone sour. To
this end, the Federal Reserve stepped in with an initial round of loans.
Eventually, the government placed the companies in conservatorship, which is a
legal status similar to bankruptcy, rather than risk the possibility they might
fail. The government assumed a nearly 80% stake in the troubled companies in a
$111 billion bailout (with a commitment of up to $400 billion) back in 2011.

   Company Background

   The Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) was created in 2008 to oversee both
Fannie and Freddie, as well as the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks. The FHFA was
granted more authority than its predecessor agencies, the Federal Housing
Finance Board and the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight .

   As publicly traded, government-backed companies, Fannie and Freddie were long
the envy of their rivals, who contended that the GSEs had unfair competitive
advantages. Those advantages didn't protect the companies from the subprime
mortgage crisis, which effectively shut down the home-buying market and turned
off their revenue stream. Shortly after, the Federal Reserve stepped in with
loans to help the GSEs, which were reeling from their exposure to toxic subprime
mortgages. The assistance didn't stop the bleeding, though, and the government
seized control of both firms in hopes of reassuring investors to continue to buy
their debt securities. The initiative was part of the government's plan to
rescue the housing market, minimize foreclosures, and slow Fannie and Freddie's
credit losses.


HISTORY:

   In 1938 President Franklin Roosevelt created Fannie Mae as part of the
government-owned Reconstruction Finance Corporation; its mandate was to buy FHA
(Federal Housing Administration) loans. Fannie Mae began buying VA (Veterans
Administration) mortgages in 1948. It was rechartered as a public-private,
mixed-ownership corporation in 1954.

   The Housing Act of 1968 divided the corporation into the Government National
Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae, which retained explicit government backing)
and Fannie Mae, which went public (with only an implicit US guarantee). Fannie
Mae retained its treasury backstop authority, whereby the secretary of the
treasury can purchase up to $2.24 billion of the company's obligations.

   The company introduced uniform conventional loan mortgage documents in 1970,
began to buy conventional mortgages in 1972, and started buying condo and
planned-unit development mortgages in 1974. By 1976 it was buying more
conventional loans than FHA and VA loans.

   As interest rates rose in the 1970s, Fannie Mae's profits declined, and by
1981 it was losing more than $1 million a day. Then it began offering
mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) -- popular as an investment product because of
their implicit guarantee from the government. By 1982 the company funded 14% of
US home mortgages.

   Fannie Mae began borrowing money overseas and buying conventional multifamily
and co-op housing loans in 1984. The next year it tightened credit rules and
began issuing securities aimed at foreign investors, such as yen-denominated
securities. Fannie Mae issued its first real estate mortgage investment conduit
(REMIC) securities (shares in mortgage pools of specific maturities and risk
classes) and introduced a program to allow small lenders to pool loans with
other lenders to create MBSs in 1987.

   After CEO David Maxwell's 1991 retirement with a reported $29 million pension
package, Fannie Mae's powerful Washington lobby squelched calls to limit
executive salaries. Other attempts to make the company more competitive with
private concerns were more successful. In 1992 Fannie Mae's capital requirements
were raised; a new mandate also required the organization to lend greater
support to inner-city buyers. A new client/server computer system helped the
company handle the deluge of new and refinanced loans that came in 1993 (Fannie
Mae had struggled to improve its information systems in the 1980s, pouring more
than $100 million into a mainframe system that was obsolete before it went
online).

   In 1997 Fannie Mae officially adopted its longtime nickname. The next year
Fannie Mae named White House budget chief Franklin Raines to succeed CEO James
Johnson.

   Fannie Mae is no stranger to bad news or bad press. In 1999 the Department of
Housing and Urban Development began investigating charges that the company's
automated underwriting systems were racially biased. The next year the agency
released a study that found it to be negligent in promoting homeownership in
low-income neighborhoods. In response, Fannie Mae eased credit requirements in
an effort to boost minority homeownership (1999) and announced plans to loan
some $2 trillion to minority and low-income homebuyers (2000). This move,
however, invoked criticism that the company was exposing itself to increased
risk from buyers more likely to default.

   Following the lead of rival Freddie Mac , in 2000 Fannie Mae offered
securities for sale over the Internet. In 2002 it tightened standards for
mortgage refinance cash-out loans it would buy as mortgage defaults rose (even
as home sales and mortgage refinancings were helping prop up the sagging US
economy).

   In response to those who thought it was in bed with the federal government,
Fannie Mae kicked off the covers and put one foot on the floor. In 2003 it
fulfilled a voluntary commitment to register its common stock with the SEC and
came permanently under that organization's disclosure and oversight
requirements.

   But the move did not stop controversy from swirling around the lender.
Chairman and CEO Franklin Raines, CFO Timothy Howard, and auditor KPMG were
ousted in December 2004 after the SEC determined Fannie Mae had violated
accounting rules. The inquiry was prompted by accusations Fannie Mae had
manipulated earnings; earnings from 2001 through 2003 were restated and those
from 2004 and 2005 were each released more than a year late.

   In 2006 federal regulators hit the firm with a whopping $400 million fine.
Investigators claimed that its former executives willfully overstated earnings
by more than $10 billion -- and then tried to impede an investigation into the
discrepancies -- in order to reap performance bonuses. Chairman Stephen Ashley
and CEO Daniel Mudd, who'd been brought in to replace Franklin Raines in late
2004, were brought to task by the Senate Banking Committee in regard to
accounting misdeeds.

   Though the Justice Department eventually dropped criminal charges against the
firm, Fannie Mae agreed to major changes in its accounting, internal controls,
and management practices. It additionally agreed to appoint an independent chief
risk officer as well as an organizational review overseen by a compliance
committee. Meanwhile, the lender suspended its home construction loan program --
worth about $10 billion -- while it got its financial house in order.

   Fannie suffered huge losses in 2007 and 2008 as a result of the subprime
mortgage crisis, which saw a tremendouse increase in loan defaults. The
government stepped in loans and, in 2008, seized both Fannie and Freddie. It
also shuffled their management teams: Fannie CEO Mudd was replaced by Herbert
Allison, former TIAA-CREF . Allison was later tapped by the Obama administration
to run the Treasury Department's financial recovery program. Former COO Michael
Williams was named CEO in 2009.

   The Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) was created in 2008 to oversee both
Fannie and Freddie, as well as the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks. The FHFA was
granted more authority than its predecessor agencies, the Federal Housing
Finance Board and the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight .

   In an historic move, the government in 2008 placed the two GSEs in
conservatorship, which is a legal status similar to bankruptcy, rather than risk
the possibility that the companies might fail. The government assumed a nearly
80% stake in the troubled companies in a $111 billion bailout (with a commitment
of up to $400 billion). In 2011, the Obama administration proposed to
restructure the housing market in a plan that will reduce the government's role
and eventually eliminate the GSEs.

   In 2009 the Making Home Affordable Program was introduced to provide
assistance to borrowers in default through refinancings and other loan
modifications.

HOOVER INDUSTRIES:

     ·    Finance & Insurance Sector
          ·    Lending
               ·    MORTGAGE BANKING




* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
NAICS CODES:
522298 - All Other Nondepository Credit Intermediation
SIC CODES:
6111 - Federal & fed.-sponsored credit
MARKETS:

   Selected Locations

   Atlanta

   Chicago

   Dallas

   Pasadena

   Philadelphia

   Washington, DC

     ·    2015 Sales
     ·    $mil. % of total
     ·    Interest income
     ·    Mortgage loans 107,699 97
     ·    Available-for-sale securities 1,156 1
     ·    Trading securities 444 -
     ·    Others 143 -
     ·    Non interest income
     ·    Fee and other income 1,348 1
     ·    Fair value losses (1,767) -
     ·    Investment 1,336 1
     ·    Total 110,359 100
     ·    2015 Sales
     ·    % of total
     ·    Single-Family 58
     ·    Capital Markets 23
     ·    Multlifamily 7
     ·    Reconciling items 12
     ·    Total 100
     ·    Selected Business Segments
     ·
     ·    Single-Family Credit Guaranty
     ·    Multifamily
     ·    Capital Markets


COMPETITORS:

     ·    Wells Fargo
     ·    Ginnie Mae
     ·    Freddie Mac
     ·    VBA


* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: December, 2016

     ·    One Year Sales Growth: (2.9%)
     ·    One Year Income Growth: 12.4%


* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EXCHANGE: OTC

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: Deloitte & Touche LLP

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2017


                              330 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           October 20, 2010 Wednesday

VIEWPOINT: Secondary Market Issue, Prime Concern

BYLINE: James Pearce

SECTION: BANK THINK; Pg. 10 Vol. 175 No. 161

LENGTH: 890  words


Reforming, privatizing or replacing the government-sponsored enterprises is the
next big legislative issue for reform of the financial system, with the Treasury
Department saying it will issue a proposal for "comprehensive reform" in
January. Meanwhile, market participants and other interested parties are
weighing in on the future of GSEs - many producing recommendations in response
to the request for comment by the Treasury and HUD. Although the various
proposals differ on whether the government should have any role and, if so, what
that role should be, most call for at least a limited guarantee for securities
backed by conventional mortgages.

The debate takes place in the context of major change in the primary market. The
Dodd-Frank legislation and other regulatory changes are already shrinking the
range of mortgage products and the pool of eligible borrowers. Therefore,
adopting a secondary market structure without a government guarantee - which
would shrink those even further - faces an uphill battle.

The framework underlying proposals from major participants in the banking and
securities industries is designed to capture the benefits of the government
guarantee while substantially reducing the risk of taxpayer bailouts. The
benefits include greater liquidity, a sustainable supply of mortgage credit
during credit crunches and the ability for originators to lock in rates ahead of
settlement through the TBA market.

Under these proposals, private companies would serve as guarantors and conduits,
issuing securities and insuring the mortgages that back them. The securities,
but not the private companies, would have further credit enhancement in the form
of government reinsurance. The private conduits would be regulated and
supervised by a federal agency, hold capital based on the risk characteristics
of their mortgages and pay a risk-based premium for the government guarantee.
The federal agency supervising these conduits would also serve as a chartering
authority, adjusting the number of such entities to accommodate demand without
requiring intervention from Congress.

A back-of-the-envelope calculation puts the amount the conduits would have to
charge at about 50 basis points above the amount charged by Freddie Mac and
Fannie Mae. This number, of course, depends on many assumptions and may be an
understatement in today's belt-and-suspenders environment.

While consensus is building for a government-backed secondary market for
conventional mortgages, the proposals vary on a number of important questions.
One key difference among the proposals is whether access to the federally backed
securities should be confined to certain classes of borrowers or loans. Most
favor limiting access, either to specific types of loans, particularly
fixed-rate mortgages and "prudently underwritten" adjustable-rate mortgages, or
to middle-market borrowers, leaving out the wealthy or high-income borrowers.

Recommendations to restrict access to federally backed securities are not
consistent with the spirit of most proposals overall, i.e. that borrowers will
not be getting a budgetary subsidy. According to most proposals, both the
regulatory oversight and the government guarantee are to be fully priced. Thus,
the call for limits appears to be a concession that, in reality, the government
guarantee will be underpriced. As Wells Fargo noted in response to the request
for comment, "as long as the guarantee is appropriately priced and the risk to
the government is consistently measured and properly managed, there is no reason
to sacrifice liquidity in some parts of the housing market in an effort to
concentrate the government's support somewhere else."

Despite the apparent concession that the government guarantee will be
underpriced, all of the proposals are very deferential to the interests of
fixed-income investors. The philosophy that everyone should have some "skin in
the game" seems to apply to everyone but them. If there is concern that the
government reinsurance will be underpriced, at least part of the response should
be to expose traders and investors to at least some credit risk, perhaps by
narrowing the guarantee so that it covers not quite all of the principal and
interest owed on the securities of a failed conduit.

Another question is whether the new secondary market institutions should include
support for affordable housing. Instead of goals for the number of units
supported, advocates recommend that some percentage of the conduits' premium
income be diverted to a fund to assist with affordable housing finance. This,
too, is inconsistent with the way the proposed system is promoted. If it works
as advertised, the number of federally chartered conduits will be adjusted to
constrain excess profits available for redirection. Support for affordable
housing should be obtained from general revenues, not from a tax on mortgage
payments of homeowners.

There will be many other issues to address in the months to come, and it is
important that they are quickly resolved. Failure to establish a framework for
reform soon will increase the difficulty in addressing long-term problems in the
mortgage market.

James Pearce is a vice president in the Bryan, Texas, office of Welch
Consulting. Previously he was vice president and director of research at the
Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              331 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                February 8, 1988

Net Worth Up In Ninth District

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: DALLAS


Texas led the ninth Federal Home Loan Bank district to an increase in net worth
in November, halting a skid in which the state's net worth fell more than $ 7
billion.

Net worth rose almost a quarter of a billion dollars, or $ 249 million, from
negative $ 5.13 billion to negative $ 4.88 billion, at member thrifts in the
state during the month.  In the district as a whole, net worth rose some $ 168
million.

Separately, Mortgage Guarantee Insurance Corp., Milwaukee, noting that the Texas
economy is showing its first signs of recovery, liberalized its underwriting
guidelines in the state.

November's net worth improvement reversed a downward trend Texas and the 9th
district as a whole have been experiencing for several years, following the
collapse of oil and certain agricultural prices.

During one twelve-month period, between Sept. 30, 1986 and Sept. 30, 1987, Texas
S&L net worth dropped $ 7 billion.

New deposits at member institutions also exceeded withdrawals by $ 750 million
in November, the district bank said, following a $ 339 million improvement in
October.

Total ninth district assets increased 0.5% during November, up $ 175 million to
$ 135.2 billion, following a 0.8% rise in October.

"Texas provides a real test of the value of private mortgage insurance," said
MGIC president and chief executive William H. Lacy.

Mr. Lacy said MGIC's market studies have found Texas' basic industries
stabilizing and its economy starting to rebound.  Economic improvements will be
gradual and vary from region to region, he cautioned, however.

"Our ability to monitor and evaluate economic conditions makes it possible for
MGIC to adjust underwriting guidelines and introduce programs that appropriately
match these changing conditions," added T. Wayne Lucius, senior vice president
and Southern division manager.

"Texas economic indicators have been positive in the first half of 1987 and we
expect those indicators to continue to move upward, signaling a sustained
improvement in the economy," Mr. Lucius said.

He noted that Texas experienced record levels of employment, personal income and
population growth and that employment gains have been mostly in smaller
businesses.

The decline of the dollar is aiding the state's already expanding manufacturing
sector and semiconductor sales, cattle and cotton are expected to do well, Mr.
Lucius said.

Population and employment growth will translate into growth in the real estate
markets, he said, and the Houston area already has bottomed out.

Some areas, such as Austin and Dallas, continue to have rising delinquency
rates, however.

Before oil prices crashed, MGIC provided more than 40% of the PMI in Texas and
"now that the first signs of economic turnaround are appearing, we're at the
forefront again," he said.

Among changes in underwriting guideline for Texas are:

* MGIC will now insure 95% loan-to-value mortgages, a practice it halted in
September of 1986.

* MGIC will now accept loans with a seller contribution of up to 3% of the value
of the loan when the LTV ratio is 90% or less.  On loans with an LTV more than
90%, the seller may contribute reasonable and customary closing costs.  Seller
contributions had been restricted in all but the Dallas, Austin and San Antonio
areas.

* MGIC will resume insuring adjustable-rate mortgages, which had been restricted
in Houston and other severely distressed parts of the state.

* Loans originated by a third party will be accepted if the loan is submitted to
MGIC by a master policyholder or prior-approved broker.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, Single Family Building Permits, By Quarter, Source: U.S.
Construction Permits

                   Copyright 1988 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              332 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          November 28, 2007 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

'No Real Positive News' Seen As Home Prices Continue to Fall

BYLINE: Renae Merle; Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 527 words


Home prices are continuing to decline, according to federal and private-sector
data released yesterday that indicated the housing slump is worsening.

"It gives more evidence of an evaporating housing market," said Mark Zandi,
chief economist of Moody's Economy.com.

The average American single family home sold for $295,573 in October, according
to the Federal Housing Finance Board, down 3.5 percent from $306,258 a year
earlier.

The numbers were slightly different, but the direction was the same for the
Standard & Poor's/Case-Shiller Home Price Index, which reported a 4.5 percent
drop in the quarter that ended in September compared with the similar period
last year. Home prices fell 1.7 percent compared with the previous quarter, the
largest quarterly decline since the index was created in 1987.

In the Washington region, September prices fell 6.6 percent from the year
before, according to that index. The national drop was most pronounced in the
Tampa area, where prices slid 11.1 percent, and in Miami, where prices have
fallen 10 percent since last year.

There "is no real positive news in today's data," Robert J. Shiller, chief
economist at MacroMarkets and one of the originators of the index, said in a
statement. "Most of the metro areas continue to show declining or decelerating
returns on both an annual and monthly basis."

The numbers weren't surprising, said analysts, who generally are expecting home
prices to continue to fall into 2008, coupled with increasing foreclosures.

But they did indicate that the housing price decline is accelerating. That is
likely to be reflected in another set of home price figures to be released later
this week by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, said Stuart
Hoffman, chief economist for PNC Financial Services Group in Pittsburgh. "There
doesn't seem to be a letup in sight in falling home prices," he said.

Reports are also scheduled to be released today and tomorrow on sales of
existing and new homes. Both sets of figures are expected to decline.

The housing slump has spurred calls for action in Congress and pledges from the
mortgage industry that it will make it easier to refinance loans. "The steepest
home-value drop in two decades" should push the Bush administration to address
the mortgage crisis, Sen. Charles E. Schumer, (D-N.Y.), chairman of the Joint
Economic Committee, said in a statement.

Despite the drop in home prices, federal authorities said yesterday that Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac, the largest buyers of home loans, will not be raising the
size of the loans they can guarantee, currently capped at $417,000. The limit,
which is linked to the Federal Housing Finance Board numbers, will remain
unchanged in 2008, making it the third year the level has held steady.

Loans above that limit, known as jumbo loans, have become harder to get in
recent months. Democratic leaders have advocated raising the limit to $500,000,
which they contend would better reflect the average home price in some
metropolitan areas. That would require legislation. But administration officials
have said such a change would have to be coupled with more regulation of Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; By Mark Lennihan -- Associated Press; Home prices fell 4.5
percent in the third quarter from a year earlier, according to a Standard & Poor
housing index.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              333 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    October 6, 1990, Saturday, Final Edition

Budget Deal May Restrict VA Loans;
New Rules Would Limit The Term of Eligibility

BYLINE: Ann Mariano, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; PAGE E1

LENGTH: 898 words


This week's bipartisan budget agreement proposes the biggest cutback ever in
veterans' housing benefits by restricting their eligibility for home loan
guarantees to the first 10 years after they leave military service.

Congressional and administration budget leaders said the cutback is one of
several ways they devised to trim housing finance programs to help meet the
deficit-reduction target of $ 500 billion over the next five years.

Other proposals would raise fees veterans pay for a government-guaranteed home
loan and make changes in the way the Department of Veterans Affairs handles
foreclosures on guaranteed mortgages.

Low-income housing tax credits would be extended for a year, but no funds for
mortgage revenue bonds were provided in the agreement. The bonds, sold by state
and local governments, provide money to help moderate-income families buy their
first homes.

Under the budget agreement, Congress's tax-writing committees can make changes
in some programs as long as spending or savings goals are met, but many others
must be included in legislation.

The 10-year limit on veterans' eligibility for loan guarantees is likely to meet
heavy opposition in Congress, according to a spokeswoman for the House Committee
on Veterans Affairs. The budget agreement said the VA must bring in $ 620
million over the next five years to help trim the nation's deficit.

Committee members are unlikely to approve legislation that would bar veterans
from the nation's most recent war, in Vietnam, from getting VA housing loans,
she said. Instead, they are likely to meet the savings target by making smaller
cuts in many programs.

In another proposed change, the mortgage-guarantee fee charged to veterans would
be increased from 1.25 percent of the loan amount to 1.75 percent. Veterans paid
no fees until Congress approved the 1.25 percent charge last November as part of
a major restructuring of the loan fund. The money goes into a mortgage indemnity
fund to reimburse the VA for paying off loans when veterans default.

Private lenders complained this week that the proposed changes in the formula VA
uses to dispose of properties when defaults occur will result in millions of
dollars in losses to lending institutions.

Congress focused attention on VA programs because of heavy losses that have
required $ 2.2 billion in appropriations since 1984 to keep the loan guaranty
fund solvent.

Sen. Frank H. Murkowski (R-Alaska), the ranking Republican on the Senate
Committee on Veterans Affairs, said the VA's loan programs "need to be
reexamined" and Congress should decide how to turn it into a "realistically
self-funding" program.

While ordering savings at the VA, congressional and administration leaders
decided to assume millions of dollars in losses in order to fund low-income
housing construction.

Low-income housing tax credits would be extended for a year and allocated to
state housing agencies at a level of $ 1.25 per state resident under the
agreement.

The credits provide tax breaks for private builders and investors. The
government's losses would be $ 200 million next year and would rise to $ 1.7
billion in 1995 if Congress continues to renew the program each year, according
to the budget summit's estimates.

The building industry and some low-income housing groups hoped for permanent
authorization for the credits, which have been the principal source of private
money for new housing since the 1986 tax law eliminated nearly all other tax
breaks designed to raise money for low-income housing construction.

As a result, the tax credits "are absolutely essential" for building new
low-income housing, said Michael A. Stegman, chairman of the Department of City
and Regional Planning at the University of North Carolina.

But "it is clear they are very complicated to use, they are expensive and they
are inadequate by themselves to create low-income housing," he said. About
three-quarters of all the housing projects funded by tax credits must get other
types of subsidies, usually from the federal government, to be successful, he
said.

States' authority to issue mortgage revenue bonds for funding low-cost housing
were eliminated altogether in the budget agreement. Local governments have been
issuing the bonds for nearly 20 years, using the estimated $ 61 billion in bond
sales to make more than 95,000 home loans to low- and moderate-income buyers,
according to John McEvoy, executive vice president of the National Council of
State Housing Agencies.

To qualify for the loans, buyers must have incomes equal to 115 percent of
median incomes in the area where they live, and must be buying their first
houses.

The current ceiling of $ 124,875 on the size of home mortgages the Federal
Housing Administration can insure in high-cost areas of the country would become
permanent under the budget agreement.

Insurance premium refunds to about 145,000 homeowners, who bought their houses
before a 1982 change in the way FHA collected insurance premiums, would be
canceled.

The refunds typically range from $ 900 to $ 1,000 and about 145,000 borrowers a
year would lose out. Owners who bought their homes in 1983 and later years would
not be affected.

The budget agreement also said the Department of Housing and Urban Development
also must make changes to put the ailing single-family loan fund on a sound
financial basis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1990 The Washington Post


                              334 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                           December 16, 2008 Tuesday

Fannie Mae working on rental foreclosure policy

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

LENGTH: 171 words


Fannie Mae, the mortgage-finance company run by the U.S. government, said it
will likely allow renters to remain in their homes following foreclosure.

Fannie is seeking to have a new policy regarding rental properties in place by
Jan. 9, when a temporary suspension on evictions expires, Brian Faith, a
spokesman for the Washington-based company, said in a statement Monday.

Fannie and Freddie Mac, government-sponsored enterprises that own or guarantee
almost half of the U.S. home-mortgage market, were placed under federal control
by the Federal Housing Finance Agency on Sept. 6. Since then, they have been
pushed to work harder to curtail foreclosures on single-family and multifamily
loans and otherwise ease the fallout from defaults.

The companies last month suspended foreclosures and evictions until Jan. 9, to
give loan servicers time to implement a program for modifying terms for
struggling borrowers. Fannie's foreclosure halt and tenant-eviction freeze has
kept 7,000 to 10,000 families in properties, Faith wrote.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2008 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                              335 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Origination News

                                    May 2013

BYLINE: Editorial Staff

SECTION: MORTGAGE MANAGERS; Pg. 14 Vol. 22 No. 8

LENGTH: 1023  words


CALIFORNIA

San Diego-Guild Mortgage Co. promoted Michael Brown to national builder division
manager.

Before joining Guild, Brown worked as builder sales manager for the Western U.S.
for MetLife Home Loans.

He also spent 17 years leading the national builder division for the West at
Countrywide and Bank of America.

CONNECTICUT

South Windsor-Rockville Bank said that Brandon Lorey has joined the company as
senior vice president and head of consumer lending.

Lorey came to Rockville Bank in February with 20 years of experience in risk and
financial management, and product, sales and strategy development.

Most recently, he held the position of chief credit and lending officer for H&R
Block Bank in Kansas City where he led the company's loan origination and credit
administration.

In addition, Lorey held various roles on the retail side of Chevy Chase Bank
Federal Savings Bank in Maryland, including vice president of risk, finance,
operations and direct sales.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

Washington-The Federal Housing Finance Agency promoted Fred Graham to be deputy
director of the Division of Federal Home Loan Bank Regulation. Graham will
oversee the regulation and supervision of the Federal Home Loan Banks.

Graham has been with FHFA since it was established in 2008 and has held several
senior positions with the agency.

Most recently he served as acting deputy director of the Division of Supervision
Policy and Support and as senior associate director of the Office of Risk
Analysis, where he chaired FHFA's Risk Committee.

Prior to the FHFA, Graham served as a senior economist and head of risk modeling
with the Federal Housing Finance Board, one of the FHFA's predecessor agencies.

FLORIDA

Coral Gables-Banesco USA hired Louis Ferreira as executive vice president and
chief credit officer.

In this new position, he will oversee Banesco USA's credit risk activities in
Florida and Puerto Rico.

Ferreira most recently served as national bank examiner in the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency at the Department of the Treasury.

There he supervised all OCC business lines, including community, midsize and
large banks.

Prior to serving at the OCC, Ferreira was chief lending officer at Banco
Santander Central Hispano SA in New York.

He has also served as commercial lending officer at National Westminster Bank NA
in New Jersey, and as director of urban affairs at the Newark Housing
Development and Rehabilitation department for the City of Newark.

MINNESOTA

Minneapolis-U.S. Bank has named Rick Aneshansel president of U.S. Bank Home
Mortgage, succeeding Dan Arrigoni who will retire June 30 after 42 years in the
mortgage business.

Aneshansel has worked in the mortgage industry for 31 years.

He was previously chief financial officer for U.S. Bank Home Mortgage, where he
has been since 1995.

Prior to joining U.S. Bank, Aneshansel worked for Metmor Financial, in Overland,
Kan., and prior to that, Sunbelt National Mortgage Corp. in Dallas.

Aneshansel serves on the Financial Services Roundtable Housing Policy Executive
Council and the Fannie Mae Single-Family National Customer Advisory Board.

Arrigoni has led the mortgage company for U.S. Bank and its predecessor
companies since January 1996, following a merger with Investors Bank.

Prior to his U.S. Bank career, Arrigoni was the president of the North Central
region of Margaretten, now Chase Mortgage, which had purchased the company he
founded, North American Mortgage, in 1984.

MISSOURI

Kansas City-Stewart Lender Services hired Jane Woll as SVP, strategic
relationship manager.

Replacing Woll as director of client relations and business development at
Martin, Leigh, Laws & Fritzlen PC will be Lindsey McArthur from the firm's
Chesterfield, Mo., office.

Woll was with Martin, Leigh, Laws & Fritzlen for six and a half years.

In her new position, Woll will be responsible for developing and growing
strategic relationships with SLS clients and representatives of the law firm and
mortgage services industry.

McArthur previously worked at Martin, Leigh, Laws & Fritzlen as the director of
St. Louis operations in its Chesterfield office and has been with the firm since
2009.

NEW YORK

New York-Greystone appointed Marty Lanigan as executive vice president.

Lanigan will oversee Greystone's portfolio lending group.

Prior to his role as executive vice president, Lanigan worked at Meridian
Capital and as an independent consultant.

Before that, he founded and led Mezz Cap, a mezzanine lending firm. Lanigan has
also held positions with Freddie Mac, GMAC and Prudential over the course of his
career.

Ridgewood-Ridgewood Savings Bank added home loan specialists Kathryn Wallace and
Manuel Valcarcel to its team of mortgage consultants.

Wallace has more than 30 years of experience in the residential mortgage market,
with the past 16 years as a consultant in the New York metro area.

She will be based in the bank's Cobble Hill branch and will also be working with
customers in the bank's other Brooklyn branches located in Bay Ridge,
Bensonhurst, Dyker Heights and Sheepshead Bay.

Valcarcel has been a residential and commercial mortgage originator for nearly
20 years.

He has a background in real estate development and hosts a radio show with
commentary on the mortgage industry.

Valcarcel will be based in Ridgewood Savings Bank's Soundview branch and will
also be assisting customers at other Bronx branches, including Allerton Avenue,
Gun Hill Road, Jerome Avenue and Sedgwick Avenue.

VIRGINIA

McLean-Freddie Mac said that David Lowman, a long-time senior leader in the
mortgage finance industry, is joining the company effective May 20, as the
executive vice president for the single-family business.

At Freddie Mac, he will have broad responsibility for the single-family line of
business, including managing the company's relationships with its
seller/servicers, the performance of Freddie Mac's guarantee book of business,
and all sourcing, servicing and business operations.

Lowman served as CEO of Chase Home Lending from 2006 to 2011. Prior to that, he
spent a decade in senior leadership roles in various lending businesses of
Citigroup, including head of CitiMortgage and Citicorp Trust Bank FSB.

URL: http://www.originationnews.com/

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: ON


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              336 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                     July 28, 1984, Saturday, Final Edition

Mortgage Insurers Set to Hike Rates

BYLINE: By Kenneth R. Harney

SECTION: Real Estate; Virginia; The Nation's Housing; E1

LENGTH: 825 words


The nation's mortgage insurers are about to raise the ante for home buyers using
conventional loans -- especially the low-down-payment, discount-rate adjustables
that have sustained 1984's housing sales thus far.

In what market analysts term a highly significant move, mortgage insurers are
raising consumers' annual premiums for the first time in nearly three decades.

The extra charges will amount to a 40 to 60 percent jump in out-of-pocket
insurance costs for some home buyers using new conventional loans, and will
affect consumers for years to come.

The rate increases quietly have been proposed to state insurance regulators in
all 50 states during recent weeks, and many of the hikes carry an Aug. 1
effective date.

So, beginning Wednesday, buyers seeking conventional mortgages for new or resale
homes may be asked to lay out higher front-end and renewal premiums if their
lender requires the loan to be insured. Spread over five to eight years, the new
fees will commonly add $1,000 or more to the cost of buying a new home with a
deep-discount-rate adjustable loan, particularly in areas of the country with
high housing prices.

Mortgage insurance -- one of the least understood "extras" tacked on to American
consumers' annual cost of owning a home -- is private industry's answer to
Federal Housing Administration (FHA) insurance and Veterans Administration (VA)
loan guarantees.

Private and federal insurers offer peace-of-mind risk protection to
mortgage-lending institutions. For an annual fee, they guarantee the lender
against the costs and losses associated with defaults and foreclosures by
mortgage borrowers.

Although the lender -- say, a bank or savings and loan association -- gets the
insurance protection, the consumer pays the premiums.

Private insurers currently underwrite more than 48 percent of all home-loan
insurance volume. FHA, by comparison, underwrites just 31 percent and the VA 21
percent, according to data from the industry's trade association. Behind the
nationwide request for sharply higher premiums, say leaders of the major
insurance firms, are the ballooning financial risks created by the popular new
breeds of mortgage loans carrying variable payments and low-equity stakes.

Defaults on adjustable-rate loans "are running twice as high as on our
fixed-rate mortgages," according to Robert L. Waldo, president of Verex
Assurance Inc., a major underwriter based in Madison, Wis.

Low-down-payment loans carrying rates that are kept artificially low in the
initial years of a mortgage but then rise rapidly in subsequent years are far
higher risks than fixed-payment plans. Loans with so-called "negative
amortization" -- mortgages whose principal debt can increase over time, rather
than decrease -- pose the highest risks of all, according to spokesmen for other
major firms.

Yet under rate structures that have barely changed in 27 years, mortgage
insurers have not adjusted their premium levels to handle the risk features of
the new variable-payment home loans.

As of Wednesday, though, that stand-pat policy will end.

The largest insurer in the field, MGIC Corp. (Magic) of Milwaukee will raise its
premiums on adjustable-rate mortgages by an average of 40 to 50 percent over the
life of a typical loan. A borrower on a $65,000 adjustable mortgage, for
example, will pay MGIC $2,400 in insurance fees over an eight-year period, up
from the current $1,500.

Other underwriting firms are imposing different types of increases. For example,
borrowers financing a home with a low-down-payment (5 percent), cut-rate,
negative-amortization adjustable will have to fork over a hefty 2.2 "points"
(2.2 percent of the amount of the loan) up front as a first-year premium to PMI
Mortgage Insurance Co. of San Francisco. (That's $2,200 on a $100,000 mortgage.)
Every annual renewal premium will cost another 0.45 percent of the mortgage
amount.

Contrast that with PMI's current rate for a standard 10 percent down-payment
mortgage: 0.7 percent as a first-year premium and 0.35 percent for renewals.

The higher the down payment, and the less the potential for negative
amortization, the lower the insurance fees. "It's the only way we can sensibly
price our product," said Paul Staley, PMI's director of research and pricing.

Home builders, lenders, real estate agents and consumers may groan at the extra
cost burdens, Staley conceded. "But ultimately, we're the ones paying the
insurance claims for their losses [on the high-risk adjustables] , so it's our
call," he said.

One opportunity opened up by the coming round of rate increases: Consumers may
be able to "premium-shop" with the help of their lenders. Because the new rates
will vary company by company, ask your lender to identify the insurer with the
lowest front-end and renewal costs for the type of financing you're after.

For the first time in years, that search will help keep hundreds of dollars in
your wallet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1984 The Washington Post


                              337 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                             April 20, 2008 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

Tight credit makes FHA a bigger player

BYLINE: Bert Caldwell Staff writer

SECTION: E; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 677 words


The Federal Housing Administration is back on the block.

Largely overlooked when mortgage lenders had a product for any borrower who
could draw breath, the FHA has re-emerged as an important player in the real
estate market.

Although the agency does not make loans, it does guarantee them. With
foreclosures and delinquencies increasing, lenders and borrowers have turned to
an old backstop.

FHA's importance has also been magnified by decisions by Washington Mutual and
other banks to no longer wholesale loans, which gives brokers fewer places to
take their loans.

"The consumer doesn't have a lot of options right now," said Glen Campbell,
president of the Eastern Washington chapter of the Association of Mortgage
Brokers.

Campbell, also a principal at Empire Home Loans, said wary lenders have raised
the bar so high on conventional loans that far fewer qualify, especially
first-time buyers. FHA-backed loans are an attractive alternative because the
down payment can be as low as 3 percent, he said.

And, until a recent decision by a U.S. District Court in California is
overturned, home sellers or other private parties can make that 3 percent
payment. Some government or charitable programs can also help, but that money is
fast disappearing.

Campbell said qualifying buyers for FHA financing means more work for brokers
and more out-of-pocket costs for borrowers because FHA does not allow all fees
to be rolled into the loan.

Nevertheless, the path to the FHA door has become crowded.

Spokesman Leland Jones said the agency guaranteed 1,702 loans in Eastern
Washington through the first six months of the 2008 federal fiscal year, which
started Oct. 1. That's almost three-quarters of the 2,346 loans guaranteed in
all of 2007, he said, and demand is accelerating.

Lenders must apply for a case number that starts the process of getting an FHA
guarantee, which takes three months or longer. The FHA received 350 such
applications in October, Jones said. Last month, the total was 736.

The trend will take FHA back to the kind of numbers registered before easy money
from other sources took the agency out of the game for a while, he said. In
2003, the agency backed 5,843 loans in Eastern Washington.

Jones said the economic stimulus package enacted in February lifted loan limits,
which will make guarantees available to more borrowers. For Spokane, the limit
on a single-family home jumped to $271,050, up from $202,350 previously.

And, earlier this month, the Bush administration announced changes that will
allow an estimated 100,000 homeowners who are behind on their mortgage payments
to access FHA loans if they can come up with a down payment. How much depends on
how far in arrears they are.

Borrowers with adjustable-rate mortgages who are two months behind can qualify
for a fixed-rate FHA loan if they can come up with a down payment equal to 3
percent of their home's current market value. Three months behind, and the
required down goes to 10 percent.

Congress is debating legislation that would expand FHA availability still
further.

Deb Bortner, director of consumer services for the Washington Department of
Financial Institutions, said she expects mortgage credit to remain tight.

More adjustable-rate mortgages will reset over the next two years, she said,
putting more stress on borrowers and their lenders. Washington has been
fortunate because housing prices have held up, she said. Foreclosure rates are a
fraction of those for the nation as a whole.

"We're still really lucky here," Bortner said.

In Eastern Washington anyway, FHA has not had to absorb many foreclosures. Jones
said the agency has absorbed only 75 since Oct. 1 in a portfolio that includes
17,050 loans.

"In a market in search of stability, a good place to go is FHA," he said.

SIDEBAR:

BY THE NUMBERS

Borrowers with adjustable-rate mortgages who are two months behind can qualify
for a fixed-rate FHA loan if they can come up with a down payment equal to 3
percent of their home's current market value. Three months behind, and the
required down goes to 10 percent.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              338 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 1, 2013

Bipartisan Solutions for Housing Finance Reform

BYLINE: Mel Martinez

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 4 Vol. 37 No. 27

LENGTH: 1336  words


The commission's report goes into considerable detail about the individual
components of the housing finance system we envision. It describes the structure
and responsibilities of the public guarantor that will administer the limited
catastrophic backstop. And it outlines the roles of the other actors in this new
system-the originators, mortgage servicers, issuers of securities and the
private entities that will "credit enhance" these securities.

The commission recommends a model similar to Ginnie Mae, where approved lenders
are the issuers of mortgage-backed securities. The functions of an issuer of
securities include:

* Obtain certification from the public guarantor that it is qualified to issue
MBS based on such factors as ability to meet credit and capital standards and
cover all of the predominant loss risk through a separate well-capitalized
credit enhancer, and capacity to effectively pool mortgages.

* Ensure that the guarantee fee is paid for and collected from the borrower
along with all other fees and fully disclosed to the borrower as a part of
originating the mortgage.

* Issue the mortgage-backed securities and, where appropriate, sell the MBS to
investors through the to-be-announced market.

* Retain responsibility for representations and warranties under the terms
specified by the public guarantor.

The TBA market was established in the 1970s with the creation of pass-through
securities at Ginnie Mae. It facilitates the forward trading of MBS issued by
Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac by creating parameters under which
mortgage pools can be considered fungible. On the trade date, only six criteria
are agreed upon for the security or securities that are to be delivered: issuer,
maturity, coupon, face value, price, and the settlement date. Investors can
commit to buy MBS in advance because they know the general parameters of the
mortgage pool, allowing lenders to sell their loan production on a forward
basis, hedge interest rate risk inherent in mortgage lending, and lock in rates
for borrowers. The TBA market is the most liquid, and consequently the most
important, secondary market for mortgage loans, enabling buyers and sellers to
trade large blocks of securities in a short time period.

Under our proposal, servicers would need to be qualified by the public
guarantor. Responsibilities of a servicer include:

* Make timely payment of principal and interest should the borrower be unable to
do so. The servicer will advance the timely payment of principal and interest
out of its own corporate funds and will be reimbursed by the private credit
enhancer at the time the amount of the loan loss is established.

* Work with the borrower on issues related to delinquency, default, and
foreclosure and advance all funds required to properly service the loan.

The commission's proposed single-family housing finance system depends on
credible assurance that private institutions will bear the predominant loss
credit risk, will be capitalized to withstand significant losses, and will
provide credit that is generally unrestricted with little leverage. As such,
private credit enhancers will bear the risk on the mortgages they have
guaranteed until they go out of business or have met their full obligation, as
defined by the public guarantor, to stand behind their guarantee. Private credit
enhancers will generally be single-business, monoline companies and will be
required to:

* Provide regular reports to the public guarantor on the nature of the credit
enhancement, who holds the risk, the amount and nature of the capital they hold,
and other measures of credit strength. These measures would include a quarterly
stress test to determine that available capital is adequate, with a "capital
call" to assure there are sufficient reserves to protect the government
guarantee from being tapped except in extreme cases.

* Establish underwriting criteria for the mortgages and mortgage pools they will
be guaranteeing beyond the baseline underwriting criteria established by the
public guarantor.

* Reimburse servicers for their timely payment of principal and interest and
other costs at the time the amount of the loan loss is established. This
reimbursement is paid out on a loan-by-loan basis until the private credit
enhancer runs out of capital and goes out of business.

* Establish and enforce servicing standards (in conjunction with national
servicing standards) in order to ensure that the interests of the private credit
enhancer and servicer are fully aligned.

* Provide credit enhancement with standard, transparent, and consistent pricing
to issuers of all types and sizes, including community banks, independent
mortgage bankers, housing finance agencies, credit unions, and community
development financial institutions.

* Meet credit enhancement requirements through one or a combination of the
following options: (1) well-capitalized private mortgage insurance at the loan
level for any portion of the loan where specific capital requirements are
established and the servicer and/or public guarantor has the ability to demand
margin calls to increase capital if there is an adverse move in house prices;
(2) capital market mechanisms where the amount of capital required to withstand
severe losses is reserved up front, either through a senior/subordinated debt
model with the subordinated piece sized to cover the predominant risk or
approved derivatives models using either margined credit default swaps or fully
funded credit linked notes; and (3) an approved premium-funded reserve model,
where a premium-funded reserve is established, either fully capitalized at the
outset or where the reserve builds over time.

These approaches to meet capital requirements are designed to ensure that
private capital will stand ahead of any government guarantee for catastrophic
risk. The public guarantor will establish the minimum capital levels required to
survive a major drop in house values and will require any private credit
enhancer to have sufficient capital to survive a stress test no less severe than
the recent downturn (e.g., a home price decline of 30% to 35%, which would
correspond to aggregate credit losses of 4% to 5% on prime loans). Under the
commission's proposal, the public guarantor would guarantee the timely payment
of principal and interest on the MBS, but this guarantee would be triggered only
after all private capital in front of the guarantee has been expended. The
guarantee would be explicit, fully funded, and actuarially sound, and the risk
would apply only to the MBS and not to the equity and debt of the entities that
issue and/or insure the MBS. Other functions of the public guarantor would
include:

* Establish the level of capital necessary to ensure that private-sector
participants in the housing finance system are all properly capitalized.

* Establish the guarantee fees to be collected from the borrower to cover the
operating costs of the public guarantor and to offset catastrophic losses in the
event of a failure of the private credit enhancer and/or servicer failure. For
both the single-family and rental housing markets, a reserve fund would be
established for catastrophic risk that will build over time.

* Ensure the actuarial soundness of the funds through careful analysis and the
use of outside expertise, and report to Congress regularly regarding their
financial condition.

* Ensure access to the government-guaranteed secondary market on full and equal
terms to lenders of all types, including community banks, independent mortgage
bankers, housing finance agencies, credit unions, and community development
financial institutions. The public guarantor must ensure that issuers of
securities do not create barriers using differential guarantee-fee pricing or
other means to unfairly restrict or disadvantage participation in the
government-guaranteed secondary market.

Mel Martinez is co-chair of the Bipartisan Policy Center's Housing Commission, a
former HUD secretary and a former U.S. Senator from Florida.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              339 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             April 28, 2009 Tuesday

News Relentlessly Downbeat At Secondary Market Meet

BYLINE: Lew Sichelman

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 9 Vol. 174 No. 80

LENGTH: 556  words


CHICAGO - Lenders hoping to hear some good news here last week at the Mortgage
Bankers Association's annual secondary market conference went away disappointed.

First, Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae told the meeting there would be no retreat
from what lenders consider excessive guarantee fees. Then former Federal Reserve
Board governor Randall Kroszner said the Fed has no particular strategy in mind
for its exit from the mortgage-backed securities market.

As if to punctuate the somber gathering, the MBA's chief economist said seven of
every 10 mortgages originated this year will replace loans already on the books.
If this forecast proves accurate, servicing runoff will accelerate dramatically
in coming months.

The MBA said more than 700 people registered for the conference. But the
exhibition hall was largely empty, save for lunchtime when a free buffet was
served. And plenty of seats were available at the sessions.

During the conference's opening session, the MBA's chairman-elect, Rob Story,
asked Fannie and Freddie executives whether they are considering reducing the
fees they charge lenders for insuring payments on the securities they issue.
Donald Bisenius, Freddie's senior vice president of single-family credit
guarantee business, responded bluntly.

quot;No, we're not going to lower our fees,quot; he said. Fees must remain at
their current levels because quot;the housing market is very, very fragile.
Prices at best are flat and still falling in many places. We need to balance
against that risk.quot;

Thomas Lund, Fannie's executive vice president of single-family mortgage
business, said the current charges strike a fair balance between providing
liquidity to the mortgage market and protecting taxpayers against footing the
bill for loans that go sour.

Kroszner, who returned to the University of Chicago in January after a
three-year stint at the Fed, was asked by Jay Brinkmann, the MBA's chief
economist, what plans the Fed has to extricate itself from the MBS market when
it reaches the $1.25 trillion of net purchases it has targeted for 2009.

The association is concerned that, when the Fed leaves the market, mortgage
rates will shoot upward.

Kroszner said the central bank will quot;do whatever it takesquot; to keep
mortgage rates in check until the MBS market returns to some approximation of
normality. quot;Whether the Fed will purchase more or less will depend on the
facts and circumstances at the time,quot; he said. If the central bank is
satisfied by 2010 that the market is coming back, it will reduce its purchases
and quot;mortgage rates should rise at a normal pace,quot; he said.

Brinkmann forecast that refinancings would account for 70% of all loans
originated this year. Refi volume will almost triple from what it was in 2008,
he said, to $1.925 trillion this year.

The MBA economist said about $1.5 trillion worth of loans would be the result of
quot;plain old, rate-term refisquot; and the remainder would be mortgages
refinanced under the government-sponsored enterprises' program for borrowers who
are current but owe more than their homes are worth.

The number of purchase loans will fall only 1%, Brinkmann said. But because of
shrinking loan sizes, the dollar volume will diminish by 5.7%, to $806 billion
this year.

Lew Sichelman is the senior housing correspondent at National Mortgage News.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              340 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Global Capital Euroweek

                                January 12, 2015

FHFA fee cut expected to hit RMBS investors

BYLINE: Ryan Bolger

SECTION: FHFA,G-FEE,FHA,FANNIE,FREDDIE,RMBS

LENGTH: 325  words



HIGHLIGHT: The Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) is believed to be
considering a reduction in its conventional mortgage guarantee fees in a bid to
win back business from the Federal Housing Administration (FHA).


Market participants told GlobalCapital that they expected the FHFA to lower
conventional g-fees or reprice the loan level pricing adjustment (LLPA) grid,
which could cause a sell-off of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac RMBS similar to that
of Ginnie Mae RMBS last week.

Last week, the FHA announced its plan to cut mortgage insurance premiums (MIPs)
by 50bp. Investors responded by selling off Ginnie Mae RMBS due to refinance
risk "" arising from the likelihood that many borrowers would refinance their
FHA mortgages under lower rates, thus accelerating principal payments on Ginnie
RMBS.

A similar price plummet could hit Fannie and Freddie RMBS if the FHFA follows
suit with a cut on g-fees, market participants said. For instance, RMBS backed
by 30-year Fannie Mae guaranteed mortgages with a 3.5% coupon could drop in
price by 8 ticks (0.25%) from a 10bp g-fee cut, JP Morgan analysts said.

"While the probability of a g-fee reduction has increased, it is still far from
certain, and timing [and] magnitude are unclear at this point," JP Morgan fixed
income analysts said in materials published in conjunction with an investor
conference call on Monday. "We retain our neutral basis call for now."

Analysts at Compass Point said in a client alert last week that they expected
the FHFA to finalize g-fees along with its private mortgage insurance
eligibility requirements (PMIERs) by early in the second quarter of 2015.

Mortgage origination is expected to flow to the FHA, and securitization to
Ginnie, after the FHA reduces MIPs by 50bp on January 26. By Q2, Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac may again offer best execution for mortgages, if g-fees are cut as
some market participants have predicted.

"The FHA and FHFA were both pushing higher premiums to reduce the presence of
the government in the mortgage market, so this comes as a surprise because they
were supposed to increase the private markets role," a securitization head at a
New York hedge fund said.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EUROW


              Copyright 2015 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              341 of 998 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                           December 16, 2008 Tuesday
                                National Edition

Fannie Mae eyes ending foreclosure evictions; Considering new policy to keep
renters in homes

BYLINE: Jody Shenn And Neil Unmack, Bloomberg News

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. FP7

LENGTH: 362  words


Fannie Mae, the mortgage-finance company run by the U. S. government, said it
will likely allow renters to remain in their homes following foreclosure.

Fannie is seeking to have a new policy regarding rental properties in place by
Jan. 9, when a temporary suspension on evictions expires, Brian Faith, a
spokesman for the Washington-based company, said in a statement sent by e-mail
today.

"This decision will bring great relief to thousands of renters who were in the
wrong place at the wrong time and were being forced from their homes as a
result," Senator Christopher Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, said in an e-mailed
statement.

Fannie and Freddie Mac, government-sponsored enterprises that own or guarantee
almost half of the U. S. home-mortgage market, were placed under federal control
by the Federal Housing Finance Agency on Sept. 6. Since then, they have been
pushed to work harder to curtail foreclosures on single-family and multifamily
loans and otherwise ease the fallout from defaults.

The companies last month suspended foreclosures and evictions until Jan. 9, to
give loan servicers time to implement a program for modifying terms for
struggling borrowers. Fannie's foreclosure halt and tenant-eviction freeze has
kept 7,000 to 10,000 families in properties, Faith wrote.

"The goal of the suspension is to ensure that no renters are put out of their
homes during this period," Faith said. "In conjunction with our regulator, FHFA,
we will continue working to fully support the market and undertake efforts aimed
at keeping people in their homes."

The shift in policy regarding tenants was reported by the Wall Street Journal
today.

Mr. Dodd's statement said that the lawmaker had "just weeks" ago urged FHFA
Director James Lockhart to force the policy change in response to Connecticut
residents trying to fight evictions by using a provision that the senator wrote
into a $700 billion financial-rescue law.

Fannie "will continue to offer monetary support for the transition to a new
residence as an alternative option," Faith said.

Freddie is considering a "similar" policy for renters, Sharon McHale, a
spokeswoman for the McLean, Virginia-based company, said today.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2008 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              342 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         WALL STREET JOURNAL ABSTRACTS

                             June 30, 2009 Tuesday

US WATCH -- ECONOMY: FANNIE MAE REPORTS RISE IN DELINQUENT MORTGAGES

BYLINE: James R Hagerty

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 42 words


Fannie Mae says 3.42% of single-family mortgages it owns or guarantees were 90
days or more delinquent in April, up from 3.15% in March; Fannie's rival Freddie
Mac reported last week that single-family delinquency rate for May was 2.62%, 4%
in April (S)

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Abstract

JOURNAL-CODE: WSJ

                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                           Information Bank Abstracts


                              343 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               December 12, 1994

Rising Rates Take Steam Out of Markets

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 557 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


While housing construction and new home sales remained strong in the third
quarter, rising interest rates took the steam out of housing markets overall,
according to the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Long-term mortgage interest rates increased by 150 basis points from the
beginning of the year through the summer and have continued to edge upward since
the end of the third quarter.

In the third quarter, conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 8.48%,
according to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.

By early November, long-term mortgage rates averaged above 9%.

While month-to-month reports have shown a mixed picture of housing market
activity, the third-quarter numbers compiled by HUD clearly show that mortgage
lending already has suffered from the effects of higher interest rates.

Applications for Federal Housing Administration loans declined 25% from the
second quarter to the third quarter.

Applications for private mortgage insurance declined 9%.  According to HUD,
total residential mortgage originations totaled $ 213 billion in the third
quarter, down from $ 263 billion in the second.

Fourth-quarter activity likely will continue the downward trend.  In the third
quarter of 1993, residential originations totaled $ 246 billion.

By contrast, multifamily construction and lending activity continued to grow in
the third quarter.

Multifamily mortgage originations, at $ 10.3 billion, were up from $ 7.8 billion
in the second quarter and $ 5.9 billion a year earlier.

Despite the decline in residential originations, the FHA and Veterans
Administration loan guarantee programs picked up market share in the third
quarter, according to HUD.

The FHA insured 14% of residential mortgages, the VA guaranteed 6%.  In the
third quarter of last year, as the refinancing boom picked up speed, the FHA
insured 7% and the VA guaranteed 4%.

Private mortgage insurance also increased to 17% of originations in the third
quarter, up from 13% a year earlier.

The percentage of loans originated with no mortgage insurance declined from 76%
in the third quarter of 1993 to 63% in the third quarter of this year.

While housing starts and home sales remained strong in the third quarter,
builders reported less traffic through model homes and single-family building
permits fell slightly from the second quarter.

While new home sales were slightly higher in the third quarter than in the
second quarter, existing home sales were down.

The pace of existing home sales, which stood at 4.06 million units annually in
the second quarter, dipped to 3.96 million units in the third, according to
HUD's report on third-quarter housing market conditions.

The National Association of Realtors reported that housing affordability, a
measure of the ability of a family at median income to purchase a median priced
existing home, fell in the third quarter.

The affordability index slipped to 128% in the third quarter, down from 131% in
the second, meaning the typical median income family could afford to purchase a
home valued at that percentage of the median existing home sales price.

The index is based on a composite of fixed rate and adjustable rate loan
options.

Calculated using only fixed rate, 30-year mortgages, the affordability index
stood at 118%, down from 122% in the second quarter.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              344 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 24, 2015 Tuesday

Washington: Housing reform bill gives Ginnie Mae larger role

LENGTH: 247  words

DATELINE: Washington


The National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the following news
release:

Last week, three moderate Democratic representatives introduced legislation they
say is aimed at protecting the 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage through a new
program involving government-sponsored enterprise Ginnie Mae.

Reps. John Delaney, D-Md., John Carney, D-Del., and Jim Himes, D-Conn.,
introduced the "Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act" on Thursday. The
bill would establish an insurance program through Ginnie Mae.
Government-guaranteed, single-family and multi-family mortgage-backed securities
would be supported by a minimum of 5 percent private sector capital, with the
remaining 95 percent of risk shared between Ginnie and a private reinsurer. The
bill would also wind down GSEs Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and allow them to be
sold and recapitalized.

NAFCU staff will review the bill and continues to monitor the housing finance
reform debate for its effect on credit unions.

In the last Congress, The Senate Banking Committee and the House Financial
Services Committee both reported Housing Finance Reform bills, but neither saw
action before the full Senate or House.

NAFCU continues to push for housing finance reform that guarantees access to the
secondary mortgage market for credit unions, and ensures fair pricing based on
loan quality rather than volume.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              345 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 8, 2014 Thursday

FORM 8-K: FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP FILES Current report

LENGTH: 730  words

DATELINE: Washington


FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP, Federally, has filed FORM 8-K (Current report)
with Securities and Exchange Commission on May 08, 2014

State or other Jurisdiction of Incorporation: Federally

Item 2.02. Results of Operations and Financial Condition.

On May 8, 2014, Freddie Mac (formally known as the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation) announced its results of operations for the quarter ended March 31,
2014. A copy of the related press release for the quarter ended March 31, 2014
is being filed as Exhibit 99.1 to this report and is incorporated herein by
reference. In addition, a copy of the First Quarter 2014 Financial Results
Supplement is being furnished as Exhibit 99.2 to this report and is incorporated
herein by reference.

Exhibit 99.1 submitted herewith shall be deemed to be "filed" for purposes of
Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.

Exhibit 99.2 submitted herewith shall not be deemed to be "filed" for purposes
of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or otherwise subject to
the liabilities of Section 18, nor shall it be deemed to be incorporated by
reference into any disclosure document relating to Freddie Mac, except to the
extent, if any, expressly set forth by specific reference in such document.

Item 9.01. Financial Statements and Exhibits.

(d) Exhibits.

The following exhibits are being filed or furnished as part of this Report on
Form 8-K:

Exhibit Number


Description of Exhibit


99.1
     Press release, dated May 8, 2014, issued by Freddie Mac

99.2
     First Quarter 2014 Financial Results Supplement

FREDDIE MAC REPORTS NET INCOME OF $4.0 BILLION;

COMPREHENSIVE INCOME OF $4.5 BILLION FOR FIRST QUARTER 2014

Company to Return Additional $4.5 Billion to Taxpayers in Second Quarter

First Quarter 2014 Financial Results
   --

First quarter 2014 net income was $4.0 billion - the company's tenth consecutive
quarter of positive earnings, compared to $8.6 billion in the fourth quarter of
2013
   --

First quarter 2014 comprehensive income was $4.5 billion, compared to $9.8
billion in the fourth quarter of 2013
   --

First quarter financial results were affected by the following significant
items:

¡     Legal settlement benefits of $4.9 billion ($3.4 billion after-tax), mostly
related to private-label securities litigation

¡     Derivative losses of $2.4 billion ($1.6 billion after-tax), driven by
lower long-term interest rates
   --

Recent level of earnings is not sustainable over the long term, and earnings may
be volatile from period to period

Treasury Draws and Dividend Payments at March 31, 2014


   --

Based on March 31, 2014 net worth of $6.9 billion, the company's June 2014
dividend obligation will be $4.5 billion, bringing total cash dividends paid to
Treasury to $86.3 billion
   --

Senior preferred stock held by Treasury remains $72.3 billion, as dividend
payments do not reduce prior Treasury draws

Housing Market Support Since January 1, 2009


   --

Provided $2.3 trillion of liquidity, including $52 billion in the first quarter
of 2014, to the mortgage market, that funded:

¡     7.8 million refinancings, including over 140,000 in the first quarter

¡     2.1 million home purchases, including over 104,000 in the first quarter

¡     1.7 million units of multifamily rental housing, including over 51,000 in
the first quarter
   --

Helped over 987,000 borrowers to avoid foreclosure, including over 34,000 in the
first quarter

Credit Quality at March 31, 2014


   --

Post-2008 book of business grew to 55 percent of single-family credit guarantee
portfolio during the first quarter, excluding HARP and other relief refinance
loans which were 21 percent
   --

Delinquency rates remained below industry benchmarks:

¡     Single-family serious delinquency rate declined to 2.20 percent

¡     Multifamily delinquency rate was 0.04 percent

Freddie Mac First Quarter 2014 Financial Results

May 8, 2014

Page 2

McLean, VA -- Freddie Mac (OTCQB: FMCC) today reported net income of $4.0
billion for the first quarter of 2014, compared to $8.6 billion for the fourth
quarter of 2013. The company also reported comprehensive income of $4.5 billion
for the first quarter of 2014, compared to $9.8 billion for the fourth quarter
of 2013.

For more information please visit: http://www.sec.gov

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              346 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            South China Morning Post

                             August 18, 2008 Monday

Polluted markets

BYLINE: James Dorn

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 695 words


The US subprime crisis has some valuable lessons for China, the foremost being
that market socialism is no magic wand for wealth creation. When the US Congress
created Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the two giant mortgage-financing companies,
and gave them the status of "government-sponsored enterprises", the stage was
set for a major moral hazard problem.

By creating for-profit joint stock companies, with an implicit guarantee that
Washington would step in if they  were in distress, the two enterprises were
able to raise funds more cheaply than their rivals and securitise vast pools of
home mortgages.

While home prices were rocketing and investment bankers and rating agencies were
making top fees creating collateralised debt obligation bonds, which included
subprime mortgages, few people were paying much attention to the potential for
disaster.

A combination of loose monetary policy,  lax risk assessment,  and the ability
to easily shift risk off the balance sheets of conventional mortgage lenders by
securitisation led to a perfect storm last year, as the housing bubble burst.

Because of Fannie and Freddie's government-sponsored enterprise status, they are
not subject to the same capital adequacy standards as other financial
institutions. Consequently, the ratio of assets (loans and investments) to net
worth is extremely high, which means that the ratio of their liabilities (debt
and guarantees) to net worth is also high.  Such leverage means high profits
when housing prices are rising, but insolvency when prices crash.

Although Fannie and Freddie's shareholders have taken a beating, the US Treasury
has promised to support share prices "if necessary" and make the implicit
guarantee to protect bondholders explicit by providing credit, along with the
Federal Reserve.  The lesson is that, when government pollutes capital markets
by implicitly guaranteeing debt, market participants recognise that they will be
protected if the enterprises run into difficulty. That is why foreign investors,
including the People's Bank of China, hold more than US$1.3 trillion of Fannie
and Freddie bonds.

In a global financial system, moral hazard means that by socialising risk in a
particular sector, overall financial risk increases. Instead of concentrating
risk on owners and investors, a government safety net socialises capital
markets, allowing errors of judgment to accumulate while profits are being made.
When the asset price bubble bursts, the safety net falls onto  taxpayers.

The subprime crisis is, at its base, a crisis of markets tainted by government
intervention,  along with the failure of the Fed to tighten monetary policy.  It
is also a failure of regulation to effectively monitor lending practices in the
subprime market.

It is ironic that the Basel capital adequacy requirements, which were supposed
to prevent excessive risk-taking, helped create the demand for securitising home
mortgages and creating collateralised debt obligations. Often, well-intended
regulations have unintended consequences. That is why it is essential to get the
institutions and incentives right from the start and let competitive markets
exercise their discipline.

China's financial sector is far more tainted by market socialism than is the US
market. China is heavily involved in credit allocation, and various state
entities hold large stakes in the big banks. Most listed stocks are state-owned
enterprises, and political connections are essential in entering the capital
markets. Consequently, corruption is still a major problem.

When the government creates state-sponsored enterprises or holds the keys to
access financial markets, there is an incentive to use political connections and
pay "tribute" to obtain and retain those valuable "economic rights". Fannie and
Freddie have spent large sums to maintain their special status, while those who
want access to funds in China must also pay tribute. Moving to a financial
system  where owners and investors, not taxpayers, bear responsibility for
losses creates rather than destroys wealth.

James A. Dorn is vice-president for academic affairs  at the Cato Institute and
editor of the Cato Journal

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 South China Morning Post Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              347 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           August 18, 2010 Wednesday

Consensus Emerging For Future Of Housing

BYLINE: Donna Borak

SECTION: WASHINGTON; Pg. 1 Vol. 175 No. 127

LENGTH: 1136  words


WASHINGTON - Although there were sharp disagreements at a Treasury Department
conference Tuesday about what kind of role the government should take in the
future of housing finance, one idea in particular seems to be gaining momentum:
creating an insurance fund to back mortgage-backed securities.

Under a plan advanced by several participants, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would
be replaced by privatelycapitalized, federallychartered companies that buy
mortgages from the primary market and deliver them into a federally guaranteed
mortgage-backed security.

The new companies would pay a risk-based fee used to establish an insurance
fund, similar to that of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which would cover
catastrophic losses on MBS.

Although details of the plan vary, the idea has won considerable support.

"Any guarantee should be explicit and the government should charge a fee to
create a reserve fund to cover potential losses," said Ingrid Gould Ellen, a
professor at New York University's Wagner Graduate School of Public Service and
co-director of the Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy.

To be sure, others offered differing visions of the GSEs' future, with Bill
Gross of Pimco calling for full nationalization and Alex Pollock of the American
Enterprise Institute suggesting a more private-market-oriented approach.

But amid the various ideas, the insurance fund was the subject of a surprising
consensus.

The basic thrust of the plan involves an explicit, narrowly targeted government
guarantee that would be used to cover "catastrophic" losses on certain kinds of
MBS. For example, the government would give a guarantee only to 30-year fixed
mortgages with significant downpayments.

"Public participation should be limited to providing only a layer of guarantee
and setting credit standards for tightly defined conventional mortgages behind
the borrower downpayment, private mortgage insurance, and layers of reserves and
capital at whatever future entities play this limited role," said S.A. Ibrahim,
chief executive of the private mortgage insurer Radian GroupInc. "Public
participation can be paid for through fees and further protect taxpayers through
sound underwriting and appraisals, while additionally limiting the government
guarantees to a historically safer catastrophic loan-to-value gap of, say, 70%
or lower."

The idea has already been endorsed by several groups and companies, including
the Housing Policy Council, theMortgage Bankers Association and Wells Fargo &
Co.

Speaking at the conference Tuesday, Mike Heid, president of Wells Fargo Home
Mortgage, said a government guarantee is "required to ensure that there's a
reliable flow of mortgage credit across the whole wide range of economic cycles
we will experience in the future."

"I want to emphasize that the guarantee itself should only apply to the
performance of the mortgage security itself," he said. "It should not apply in
any shape or form to the particular entity that's involved in the securitization
process itself."

Susan Wachter, Richard B. Worley Professor of Financial Management, professor of
Real Estate, Finance and City and Regional Planning at the University of
Pennsylvania's Wharton School, agreed."There is a role for a government
guarantee that is very limited in successor entities such as Fannie and
Freddie," Wachter said. "There should be perhaps successors not solely, in my
mind, in the government, but outside the government, with a limited role for a
government guarantee with private capital in the first-loss position."

She, too, said the government should not guarantee debt of any new entities, but
only the security.

Barbara Desoer, president of Bank of America Home Loans, said the government's
role in housing finance needs to be cleared up. Fannie and Freddie were
considered implicitly backed by the government, a role that allowed them to sell
their debt for cheaper because of a perceived government guarantee but not
technically be on the government's books. "The future role for the government
must be transparent and clear," Desoer said. "Institutions or products will
either need to be explicitly guaranteed or not guaranteed at all."

Although Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner moderated the panel, which included
in-depth discussion of the insurance fund idea, he did not take a position on
it. Instead, he said he favored some type of government role in housing finance.
The administration is due to unveil its own plan in January.

"The question is really about whether the government - in order to make sure
that Americans can borrow at reasonable interest rates to buy a house even in a
deep recession - has to provide a form of guarantee or insurance against
losses," Geithner said. "I believe there is a strong case to be made for a
carefully designed guarantee in a reformed system, with the objective of
providing a measure of stability in access to mortgages, even in future economic
downturns."

The challenge is "to make sure that any government guarantee is priced to cover
the risk of losses, and structured to minimize taxpayer exposure," Geithner
said.

One participant pushed for a much more substantial role for the government.
Gross, a co-founder and co-chief investment officer of Pacific Investment
Management Co., said all government programs should be combined into Ginnie Mae.
"We should consolidate all of the agencies into one true Ginnie Mae, a
government national mortgage association - one agency," he said. "We are
skeptical of other public-private models currently being considered, discussed
today, because they're more expensive primarily, resulting in higher mortgage
rates and therefore favoring Wall Street as opposed to Main Street."

Gross said several options would essentially create "clones" of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.

"Private mortgage insurance, for instance, is untrustworthy and comes at a very
expensive costs going forward," Gross said. "We need one national agency with
sufficient backing, down payments and guarantees going forward."

He was balanced out by Pollock, who said Fannie and Freddie should be split into
three parts: a private company that provides a guarantee, a government agency
that provides housing subsidies and a liquidating trust to run off continuing
losses from the existing GSEs.

One option that does not appear to be on the table: returning Fannie and Freddie
to the structure they had before they were seized by the government two years
ago. In his remarks, Geithner specifically rejected the idea.

"We will not support returning Fannie and Freddie to the role they played before
conservatorship, where they fought to take market share from private competitors
while enjoying the privilege of government support," he said. We will not
support a return to the system where private gains are subsidized by taxpayer
losses."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              348 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                  COURIER-MAIL

                          November 19, 1986 Wednesday

BANKS WILL KEEP LOAN RATE STEADY

SOURCE: QNP

BYLINE: EARLE G

LENGTH: 582 words


CANBERRA._ Major savings banks last night said they did not intend to follow the
National Australia Bank's move to raise some interest rates for new home loans.
Such a rise applied generally to new loans would increase the average home
buyer's interest repayments by between $30 and $50 a week. The Federal
Government is confident the National will be isolated in its move to raise
interest rates on some home loans to as high as 17.5 percent _ 2 percent beyond
the market rate. A National spokesman said ""a very small group" of
non-customers and people who could not provide 20 percent equity would pay the
new rate, in the range 15.5 percent to 17.5 percent, on new loans. He would not
give a guarantee the 15.5 percent rate would remain unchanged for existing
borrowers. The Housing and Construction Minister, Mr West, said the National's
rate was extremely uncompetitive and borrowers easily could find a better deal
from the other banks and building societies. He advised new home buyers to
""shop around" for the lowest rate. ""I might just say that, if any person in
their right mind is inclined to take the 17.5 percent loan I'm puzzled, for they
should look around at what is available from other banks," he said. ""If the
National Bank's action is a move in a campaign to force an eventual rise in the
13.5 percent regulated rate, it will not succeed because the Government is
committed to that regulated rate." The National Australia Bank's chief general
manager of retail banking, Mr Lloyd Smith, said: ""This three-tiered approach is
not a departure from our past savings bank lending policy. Customers who meet
the bank's basic lending requirements will continue to be offered housing loans
at 15.5 percent." The ANZ, Commonwealth and Westpac banks said yesterday they
had no immediate plans to follow the National's lead. The ANZ chief general
manager, Mr Bob Bennett, said the bank was lending ""considerable amounts" at
15.5 percent and it would be ""business as usual". He said he expected general
interest rates to fall in the next few months, which would ease the pressure on
the banks. The Commonwealth Bank managing director, Mr Vern Christie, also said
there were no plans to increase the 15.5 percent rate. Westpac's chief manager,
Mr John Morris, said the bank would continue to approve loans at the old rate.
The Opposition leader, Mr Howard, said yesterday's decision by the National was
""really bad news for the Government". ""It is a further sign that the
Government's housing package of last April is falling apart," he said. The
housing package partly deregulated home loan rates and set a 13.5 percent
ceiling on home loans taken out before April 2. A Government interest-rate
subsidy worth $120 million a year was given to the four major banks _ the
Commonwealth, Westpac, ANZ and National _ for them to maintain existing
deposits. The savings banks recently have revived their arguments that the
Government should abandon the 13.5 percent ceiling rate on many home loans as
the best way of allowing them to compete in a high- interest rate environment.
The Metropolitan Permanent Building Society assistant general manager, Mr Cliff
Dawson, said there were no plans to raise the prevailing rate of 15.5 percent
for all new variable mortgages. Suncorp's assistant general manager, Mr Lawrie
Elder, said an increase in the society's home loan rates was unlikely, even
though the current economic climate precluded a sustained fall in rates.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: CML

                   Copyright 1986 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              349 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                  June 9, 1997

HUD Questions Freddie on B&C

BYLINE: BY BRIAN COLLINS

SECTION: Pg. 50

LENGTH: 572 words

DATELINE: Washington


The Department of Housing and Urban Development is waking up to Freddie Mac's
venture into securitizing subprime loans and is beginning to ask questions.

The Federally chartered secondary market agency has apparently completed at
least a billion dollars in securitizations and most recently securitized a $ 227
million pool of subprime first mortgage loans for First Union National Bank,
Charlotte. N.C.

Freddie Mac officials maintain that they don't need HUD approval to enter the
B&C market because the agency has approved the real estate mortgage investment
corporation (REMIC) structure used in the First Union transaction.

"We don't consider this transaction to be an issue of whether we are purchasing
B&C mortgages.  We are purchasing and securitizing a senior investment grade
security and then putting our REMIC wrapper on it," said Freddie Mac spokesman
Douglas Robinson.

"This is a structure that HUD has already approved," Mr. Robinson added and he
pointed to HUD's approval of a REMIC transaction Freddie Mac conducted for
BlackRock Capital Financial L.P., New York, and Ocwen Federal Bank FSB, W. Palm
Beach, Fla., last year.

HUD officials maintain the Black-Rock approval is specific to one transaction
and they have started an inquiry into the First Union transaction.

"This letter is specific to Black-Rock," HUD spokesman Victor Lambert said.  "We
are telling Freddie that this particular transaction (Black Rock) is
permissible, not that it is permissible to securitize subprime mortgages across
the board."

The Black Rock/Ocwen team is a major purchaser of nonperforming Federal Housing
Administration single-family loan from HUD.

Last year, Freddie Mac assisted BlackRock/Ocwen in securitizing a $ 550 million
pool of "re-performing" FHA loans by purchasing and securitizing the senior
classes, which totaled $ 391 million.  Freddie Mac did not place its REMIC
guarantee on the $ 108 million subordinated piece.

Upon review of the transaction.  HUD gave Freddie Mac its stamp of approval.

"The BlackRock transaction is permissible under Freddie Mac's charter.
Generally, REMICs are permissible transactions for Freddie Mac and the details
of this transaction make it permissible," according to HUD assistant secretary
Nicolas Retsinas.

The restructured FHA loans in the Black Rock transaction probably were not of
the highest quality.

The First Union pool includes "A" through "C" quality loans with interest rates
ranging from 7%-16% and most the loans do not fit Freddie Mac's loan purchase
guidelines.

Freddie Mac's spokesman explained.  However, that the First Union transaction is
part of a pilot program that is limited in scope and duration.  And Freddie Mac
is allowed to initiate these kinds of limited transactions without HUD approval.

HUD officials are not so sure and Janet Tasker, the director of HUD's Office of
Government Sponsored Enterprises Oversight, is seeking more information from
Freddie Mac about the First Union transaction.  "We certainly are talking to
them," HUD's spokesman said.

On Capital Hill, the news that Freddie Mac is venturing into riskier territory
also raised eyebrows.

"It is something the committee will take a look at," said David Runkel,
spokesman for the House Banking Committee.  However, committee chairman Jim
Leach, R., Iowa, has not requested a HUD review of the transaction.  "We don't
have an opinion on it yet," Mr. Runkel said.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1997 Faulkner & Gray


                              350 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                The Denver Post

                             March 17, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

LINING UP HOME LOANS: HUD program strives to open doors for American Indian
buyers Nearly 80,000 Coloradans may be eligible for the low-cost, federally
guaranteed mortgages, but fewer than a dozen have benefited. Denver will be a
focal point in expanding the program.

BYLINE: Aldo Svaldi Denver Post Staff Writer

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-01

LENGTH: 563 words


With two growing children in a three-bedroom, one-bath home, Darius Smith and
his wife, Lisa Calderon, knew it was time to look for something larger.

But when the couple began to arrange financing, they were told that their
preapproved mortgage would be limited to $270,000 and carry an interest rate
nearly 1 percent higher than the market average.

Smith is director of Denver's Anti- Discrimination Office, and Calderon is a
nonprofit executive. Even so, Smith feared they would have to leave the
Highlands area for the suburbs to find a home they could afford.

"We were about to give up," he said.

Then Smith learned that, because he is Navajo, he qualified for a special loan
under the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Section 184 Indian
Housing Loan Guarantee Program. Among its many perks, the program offers
government-guaranteed mortgages at 150 percent of the federal lending limits for
a county.

Several months ago, Smith became the first American Indian to take out a Section
184 loan in Denver. He and Calderon qualified for a $350,000 loan at competitive
interest rates, with which they bought a four-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath home in
Denver's Cole neighborhood.

"Sometimes I have to catch myself," Smith said. "I can't believe this is my
house."

HUD will host a free, two-day training session in Denver on March 23 and 24 for
lenders and tribal officials interested in learning more about the program.

Section 184 loans have been available since 1992, but relatively few have been
made. While nearly 80,000 Coloradans described themselves as American Indian in
the 2000 census, fewer than a dozen have Section 184 loans. Nationally, only
about 3,000 loans worth $320 million have been issued.

The primary reason is that the program originally focused just on home purchases
within tribal lands, said Randall Akers, who oversees Northern Plains American
Indian programs with HUD. Economic hardship, cultural constraints and a lack of
new construction and access to capital kept many rural American Indians from
homeownership.

But in recent years, HUD has lifted the geographic limits in states where tribes
have agreed to sponsor the program.

Last year, the Southern Ute Tribe stepped in, opening the 184 program to any
qualified American Indian in Colorado who is enrolled or registered with a
tribe. The bulk live in urban areas or off reservations.

HUD would like to make 1,000 loans under the 184 program this year, and Denver
will be key in achieving that goal, said John Carson, HUD's regional director in
Denver.

"Homeownership is the first rung on the ladder to moving up economically,"
Carson said. "It is something we want to push."

Underwriting criteria are more flexible than for conventional mortgages, and the
loans have low down payments and require no mortgage insurance. HUD also watches
out for predatory interest rates, junk fees and other abuses, said DeAnna
Lucero, a HUD underwriter.

Besides purchases, the flexible loans can also be used for refinancings,
rehabilitations and new construction, including prebuilt homes.

For most American Indian borrowers, the program represents a much better deal
than other government and conventional loan programs, said Roy Chavez, who works
with Clarion Mortgage Capital, one of six lenders approved to make the loans in
the state.

Staff writer Aldo Svaldi can be reached at 303-820-1410 or
asvaldi@denverpost.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2006 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              351 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 7, 2014 Thursday

FORM 8-K: FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP FILES Current report

LENGTH: 787  words

DATELINE: Washington


FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP, Federally, has filed FORM 8-K (Current report)
with Securities and Exchange Commission on August 07, 2014

State or other Jurisdiction of Incorporation: Federally

Item 2.02. Results of Operations and Financial Condition.

On August 7, 2014, Freddie Mac (formally known as the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation) announced its results of operations for the quarter ended June 30,
2014. A copy of the related press release for the quarter ended June 30, 2014 is
being filed as Exhibit 99.1 to this report and is incorporated herein by
reference. In addition, a copy of the Second Quarter 2014 Financial Results
Supplement is being furnished as Exhibit 99.2 to this report and is incorporated
herein by reference.

Exhibit 99.1 submitted herewith shall be deemed to be "filed" for purposes of
Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.

Exhibit 99.2 submitted herewith shall not be deemed to be "filed" for purposes
of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or otherwise subject to
the liabilities of Section 18, nor shall it be deemed to be incorporated by
reference into any disclosure document relating to Freddie Mac, except to the
extent, if any, expressly set forth by specific reference in such document.

Item 9.01. Financial Statements and Exhibits.

(d) Exhibits.

The following exhibits are being filed or furnished as part of this Report on
Form 8-K:

Exhibit Number


Description of Exhibit


99.1
     Press release, dated August 7, 2014, issued by Freddie Mac

99.2
     Second Quarter 2014 Financial Results Supplement

FREDDIE MAC REPORTS NET INCOME OF $1.4 BILLION,

COMPREHENSIVE INCOME OF $1.9 BILLION FOR SECOND QUARTER 2014

Company to Return Additional $1.9 Billion to Taxpayers in Third Quarter

Families Helped to Avoid Foreclosure Reaches 1 Million Milestone

Second Quarter 2014 Financial Results
   --

Net income was $1.4 billion - the company's eleventh consecutive quarter of
positive earnings, compared to $4.0 billion in first quarter of 2014
   --

Comprehensive income was $1.9 billion, compared to $4.5 billion in first quarter
of 2014
   --

Second quarter financial results were primarily driven by credit cycle recovery
items

¡     Lower income from legal settlements on private-label securities of $0.4
billion versus $4.5 billion in first quarter

¡     A shift to credit provision income of $0.6 billion from credit provision
expense of $0.1 billion in first quarter
   --

Additionally, results reflect lower derivative losses of $1.9 billion versus
$2.4 billion in first quarter

Treasury Draws and Dividend Payments at June 30, 2014
   --

Based on June 30, 2014 net worth of $4.3 billion, the company's September 2014
dividend obligation will be $1.9 billion, bringing total cash dividends paid to
Treasury to $88.2 billion
   --

Senior preferred stock held by Treasury remains $72.3 billion, as dividend
payments do not reduce prior Treasury draws

Housing Market Support Since January 1, 2009
   --

Provided $2.3 trillion of liquidity to the mortgage market, including over $116
billion in the first half of 2014

¡     7.9 million refinancings (nearly 275,000 in the first half of 2014)

¡     2.3 million home purchases (over 251,000 in the first half of 2014)

¡     1.7 million units of multifamily rental housing (over 114,000 in the first
half of 2014)
   --

Helped 1.0 million borrowers to avoid foreclosure (over 64,000 in the first half
of 2014)

Credit Quality at June 30, 2014
   --

Post-2008 book of business continues to grow and now represents 56 percent of
single-family credit guarantee portfolio and HARP and other relief refinance
loans were an additional 21 percent of that portfolio
   --

Delinquency rates remained below industry benchmarks:

¡     Single-family serious delinquency rate was 2.07 percent (compared to 2.79
percent at June 30, 2013)

¡     Multifamily delinquency rate was 0.02 percent
   --

Continued to shift mortgage credit risk to private capital markets through
innovative STACR®, ACIS and K-deal offerings, transferring a significant portion
of credit risk on nearly $200 billion of mortgages since the start of these
efforts through June 30, 2014

Freddie Mac Second Quarter 2014 Financial Results

August 7, 2014

Page 2

McLean, VA -- Freddie Mac (OTCQB: FMCC) today reported net income of $1.4
billion for the second quarter of 2014, compared to $4.0 billion for the first
quarter of 2014. The company also reported comprehensive income of $1.9 billion
for the second quarter of 2014, compared to $4.5 billion for the first quarter
of 2014.

For more information please visit: http://www.sec.gov

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              352 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             July 7, 2005 Thursday

New Point of Dispute in GSE Reform: Loan Limits

BYLINE: Rob Blackwell

SECTION: WASHINGTON; Pg. 1 Vol. 170 No. 129

LENGTH: 1191  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The list of obstacles to overhauling the regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie

Mac this year keeps growing.

Controversy has flared over two more provisions -- one that would raise

the conforming loan limit in high-cost areas and another that would make

Fannie and Freddie register their debt.

Additionally, Washington insiders say that even if the Senate Banking

Committee passes a bill, the full Senate may not have time to vote on it

because of an anticipated Supreme Court nomination battle and other fights.

"The longer you let a complex bill hang out there, the more issues that

come up," said Edward Yingling, the president of the American Bankers

Association.

Some bankers are rallying opposition to a provision in the House bill

that would raise the largest mortgages Fannie and Freddie could buy in

high-cost areas by 50%, or to the level of the area's median home price,

whichever was less.

The provision has pitted two community banking trade groups against each

other and set off another feud between bankers and the National Association

of Realtors.

Currently Fannie and Freddie are restricted to buying single-family

mortgages of $359,650 and under. The bill would allow them to buy loans of

nearly $540,000 in high-cost areas.

Though the provision has been divisive since the bill passed the House

Financial Services Committee in May, more bankers have begun to object in

recent weeks. They argue that letting the government-sponsored enterprises

buy loans of wealthier borrowers and reducing their incentive to serve low-

and moderate-income consumers would contradict the goal of reining in the

GSEs.

It would create "a tremendous risk to divert Fannie's and Freddie's

attention from what they were chartered to do," said F. Weller Meyer, the

president and chief executive officer of the $1.1 billion-asset Acacia

Federal Savings Bank in Falls Church, Va. "It certainly creates the potential

to expand their mission beyond what it has been defined as."

Four financial groups -- America's Community Bankers, the Association of

Financial Guaranty Insurers, the Consumer Mortgage Coalition, and the

Financial Services Roundtable's Housing Policy Council -- sent a letter to

all members of Congress on Friday that urged them to remove the provision.

Diane Casey-Landry, ACB's president, warned that her group may oppose the

bill if the provision remains. It "could ultimately make us question our

support for GSE legislation," she said. "We believe this provision undermines

the intent of the bill."

Opponents of the provision are also motivated by competitive interests.

Ms. Casey-Landry acknowledged that banks and thrifts that make jumbo

loans and hold them in portfolio could be squeezed out of the market if

Fannie and Freddie were permitted to buy bigger loans.

Traditionally, banks that choose to hold loans rather than sell them

cannot offer as good a price on a mortgage as a bank that is prepared to sell

the loan. In the conforming loan market that means most banks sell off their

loans. But lenders that want to hold mortgages tend to operate in the jumbo

market, where they can afford to hold on to the mortgage.

Jim Giraldin, president of $10 billion-asset First Federal Bank of

California in Santa Monica, said he does not want to lose business to lenders

that work with Fannie and Freddie. He said the provision would further help

the two companies, which already have an implicit government guarantee.

"I don't argue consumers won't get a few basis points better rate. But

what is the public policy purpose of that? ... This is giving a benefit to

wealthier people," he said.

Several state groups have weighed in as well, saying the current jumbo

market is well served already and that the GSEs' presence in it would not

lower prices by much.

"New York is not underbanked by any stretch," said Mariel Donath, the

president of the Community Bankers Association of New York State. "There is

no reason to have Fannie and Freddie in this market for this level of

housing."

Mr. Meyer said that "if Fannie and Freddie got into the marketplace too,

the differential would be minimal at best."

Not all bankers agree. The Independent Community Bankers of America said

a hike in the conforming loan limit could provide bankers more opportunity to

sell their loans.

"Most ICBA members are interested in selling those loans in the secondary

market," said Karen Thomas, the group's executive vice president of government

relations. "The higher the conforming loan limit is, the easier it is for them

to do that. They are not going to have the volume to do their own

securitization, and they don't necessarily want to do business with another

bank. ... They want to be able to sell to Fannie and Freddie."

The Realtors association has also been pushing for the provision. Steve

Cook, the group's vice president for communications, said it would help lower

the price of mortgages and help more consumers afford homes in areas where the

median home price is higher than the conforming loan limit.

"These big banks don't want competition -- that's what it is all about,"

Mr. Cook said. "We think it's incredible that these banking interests should

be fighting to preserve the jumbo markets themselves and making it impossible

for working families to take advantage of the benefits of the secondary

mortgage markets made possible by Fannie and Freddie."

But Ms. Casey-Landry said members of Mr. Cook's group had their own aims

at heart. "The Realtors need to realize that Fannie and Freddie were not

created so that Realtors could sell high-cost properties," she said.

Senate Banking Chairman Richard Shelby did not include a higher limit in

his wish list for legislation. But some observers said they believe lawmakers

such as Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., and Sen. Jon Corzine, D-N.J. -- both

panel members from states with expensive housing -- might push for such an

addition to the bill.

Sen. Shelby, R-Ala., did say last month that he wanted to require Fannie

and Freddie -- but not the Federal Home Loan Banks -- to register their debt

with the Securities and Exchange Commission. That suggestion is opposed by

ACB and the ICBA. (Mr. Yingling said the ABA had not taken a position on the

conforming loan limit or debt registration provisions.)

Both community banking groups contend that Fannie and Freddie already

disclose enough to the market. And they are worried that the same

public-policy argument behind forcing registration by Fannie and Freddie

could easily apply to the Home Loan banks, which have said debt registration

would hurt the system.

"It's a dumb idea," said Mr. Giraldin, who is also a director at the San

Francisco Home Loan Bank. "It will increase the cost of the debt securities.

My fear is they will expand beyond Fannie and Freddie to the Federal Home

Loan Bank System and that is anti-community lending."

The bill's other major obstacles include deciding whether and how to

limit Fannie and Freddie's mortgage portfolios and a proposal to force them

to devote 5% of their profits to an affordable-housing fund. With Sen. Shelby

aiming to hold a committee vote the week of July 18, most observers say

lawmakers are running out of time to work things out.

http://www.americanbanker.com http://www.sourcemedia.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo, Meyer

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: a


                        Copyright 2005 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              353 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                            October 20, 2009 Tuesday

VA Reports Growth In Mortgage Volume

BYLINE: National Mortgage News

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 5 Vol. 174 No. 191

LENGTH: 183  words


The Department of Veterans Affairs guaranteed $68.2 billion of single-family
loans in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, an 80% spike from the preceding
year.

Refinancings drove most of the increase, with the agency guaranteeing 144,800
transactions. In the previous fiscal year it backed 37,300 refis.

Purchase mortgage transactions rose 27%, to 180,900 loans.

Volumes aside, VA officials seem most pleased with the performance of the new
loans. "We outperform every other product on the market, including prime loans,"
said Mark Bologna, the director of the VA home loan guarantee program.

The agency's "seriously delinquent" rate is 4.69%, compared to 5.44% for prime
loans, according to the latest data compiled by the Mortgage Bankers
Association.

VA officials contended that one reason for the good performance is that the
agency did not bend to industry pressure during the housing boom to let loan
officers and mortgage brokers select their own appraisers. VA approves, monitors
and selects appraisers.

This has resulted in "good, solid values," Bologna said. "It has proven to be a
good decision."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              354 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                October 28, 2013

Getting Out from Under Fannie's, Freddie's Shadow

BYLINE: Alfred Dellibovi

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 3 Vol. 38 No. 7

LENGTH: 698  words


The Manhattan skyline is an iconic image, but to get a true sense of the scope
of New York City, one has to take it all in: from the northernmost sections of
the borough of the Bronx down through the neighborhoods of Queens and Brooklyn
and out to Staten Island.

The city's infrastructure is familiar across the globe, but its roots lie with
the local lender.

Even in a city with the international reach of New York, it is the local
lenders-and the multifamily lending market they support-that build from the
ground up.

This is why I was encouraged by the Federal Housing Finance Agency's recent call
for input on strategies for reducing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's presence in
the multifamily housing market.

The membership of the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York is comprised of some of
the most active and experienced multifamily lenders in the country.

At the end of the second quarter of 2013, our members had nearly $54 billion in
multifamily loans on their balance sheets.

And as the economy continues to slowly improve, our members are doing their part
to help drive this growth, increasing their multifamily lending by nearly 15%
between the second quarter of 2012 and the second quarter of this year.

This is what we observe in our home loan bank district, but this supportive
relationship between the local lender and the local multifamily market is one
that is repeated in cities across the nation.

Clearly, the local lender already provides ample and numerous sources of
liquidity in the marketplace to help support multifamily lending.

That is not to say that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's presence in the multifamily
area should be completely eliminated.

But their involvement in this market should be limited to helping those
communities or projects that actually need government assistance.

I suggest a recalibrated focus on making sure that Fannie and Freddie provide
backing only in connection with those projects that truly require support.

After all, there are pockets of multifamily areas in some of our cities where
blight has occurred and lending by the government-sponsored enterprises would
stabilize the market and encourage the private sector to return.

Regardless of location, affordable multifamily housing will be a key issue in
any reformed housing finance system. As the Bipartisan Policy Center's Housing
Commission noted in our February 2013 report, "Housing America's Future: New
Directions for National Policy," much of the focus of current housing policies
is on homeownership, but more than one-third of all U.S. households rent their
homes.

In fact, the nation's forty-one million renter households account for 35% of the
population of the United States, and their numbers are likely to grow
significantly in the coming years.

According to the Urban Institute, some five million to six million renter
households will form over this coming decade due to factors including demand
from the echo boomer and immigrant populations.

The commission's proposals for reforming the multifamily housing finance system
include the gradual wind down of the GSEs; a continued government presence
through a limited "catastrophic" guarantee; and, of course, a greater role for
at-risk private capital.

The best long-term way to meet the needs of consumers and communities is to once
again have the private sector play the lead role in the housing market, led by
responsible local lenders.

In the overall housing market, we have seen the damage that can be done by
allowing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to compete with the private sector.

Through Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Housing Administration, the
government supports more than 90% of new single-family mortgages-a staggering
and unsustainable share of the market. This outsized and unnecessary role cannot
repeat itself in the multifamily area.

To do so would blot out the local lenders' role in the market and cast a shadow
on skylines across the country.

Alfred DelliBovi is the president and CEO of the Federal Home Loan Bank of New
York and the former deputy secretary of HUD. In December 2011, he was named to
the Bipartisan Policy Center's Housing Commission and is a co-author of its
February 2013 housing report.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              355 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   January 28, 1984, Saturday, Final Edition

Fight Brews Over Bonds

BYLINE: By Kenneth R. Harney

SECTION: Real Estate; Virginia; The Nation's Housing; E1

LENGTH: 835 words


A major political fight is brewing between the Treasury Department and housing
proponents over use of the fastest growing form of home finance in the
country--the so-called "builder bond" for single-family houses.

Sources within Treasury confirm that the Internal Revenue Service may attempt to
slow the explosive growth in builder-bond financing by issuing negative tax
rulings in the near future, or by proposing regulations that would decrease
their attractiveness.

The sources also said that the Treasury may seek congressional action to
accomplish similar objectives as part of this spring's expected federal tax
bill.

On Capitol Hill, meanwhile, congressional housing supporters are gearing up to
fight the Treasury. Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.) will be introducing a
bipartisan "sense of Congress" resolution early next week to preserve the
current legal status of the bonds.

Builder bonds--which accounted for an estimated $3 billion in home mortgages
last year alone--involve direct participation by home builders in the national
capital markets.

Firms as large as Pulte or as small as Metropolitan Washington's Miller & Smith
float bond issues using their individual home buyers' mortgages as collateral.
The builders retain ownership of the mortgages, just as a savings and loan
association or mortgage bank would--but they borrow money in the bond markets,
secured by the future payments on those home loans.

By using the bond technique, home builders in effect can have their cake and eat
it, too. They can raise their profits, cut their taxes drastically, and, they
argue, offer lower-priced homes to consumers.

The sharply lower taxes are possible because the bond issue transaction is
structured as an "installment sale": So long as the bond-issuing builder doesn't
actually sell the loans on the homes, the firm may be able to report only the
portion of the actual sale price paid by the home buyer during each year after
the sale.

Installment sale tax treatment is widely used by industries ranging from farmers
to appliance and automobile manufacturers. When General Motors Acceptance Corp.
(GAMC) finances a new car, for instance, General Motors Corp. cuts its federal
tax exposure by treating the sale as an installment contract.

According to department officials, Treasury objects to the builders' use of the
technique on two grounds.

First, federal revenue collectors see red because builders get full cash in
their pockets after floating an issue, but only have to report a fraction of
that income immediately.

Second, many of the bonds are supported with direct federal guarantees. When the
mortgages are FHA (Federal Housing Administration) and VA (Veterans
Administration) loans, they carry federal insurance. Moreover, they carry the
"full faith and credit" pledge of the federal government when they are further
backed by Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae) guarantees
against non-payment.

The federal backing on the mortgages enables the bond-issuing builders to
attract exceptionally high ratings--and lower than customary interest rate
costs--in the bond market.

"That's fine for the builder," said one key official at Treasury, who asked not
to be identified. "But look what's happening here: We're using federal
government guarantees to enable home builders to pay lower taxes on their
profits than they should. Is that any way to run a tax system?" Builders don't
deny that they get to keep more of their profits by using the technique. In
fact, the national accounting firm of Kenneth Leventhal & Co. suggests that a
typical home builder with $1 million in home sales on a subdivision can readily
cut its taxes in the first year from $132,800 to just $8,474 by using the bond
technique.

This also enables the builder to finance "buydown" mortgage rate subsidies
offered to entice new buyers, and even to recover taxes paid to the federal
government in prior years.  What's most important about the technique, however,
"is that it truly makes financing more efficient and less costly for everyone
involved--from the consumer to the builder," said Kenneth Leventhal partner
James Marshall,

The presence of builder bonds in large volumes in the marketplace already has
cut the cost of bond-financed mortgage money during the past 12 months by more
than three-quarter percent, Marshall said.

Home builders such as Washington's Richard North, vice president of Miller &
Smith, also argue that using builder bonds has enabled the firm to cut home
prices by one to 2 percentage points. That's $1,000 to $2,000 off the selling
price of the bulk of Miller & Smith's suburban models.

The National Association of Home Builders plans to mount a "massive" campaign on
Capitol Hill to forestall any negative action by Treasury or the IRS. "This is a
very political year," said one of the association's lobbyists, "and the White
House will get the message loud and clear if the administration attacks the best
tool we have for financing homes."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1984 The Washington Post


                              356 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Push up the ladder for families stuck on 'zombie mortgages';
GUARANTEE SCHEME

BYLINE: Christopher Hope

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 430 words


HUNDREDS of thousands of people are to be rescued from so-called "zombie
mortgages" and helped to move house with state-backed loans.

A new mortgage guarantee scheme will see the Government underwrite some of the
cost of people's loans if they want to move.

The measures were criticised last night by financial experts, who said it
amounted to "sub-prime lending".

An estimated 1.1million home owners are stuck with what are known as zombie
mortgages, where the value of their property has fallen to the point that if
they sell they will not be left with enough money to raise a sufficient deposit
to obtain another home loan.

Official figures suggested 190,000 people a year will benefit from the scheme,
although campaigners and lobby groups warned that it could feed another housing
bubble.

Under the scheme, buyers could provide a deposit of as little as 5 per cent, and
the Government will underwrite 15 per cent of the home's value. This would mean
the Government is effectively guaranteeing 80 per cent of the value of the
property.

The scheme, which could support £130billion in loans, is open to anyone looking
to buy a new home worth up to £600,000 from January 2014.

George Osborne said: "The deposits demanded for a mortgage these days put home
ownership beyond the great majority, who can't turn to their parents for a
contribution.

"That's not just a blow to the most human of aspirations, it's a setback to
social mobility and it's been hard on the construction industry too."

Council of Mortgage Lenders figures show that in 2006, the year before the
financial crisis, 1.1million mortgages were taken out by people wanting to move
house. In 2012, this figure had nearly halved to 543,000. Builders welcomed the
plans. Steve Roche, spokesman for Persimmon Homes, said the plans could "help
create much-needed movement within all levels of the housing market". Mark
Clare, chief executive of Barratt Developments, said the measures were a "major
boost for home buyers and house builders".

Others expressed concerns that it would create another housing bubble and
threatened Britain's recovery.

A spokesman for Fathom Consulting, a financial consultancy, said it amounted to
subprime lending. He said: "There are good reasons why banks now sometimes
require a 20pc deposit before lending. It is hard to exaggerate how disappointed
we are by this."

Simon Rubinsohn, chief economist at the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors, said the measures were "much-needed", but added: "The Government
needs to be careful this doesn't create another housing bubble."

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              357 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               americanbanker.com

                             August 17, 2015 Monday

Five Factors Driving the Future for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac

BYLINE: Bonnie Sinnock

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 898  words


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have a regulatory mandate to shrink. But that's
easier said than done, given the government-sponsored enterprises' outsized
presence in the mortgage industry, as their latest quarterly results show.

To be sure, Fannie and Freddie have gotten smaller. In 2008, the year the GSEs
were put into federal conservatorship, the value of Fannie and Freddie's
combined portfolio of mortgage assets was $1.6 trillion, according to the
Federal Housing Finance Agency. By the end of 2014, that figure had been cut in
half, to $800 billion, but that hasn't curbed the industry's reliance on the two
mortgage giants.

"Over 50% of all mortgages are sold to Fannie and Freddie," noted Rick Roque,
managing director of retail lending at Michigan Mutual, a national retail and
wholesale lender based in Port Huron, Mich.

With that in mind, here are five takeaways from the GSEs' second-quarter
financial results that mortgage executives believe could have implications for
them.

Market Share Shift a Sign of Competition Heating Up

Fannie is still the largest issuer of single-family mortgage securities, but its
dominance has slipped of late. Meanwhile, Freddie Mac has put extra emphasis
behind growing its single-family book of business, and has taken market share
away from Fannie.

Mortgage professionals say they have noticed Freddie Mac getting more aggressive
for their business and the competition heating up.

"It looks like they're definitely competing with each other again," said Brian
Koss, executive vice president at Mortgage Network. "It's not where we're
seeing, 'Oh, they're getting all our business now,' but if one does get out
ahead a little, the other one's right behind."

Guarantee-Fee Profits Keep Rolling In

The GSEs' recent earnings are strong, but they have been increasingly
concentrated in guarantee-fee revenues. That's got some in the industry worried.

Fannie Mae's net interest income, including G-fees, rose to $5.7 billion in the
second quarter from $5.1 billion in the first. More than 40% of Freddie's net
interest income in the second quarter was derived from management and G-fees.

"That would be a concern, that the government gets addicted to this sort of
return that the GSEs have been getting recently, and that the 'let's bump the
G-fees so we can pass a highway bill,' [mentality] means the G-fees become this
Trojan horse to tap into their revenue," Koss said.

Refis Dominate Recent Gains

The GSEs' recent profits have also been increasingly dependent on refinancing
activity that could be transitory. Refis began representing the majority of new
single-family funding gains for the GSEs this year, financial results show.

But in some ways that could be a glass half-empty view of the situation: the
gains in refinancing after years of low rates show the segment can be more
resilient than expected.

"The results reflect an extraordinarily strong first half for lenders, which
demonstrates the impact a low interest rate environment can have on a market
even when it appears that everyone has already refinanced their mortgage," Dave
Worrall, president of RoundPoint Mortgage Servicing Corp., said after Freddie's
earnings release.

Time to Open Up the Credit Box

But while refinancing activity has continued longer than many expected, neither
mortgage executives nor the GSEs are planning on relying on it alone.

And when refis drop, one alternative is to expand credit. That's something the
GSEs have been careful about, given their experience with overly aggressive
lending during the downturn. But more recently, Fannie's and Freddie's regulator
has been trying to loosen credit standards that have gotten too tight, notably
by reviving past programs to offer lower-down payment loans.

The GSEs' earnings suggest they are running cleaner books of business today and
taking on only modest amount of risk through such expanded-criteria loans.
Fannie Mae's serious delinquency rate had dropped to 1.66% at the end of June.
The GSE said it has dropped for 21 quarters since the first quarter of 2010,
when it was 5.47%. Freddie Mac's serious delinquency rate was 1.53% as of June
30 and the lowest it has been since November 2008.

Expanding credit when the GSEs had more significant liabilities on their books
would've been imprudent, but now it makes more sense - particularly given that
homeownership rates have dropped and the loosening of standards still sounds
like it has had only a marginal effect on lending.

"Underwriting guidelines are probably still a little stringent but I am
encouraged that they are making some adjustments," said Anthony Kellum,
president of Kellum Mortgage and Kellum Capital Group.

Risk Sharing Needed to Offset Shrinking Capital Reserves

While the GSEs' improved delinquency rates may make room to expand their lending
criteria, regulatory mandates are shrinking Fannie and Freddie's capital buffer
against risk and putting more emphasis on risk-sharing initiatives with the
private sector.

"That's an ideological decision that some would argue is a good thing," said
Roque.

Recent earnings show both GSEs' risk sharing activity is growing.

How effective such new risk management efforts are could ultimately help
determine what direction broader GSE reform goes in from here. And given how
many loans lenders are still selling to Fannie and Freddie even as those two
GSEs shrink, mortgage executives will be watching it closely.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              358 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               paymentssource.com

                             August 17, 2015 Monday

Five Factors Driving the Future for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac

BYLINE: Bonnie Sinnock

SECTION: CCR - RISK & ANALYTICS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 898  words


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have a regulatory mandate to shrink. But that's
easier said than done, given the government-sponsored enterprises' outsized
presence in the mortgage industry, as their latest quarterly results show.

To be sure, Fannie and Freddie have gotten smaller. In 2008, the year the GSEs
were put into federal conservatorship, the value of Fannie and Freddie's
combined portfolio of mortgage assets was $1.6 trillion, according to the
Federal Housing Finance Agency. By the end of 2014, that figure had been cut in
half, to $800 billion, but that hasn't curbed the industry's reliance on the two
mortgage giants.

"Over 50% of all mortgages are sold to Fannie and Freddie," noted Rick Roque,
managing director of retail lending at Michigan Mutual, a national retail and
wholesale lender based in Port Huron, Mich.

With that in mind, here are five takeaways from the GSEs' second-quarter
financial results that mortgage executives believe could have implications for
them.

Market Share Shift a Sign of Competition Heating Up

Fannie is still the largest issuer of single-family mortgage securities, but its
dominance has slipped of late. Meanwhile, Freddie Mac has put extra emphasis
behind growing its single-family book of business, and has taken market share
away from Fannie.

Mortgage professionals say they have noticed Freddie Mac getting more aggressive
for their business and the competition heating up.

"It looks like they're definitely competing with each other again," said Brian
Koss, executive vice president at Mortgage Network. "It's not where we're
seeing, 'Oh, they're getting all our business now,' but if one does get out
ahead a little, the other one's right behind."

Guarantee-Fee Profits Keep Rolling In

The GSEs' recent earnings are strong, but they have been increasingly
concentrated in guarantee-fee revenues. That's got some in the industry worried.

Fannie Mae's net interest income, including G-fees, rose to $5.7 billion in the
second quarter from $5.1 billion in the first. More than 40% of Freddie's net
interest income in the second quarter was derived from management and G-fees.

"That would be a concern, that the government gets addicted to this sort of
return that the GSEs have been getting recently, and that the 'let's bump the
G-fees so we can pass a highway bill,' [mentality] means the G-fees become this
Trojan horse to tap into their revenue," Koss said.

Refis Dominate Recent Gains

The GSEs' recent profits have also been increasingly dependent on refinancing
activity that could be transitory. Refis began representing the majority of new
single-family funding gains for the GSEs this year, financial results show.

But in some ways that could be a glass half-empty view of the situation: the
gains in refinancing after years of low rates show the segment can be more
resilient than expected.

"The results reflect an extraordinarily strong first half for lenders, which
demonstrates the impact a low interest rate environment can have on a market
even when it appears that everyone has already refinanced their mortgage," Dave
Worrall, president of RoundPoint Mortgage Servicing Corp., said after Freddie's
earnings release.

Time to Open Up the Credit Box

But while refinancing activity has continued longer than many expected, neither
mortgage executives nor the GSEs are planning on relying on it alone.

And when refis drop, one alternative is to expand credit. That's something the
GSEs have been careful about, given their experience with overly aggressive
lending during the downturn. But more recently, Fannie's and Freddie's regulator
has been trying to loosen credit standards that have gotten too tight, notably
by reviving past programs to offer lower-down payment loans.

The GSEs' earnings suggest they are running cleaner books of business today and
taking on only modest amount of risk through such expanded-criteria loans.
Fannie Mae's serious delinquency rate had dropped to 1.66% at the end of June.
The GSE said it has dropped for 21 quarters since the first quarter of 2010,
when it was 5.47%. Freddie Mac's serious delinquency rate was 1.53% as of June
30 and the lowest it has been since November 2008.

Expanding credit when the GSEs had more significant liabilities on their books
would've been imprudent, but now it makes more sense - particularly given that
homeownership rates have dropped and the loosening of standards still sounds
like it has had only a marginal effect on lending.

"Underwriting guidelines are probably still a little stringent but I am
encouraged that they are making some adjustments," said Anthony Kellum,
president of Kellum Mortgage and Kellum Capital Group.

Risk Sharing Needed to Offset Shrinking Capital Reserves

While the GSEs' improved delinquency rates may make room to expand their lending
criteria, regulatory mandates are shrinking Fannie and Freddie's capital buffer
against risk and putting more emphasis on risk-sharing initiatives with the
private sector.

"That's an ideological decision that some would argue is a good thing," said
Roque.

Recent earnings show both GSEs' risk sharing activity is growing.

How effective such new risk management efforts are could ultimately help
determine what direction broader GSE reform goes in from here. And given how
many loans lenders are still selling to Fannie and Freddie even as those two
GSEs shrink, mortgage executives will be watching it closely.

URL: http://www.paymentssource.com

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: PAYMENTSSOURCE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              359 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             June 26, 2008 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

Delinquencies Rise at Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac

BYLINE: David S. Hilzenrath; Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 618 words


In a sign of continuing trouble in the housing market, mortgage delinquency
rates doubled over a 12-month period at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the two
industry giants reported yesterday.

In April, 1.22 percent of the conventional home loans that Fannie Mae guarantees
were past due by at least three months or were in foreclosure. That was up from
1.15 percent in March and about twice the rate recorded in April 2007.

Freddie Mac said its delinquency rate was 0.81 percent in April, up from 0.77
percent in March. The rate was 0.4 in April of last year.

Neither company's figures fully captured the problems borrowers have had making
payments, because they excluded loans for which payment terms had been relaxed.

Chartered by the government to keep mortgage money flowing, Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac package mortgages into securities for sale to investors,
guaranteeing that they will pay the investors if the borrowers default. The
companies also invest in mortgages and securities backed by mortgages.

The collapse of the housing bubble has left them the dominant players in housing
finance. Together, they bought the equivalent of 68 percent of the single-family
mortgages that originated during the first three months of this year, according
to the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight.

After years of hand-wringing about the risks that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's
rapid growth might pose to the financial system, the government has loosened
restraints on the companies in the stated hope that they will help prop up the
housing market.

The monthly reports the companies issued yesterday showed that Freddie Mac has
made much more use of its increased purchasing power than Fannie Mae has.

Freddie Mac increased its mortgage-related holdings in May at an annualized
growth rate of 53.4 percent, to a total of $770.4 billion, its highest ever.
Fannie Mae increased its holdings at an annualized rate of 15 percent, to $736.9
billion.

"Freddie has put its newly freed capital to work," while by comparison Fannie
Mae has held back, analyst Jim Vogel of FTN Financial said.

Fannie Mae's report showed that it has substantial purchases in the pipeline.

The purchases have the potential to boost profits or reduce red ink at a time
when the companies have been reporting heavy losses. But Freddie appears to have
nearly tapped out its buying capacity until it raises more capital, Vogel said.

Both companies expanded their holdings largely by buying their own securities.
Such purchases represented $20.2 billion of the $32.8 billion growth in Freddie
Mac's investment portfolio in May and $8 billion of the $8.5 billion increase in
Fannie Mae's portfolio.

In Freddie Mac's case, those purchases have produced a high concentration of
risk, raising questions about the company's financial safety and soundness,
analysts at the research firm Federal Financial Analytics said. Freddie Mac
securities made up more than half of its mortgage portfolio in May; Fannie Mae
securities made up just over a third of its portfolio.

"[W]e're pretty sure that any bank holding as much of its own obligations as
Freddie would need to have a great deal more [reserves] in place to handle the
resulting liquidity risk," the research firm said in a report yesterday titled
"Doubling Down."

A Freddie Mac spokesman said the company is fulfilling its mission.

"The numbers tell that Freddie Mac is continuing to provide critically needed
liquidity and stability to the housing finance system during this time of
crisis," Freddie Mac spokesman Michael Cosgrove said.

"We're managing our portfolio in a safe and sound manner . . . and taking
advantage of purchasing opportunities that make sense," Fannie Mae spokeswoman
Janis Smith said.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              360 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                               February 17, 2017

Freddie Focusing on Credit Risk Transfers as Portfolio Winds Down

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: SECONDARY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 469  words


Freddie Mac is ramping up its use of credit risk transfers, completing $215
billion in single-family transfers last year, up to $600 billion since 2013.

Donald Layton, the government-sponsored enterprise's CEO, has embraced the
transfers, where investors bid on taking a first-loss position on mortgages
guaranteed by Freddie that go into default. So far the deals have generated $25
billion in loss protection against mortgage defaults.

In evaluating these transactions, Freddie executives have to judge how much loan
revenue they can give up and still get the loss protection they need.

Freddie is "re-engineering the guarantee businesses to heavily employ credit
risk transfers and to fall away from the historic buy and hold business model,"
Layton said Thursday in releasing Freddie's 2016 annual and fourth-quarter
earnings report.

Freddie also has completed $180 billion of risk transfer transactions involving
multifamily mortgages since 2013, including $51 billion in 2016.

"As a result, new multifamily loans coming on Freddie's balance sheet pose
little residual risk to taxpayers," Layton said.

The Freddie CEO also reported progress in reducing the GSE's investment
portfolio, which held $737 billion in mortgage-related assets back in 2008.

The investment portfolio declined by nearly $50 billion in 2016 to $298 billion.
That's getting closer to the $250 billion cap under the conservatorship
agreement with the federal government. Layton noted that Freddie has
concentrated on selling the "less liquid" assets in the retained portfolio.

Freddie currently has a net worth of $5.1 billion and is slated to pay $4.4
billion to Treasury in March. Under an agreement with the Treasury Department
and Federal Housing Finance Agency, the GSE must turn over all profits to the
government. It is not allowed to raise additional capital.

"That will leave us with a net worth of $600 million as a capital buffer,"
Layton said.

So far Freddie has made $106 billion in payments to the Treasury, about $35
billion more than the company has received in Treasury assistance since it was
placed in conservatorship in 2008.

Despite the risk sharing and downsizing, Freddie reported $513 million in loan
guarantee fee income for 2016, up from $396 million in 2015. The increase was
primarily a result of multifamily guarantee fees.

Layton said g-fee growth should continue to replace lost income from the
declining investment portfolio. Such income is expected to increase going
forward as a larger share of single-family loans is impacted by a g-fee hike
implemented a few years ago.

Freddie Mac also said it expects the mortgage origination market to focus more
on purchase mortgage lending than refinancings in 2017.

"We will be focused on working with our lending customers so they can succeed in
this changed market," Layton said.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              361 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           February 21, 2017 Tuesday

Freddie focusing on credit risk transfers as portfolio winds down

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: Vol. 1 No. 34

LENGTH: 471  words


WASHINGTON - Freddie Mac is ramping up its use of credit risk transfers,
completing $215 billion in single-family transfers last year, up to $600 billion
since 2013.

Donald Layton, the government-sponsored enterprise's CEO, has embraced the
transfers, where investors bid on taking a first-loss position on mortgages
guaranteed by Freddie that go into default. So far the deals have generated $25
billion in loss protection against mortgage defaults.

In evaluating these transactions, Freddie executives have to judge how much loan
revenue they can give up and still get the loss protection they need.

Freddie is "re-engineering the guarantee businesses to heavily employ credit
risk transfers and to fall away from the historic buy and hold business model,"
Layton said Thursday in releasing Freddie's 2016 annual and fourth-quarter
earnings report.

Freddie also has completed $180 billion of risk transfer transactions involving
multifamily mortgages since 2013, including $51 billion in 2016.

"As a result, new multifamily loans coming on Freddie's balance sheet pose
little residual risk to taxpayers," Layton said.

The Freddie CEO also reported progress in reducing the GSE's investment
portfolio, which held $737 billion in mortgage-related assets back in 2008.

The investment portfolio declined by nearly $50 billion in 2016 to $298 billion.
That's getting closer to the $250 billion cap under the conservatorship
agreement with the federal government. Layton noted that Freddie has
concentrated on selling the "less liquid" assets in the retained portfolio.

Freddie currently has a net worth of $5.1 billion and is slated to pay $4.4
billion to Treasury in March. Under an agreement with the Treasury Department
and Federal Housing Finance Agency, the GSE must turn over all profits to the
government. It is not allowed to raise additional capital.

"That will leave us with a net worth of $600 million as a capital buffer,"
Layton said.

So far Freddie has made $106 billion in payments to the Treasury, about $35
billion more than the company has received in Treasury assistance since it was
placed in conservatorship in 2008.

Despite the risk sharing and downsizing, Freddie reported $513 million in loan
guarantee fee income for 2016, up from $396 million in 2015. The increase was
primarily a result of multifamily guarantee fees.

Layton said G-fee growth should continue to replace lost income from the
declining investment portfolio. Such income is expected to increase going
forward as a larger share of single-family loans is impacted by a G-fee hike
implemented a few years ago.

Freddie Mac also said it expects the mortgage origination market to focus more
on purchase mortgage lending than refinancings in 2017.

"We will be focused on working with our lending customers so they can succeed in
this changed market," Layton said.

URL:
http://www.americanbanker.com/news/freddie-focusing-on-credit-risk-transfers-as-
portfolio-winds-down

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              362 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Brunswick News (Georgia)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 4, 2014 Wednesday

Homeowner's dream comes true with help

BYLINE: Lindsey Adkison, The Brunswick News, Ga.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 930 words


June 04--Telisha Mack beamed with pride as she opened the door to welcome her
guests.

The group was made up of U.S. Department of Agriculture officials, including
Rural Housing Service Administrator Tony Hernandez. All greeted Mack warmly.

"This is a beautiful home. Congratulations," Hernandez gushed, handing Mack an
oversized key in celebration of her new house.

The home, her first, was a dream come true for Mack. But like so many others,
she needed help to realize it.

She found that help with the USDA. The organization offers a Rural Development
Housing Program, which aids individuals who are unable to purchase a home the
traditional route.

For Mack, a single mother of three with a master's degree, it was the only
solution.

"I started pursuing home ownership in 2011. I applied for mortgages with a lot
of different banks and was denied. A lot of them wanted a big down payment or a
co-signer," she said.

That's when Mack was told about the USDA home loan program.

"I have a friend who knew someone who did it. So I applied and was accepted,"
she said with a smile.

From there, she was guided by local members of the USDA who helped her complete
all the documentation and find a home within her price range.

Mack was lucky. She found a home currently under construction in Glynn County.
She was able to complete the deal quickly and was even able to help choose the
interior color palette.

It was clear that Mack and her family have since made it their own, something
Hernandez was thrilled to see.

"This house is more than a building. It's the foundation for the future of this
family," he said. "Owning your own house changes your life. And (Mack is) a
great example of this.

"You need help? You need to find partners that can help make your dreams come
true."

Hernandez was visiting Brunswick from Washington, D.C., to spread that message.
His goal was to generate a conversation about the USDA loan and grant programs
during June, which is Homeownership Month.

There are a lot of options for individuals in Glynn and surrounding counties who
meet specific guidelines.

Ed Peace, director of USDA Single Family Housing programs, says each one is
designed to target a specific kind of homeowner.

The first is a direct loan, where the USDA makes a loan directly to the
borrower, who the organization classifies as "very-low-income applicants." For
these plans, payment assistance is provided that can lower the mortgage interest
rate to as low as 1 percent.

"We make the loan directly to the borrower. They come to the office and fill out
an application. Then we handle it until the end of the loan," Peace said. "These
borrowers get into the house for very little money out of pocket. And they get
subsidized payments where taxpayers help them out. For instance, a $600 payment
may be reduced to $400 per month."

The amount of income to qualify varies depending on location and the size of the
family, Peace said.

"But it's 80 percent of the median income for an area. For a family of four,
just as an example, it would be about $25,000 to $35,000. For Glynn County, the
highest loan amount is $135,800," he said.

To determine eligibility, an applicant must submit documents verifying income
and have an adequate credit rating.

"These are all modest homes that are around 1,200 square feet unless the family
is very large. But they are nothing elaborate," Peace said.

The other type of loan is called a guaranteed home loan, which are geared toward
moderate-income families. The agency works in partnership with private-sector
lenders to back the loans.

"We make sure it meets the proper guidelines. And we guarantee the lender that
we will pay the majority of that loan if the borrower defaults. That's a very
attractive to lenders," he said.

Peace estimates the income for a family of four with this loan would be
approximately $75,000.

"The guaranteed loan has a higher income limit," he said.

In addition to these loan programs, the USDA also offers home repair loans and
grants to help rural homeowners make safety improvements or repairs such as
adding wheelchair ramps or correcting faulty wiring. Senior citizens 62 or older
can apply for a grant of up to $7,500 for home repair assistance.

Unlike the USDA loans, grant assistance does not need to be repaid.

Of course, navigating these programs may be a bit overwhelming for those
unfamiliar with the process. That's why Peace is excited that a local
organization has recently been certified to help applicants.

"Millicent Harwell-Cross of Totally Free Inc. in Brunswick has been certified as
a 'packager.' What they do is help the applicant go through the process and get
verification on income, get the credit report together and anything else they
need to do. It helps the speed of the loan," Peace said. "They can help with
anything applicants will need. She can also do credit counseling and show them
how to repay the loan."

The task may seem daunting, but Peace knows it's invaluable to many families who
may never own a home otherwise.

"It gives them a good start. Once they start repaying the loans, they can
refinance and move out of the program so someone else can come in," he said.

-- Reporter Lindsey Adkison writes about business and other local topics.
Contact her at ladkison@thebrunswicknews.com, on Facebook or at 265-8320, ext.
346.

Do you qualify

Call or visit Totally Free, 2517 Norwich St., Brunswick, 265-1515. or call USDA
Rural Development in Athens, 706-546-2162.

___ (c)2014 The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) Visit The Brunswick News
(Brunswick, Ga.) at www.thebrunswicknews.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140604-GE-Homeowner-s-dream-comes-true-with-help-0604-20140604

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GE


                       Copyright 2014 The Brunswick News


                              363 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             March 17, 2014 Monday

Dearth of First-Time Home Buyers Chills FHA Lending

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: REGULATION & REFORM Vol. 179 No. 40

LENGTH: 422  words


WASHINGTON - Home builders and lenders know that the upper end of the housing
market is the place to be these days.

Demand for home purchase loans above $417,000 is strong, while demand for lower
balance loans is weak, according to Mike Fratantoni, the chief economist for the
Mortgage Bankers Association.

"There is a real strong demarcation in the market," he said.

That is one reason builders appear to be catering to move-up buyers while paying
little attention to first-time borrowers.Â

Overall, the entire MBA purchase mortgage application index is down 15% from a
year ago. Yet applications for loans below $417,000 is where the real decline
shows up.

This trend is impacting all government-backed lending and especially the Federal
Housing Administration's single-family program. "FHA in particular seems to be
doing even worst," said Frantantoni.

FHA depends on first time buyers for over 50% of its business. In January, FHA
endorsed 45,800 single-family loans, including 26,500 loans for first-time
buyers.

The weak first-time homebuyer market is part of the reason FHA has experienced
such a large drop in purchase mortgage volume over the six-month period ending
in January 2014.

Data from the Department of Housing and Urban Development shows that FHA
endorsed 291,200 purchase loans in August 2013 through January 2014. That is a
27% decline from the 398,700 purchase loans FHA endorsed during the same
six-month period a year ago (August 2012 through January 2013).

FHA also is being boxed out of housing markets due to a series of mortgage
insurance premium over the past four years. In healthy housing markets where
private mortgage insurance is available, homebuyers can get a better deal on a
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac conventional loan than a FHA loan if they have a 5%
downpayment and a strong credit score.Â

Considering the higher FHA premiums, "it isn't surprising that they are trailing
the market," Fratantoni said.

The loan guarantee program for the Department of Veterans Affairs is also taking
market share from FHA.Â

MBA's latest survey of builder mortgage banking subsidiaries found that VA is
trailing FHA by only three percentage points - 16% of new home buyers applied
for a FHA-insured loan and 13% of home buyers applied for a VA-guaranteed loan.
VA is particularly strong in southwest markets like Texas, which has been one of
the best housing markets in the U.S.

The majority of applications (65%) were for Fannie and Freddie loans and 5%
applications were for government backed Rural Housing Service loans.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              364 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            November 8, 2010 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Taxpayers' bill on foreclosures: $2B;
That's how much Fannie, Freddie have paid to maintain properties

BYLINE: Julie Schmit and Stephanie Armour

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 442 words


Taxpayer-funded Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have spent more than $2 billion this
year on foreclosed property expenses after acquiring tens of thousands of homes
through foreclosures.

The mortgage giants owned more than 240,000 foreclosed homes on Sept. 30, they
reported last week. That's about 25% of all lender-owned homes in the U.S.,
according to RealtyTrac.

Fannie and Freddie, which buy mortgages from lenders and package them into
securities to sell to investors, own or guarantee half of all U.S. mortgages.
Together, they have more than twice as many foreclosed homes now as they did
this time last year, with a combined value of $24 billion.

The U.S. Treasury has invested $148 billion in preferred stock in Fannie and
Freddie -- and received almost $17 billion in dividends -- since taking them
over two years ago. Their losses have narrowed, but further Treasury investments
are expected. Excluding dividends, the government's cumulative cost could range
from $142 billion to $259 billion by December 2013, estimates their regulator,
the Federal Housing Finance Agency.

The longer foreclosed homes stay on their books, the larger taxpayers' expenses
will be. "Taxpayers are covering their losses. We are the ultimate deep pocket,"
says Lawrence White, a New York University economics professor.

As of Sept. 30, Freddie Mac owned 74,897 foreclosed single-family homes, up 82%
from a year ago, according to its third-quarter financial report. From January
through September, Freddie spent $842 million -- vs. $480 million in the same
time last year -- on properties acquired in foreclosures. Costs include legal
fees, insurance, taxes, cleaning and maintenance, Freddie said last week.

Fannie owned 166,787 foreclosed single-family homes on Sept. 30. Its foreclosed
property expenses approached $1.3 billion from January through September.

Those include costs to clean and maintain homes and accounting adjustments
reflecting reduced values of those properties, says Fannie spokeswoman Amy
Bonitatibus.

Freddie and Fannie set limits on what they'll pay companies to clean and
maintain homes or real estate firms, who hire contractors to do the work.
Freddie, for instance, pays up to $400 for an initial cleaning of a foreclosed
property and up to $125 to have the grass cut twice a month in the summer.

Freddie's and Fannie's property costs are likely to rise as more houses go into
foreclosure.

Properties also may take longer to sell because of state and federal
investigations into whether foreclosure documents were properly executed.

That could "prolong the foreclosure process nationwide and may delay sales,"
Freddie said in its third-quarter report.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              365 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                August 19, 2013

VA Home Loan Program Looks At Best Year In Guarantees

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 37 No. 46

LENGTH: 504  words


The 69-year-old home loan program run by the Department of Veterans Affairs is
on track to have its best year ever.

Department officials estimate that VA lenders will originate 640,000 loans in
fiscal year 2013, which ends Sept. 30.

That would top the current record of 600,000 VA loans set in FY 1994 during a
huge refinancing boom.

"Last year we were guaranteeing 2,400 loans a day. This year, it's around 2,900
loans each [business] day," according to Michael Frueh, the director of the VA
Loan Guaranty Service.

At this rate, "it will be our biggest year ever," he said in an interview.

The director noted the VA is the last national no-downpayment program standing.
Nearly 90% of VA borrowers put no-money down to purchase a home.

"That is a huge driver of VA loans in the past several years. The average
veteran or servicemember comes to the closing table with $7,000 in liquid
assets," Frueh said.

VA used to have a loan limit of $144,000. But Congress relaxed the loan limit in
2003 and now veterans can purchase $1 million homes. Today, California is VA's
biggest state in terms of number of loans.

As of Aug. 13, VA had guaranteed 543,385 single-family loans totaling $122.7
billion in FY 2013. Nearly 53% of the loans are refinancings.

While VA serves a deserving but risky population with generally limited
financial resources and low credit scores, it manages through its loss
mitigation regime to keep foreclosure starts and actual foreclosures low.

VA keeps watch over its servicers and intervenes when necessary to help a
veteran who's getting too far behind in their payments.

"We prevent foreclosures much better than anyone," the VA director said.

And this record shows up in the quarterly delinquency reports issued by the
Mortgage Bankers Association.

The foreclosure starts on VA loans was 0.47 basis points in the second quarter,
compared to 39 bps for prime loans and 81 bps for Federal Housing
Administration-insured loans.

However, looking at completed foreclosures or foreclosure inventory, VA has a
lower rate than prime loans.

Foreclosure inventory as of June 30 was 1.88% for VA, 2.13% for prime and 3.68%
for FHA loans.

Looking at the foreclosure inventory, "we have been in front of prime for the
past 21 quarters," the VA director stressed.

Due to this loan performance, VA is drafting a qualified mortgage rule that will
largely reflect the agency's current underwriting standards.

"We basically believe that our underwriting standards as they stand should
qualify a mortgage for the QM standard," Frueh said.

At the same time, VA is reviewing its restrictions on fees and charges so they
don't hinder a veteran's ability to purchase a home.

"We are trying to make it more negotiable between the veteran borrower and
seller," the VA director said. For example, a veteran can't pay for a termite
inspection. VA also has limitations on what the seller can pay.

"We don't want VA borrowers to be overcharged," he said. But the limitations
should be reasonable so veterans are not disadvantaged compared to other buyers.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              366 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           December 27, 2011 Tuesday

Payroll Tax Done, Next Is Hike on Government-Backed Mortgages

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: REGULATION & REFORM Vol. 176 No. 248

LENGTH: 238  words


Consumers soon will be paying more for government-backed mortgages now that the
House and Senate have reached a deal extending a payroll tax break for two
months.

The bill (HR 3630) pays for the payroll measure by raising guarantee fees on
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac loans by 10 basis points. Lenders will pay the extra
points but, more than likely, will pass the cost on to borrowers.

After a bitter fight over the two-month extension, congressional leaders reached
a deal late Thursday. They will return to Washington in January to hammer out a
full-year extension. Mortgage industry leaders are hoping lawmakers will look
elsewhere for revenues to fund the next extension.

HR 3630 also increases annual premiums on Federal Housing Administration
single-family loans by 10 basis points.

This corresponding rise is designed to ensure the FHA goes not gain a
competitive advantage and increase its market share via the government-sponsored
enterprises.

Industry leaders were relieved to learn that the higher premiums will be used to
bolster the FHA's undercapitalized mortgage insurance fund and will not be
diverted to pay for other government programs or tax breaks.

In addition, the FHA can phase-in the 10-basis-point annual premium increase
over two years. The agency now charges a 115-basis-point annual premium.

Congressional leaders were set to pass HR 3630 on Friday, sending the measure to
President Obama for his signature.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2011 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              367 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 August 5, 1991

Compromise Set On GSE Capital

BYLINE: By PAUL MUOLO

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Treasury Department and key legislators last week agreed to compromise on
minimum capital standards for the Federal secondary marketing agencies while the
House Banking Committee passed legislation solidifying the role those agencies
play in affordable housing.

Passed 49 to 1, the bill mandates that the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and
Federal National Mortgage Association must maintain a minimum capital ratio of
2.25% for on-balance-sheet assets and 0.40% for off-balance-sheet assets.

Once the bill is signed into law, the agencies have an 18-month grace period in
which they must raise their minimum capital level to 2.50% for on-balance-sheet
assets and 0.45% for off-balance-sheet assets.

Treasury is expected to support the House version of the bill.

Later this month the Senate Banking Committee will begin drafting its version.

Passage of a final bill is expected sometime in September.

As National Mortgage News went to press it was not known if the House Ways and
Means Committee would request jurisdiction over the bill.

Late Tuesday, Treasury undersecretary Robert R. Glauber reached an agreement
with Freddie Mac chairman Leland Brendsel to allow the 2.25% capital minimum for
an 18-month phase-in period.

As of June 30, Freddie Mac surpassed the 2.25% requirement by $ 33 million but
was shy of the 2.50% requirement.

Freddie Mac and its investors were concerned about the market reaction if it was
found not be in compliance with the capital standard.

Freddie Mac, like Fannie Mae, has increased its capital position during the last
year through retained earnings and growth.

It is expected to have no trouble meeting the 2.50% ratio in 18 months.

Fannie Mae already meets the minimum requirements.

When news of the agreement hit Wall Street, stock prices in both companies rose
by more than $ 2 a share.

The Government-Sponsored Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act
of 1991 (H.R. 2900) calls for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to buy $ 3.5 billion in
low-income housing loans during 1992 and 1993.

Fannie Mae will be required to buy $ 2 billion in single-family and multifamily
affordable housing loans while Freddie Mac will have to purchase $ 1.5 billion.

Beginning in 1994 the two will have to buy affordable housing loans equal to at
least 1% of the previous year's loan purchases.

No caps were placed on compensation paid to officials who work for the two
companies although one was introduced during a subcommittee mark-up and
defeated.

Other key points of the legislation provide that:

* The Department of Housing and Urban Development will remain as regulator of
the two GSEs.

It is still unclear whether HUD will have final approval over all new products
developed by the two.

* A study will be conducted to determine whether the two agencies have a
competitive advantage over Federally-insured depository institutions.

* Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac must meet "critical" capital levels of 1.25% for
on-balance-sheet assets, and 0.25% for off-balance-sheet assets.

* The bill establishes specific capital "stress" tests but gives HUD greater
discretion in reviewing stress test requirements.

By the time the bill hits the House floor legislators are expected to reach a
comprimise on an amendment prohibiting Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac from
purchasing or securitizing mortgages from any thrift or bank that is not in
compliance with the Community Reinvestment Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity
Act, or the Fair Housing Act.

The bill, in effect, maintains the agencies' status as government-sponsored
agencies.

Rep. Jim Leach, R., Iowa wanted to repeal the implicit guarantee backing their
obligations, including provisions requiring the two to pay state taxes and
ending their line of credit with the Treasury.

An outspoken critic of two GSEs, Rep. Leach introduced the amendment but then
withdrew it.

The sole vote cast against the package, the Iowa Republican sided with a number
of large California thrifts opposing the bill.

The thrifts feel the implicit guarantee gives the agencies a competitive
advantage against portfolio lenders.

"We just want a level playing field," said Ken McClean, a lobbyist working for
the California thrifts.

The debate over implicit guarantees is expected to continue while pro-Federal
secondary marketing agency forces argue that Federally-insured deposits are
tantamount to a having a Federal subsidy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              368 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             March 8, 2011 Tuesday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

THE NEW AMERICAN REALITY

BYLINE: ROBERT TRIGAUX

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; ON BUSINESS; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 531 words



HIGHLIGHT: The easy route to owning a home may become a thing of the past, and
that's not bad.


What if 30-year, fixed-rate mortgages were a luxury rather than a foundation of
our housing market?

What if mortgage interest was no longer deductible on federal income taxes?

What if Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac - federal creations gone wild (costing
taxpayers $150 billion and counting) that offered "U.S." guarantees and backed
the mortgage-backed securities market - slowly disappeared?

What if home buyers had to put down a "substantial" down payment when buying a
house, perhaps as much as 20 percent of the home's value?

In the angry wake of the burst housing bubble and amid the hysteria over the
federal deficit, these are just some of the possible changes that could sharply
alter the housing market and shrink the percentage of Americans who own their
homes.

Is this a good thing? Depends on your point of view. Certainly for Florida's
still skidding housing market, such changes would hamper the already tepid
recovery. But for the growing chorus that wants to shrink the role of the
federal government and make the U.S. housing market more self-reliant, it is
overdue.

Policy leaders in recent decades grew infatuated with delivering "the dream of
home ownership" to anyone with a pulse standing in front of a For Sale sign.
Rules relaxed (later growing more perverted) to make getting mortgages easy with
no money down, no proof of a steady income and with no need to make regular
monthly payments. How? Banks offered interest-only mortgages and tacked on any
principal to the back end of the loan.

Who didn't drink housing's Kool-Aid? Home prices were only going higher. Buying
a home was smart and padded your financial nest egg.

Then it was over. Home prices plummeted instead.

Home ownership fans long praised the social benefits of more people "owning"
(better described as "in hock up to their eyeballs") houses as prices rose. Home
ownership, they argued, fostered better educational achievement and civic
participation, improved household health, lowered crime rates, and made more
stable communities.

That's misleading. Remember "subprime" lending? People who could least afford to
buy a home, being high-risk borrowers in the eyes of lenders, got mortgages with
the most perilous of terms.

Consider how much less nasty the U.S. economic crisis and home foreclosure
fiasco might have been if so many marginal mortgage borrowers had not been
approved to buy a home beyond their means?

Yet backers of Fannie and Freddie argue the recession would have been far worse
had the current housing subsidies and backstops not been in place to soften the
blow.

In 2009, the U.S. median sales price of a single-family home was $172,100. The
Center for Responsible Lending argues that "even with a substantial savings
commitment" of $3,000 per year, it would take a family 14 years to accumulate
the cash needed for a 20 percent down payment.

Okay. But the same family saving $3,500 annually for eight years could put 20
percent down on a lesser home of $140,000.

Qualifying to buy a home used to take time and disciplined saving. Changing the
gotta-have-a-home-now mind-set and avoiding the overleveraged home loan may be
good public policy after all.

Contact Robert Trigaux at trigaux@sptimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2011 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              369 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THRIFT UNIT AID BACKED IN HOUSE

BYLINE: By KENNETH B. NOBLE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 11


The House Banking Committee, seeking a way to help the beleaguered savings and
loan industry, today approved a measure that would set up an $8.5 billion
Treasury-backed fund to guarantee the net worth of failing thrift units.

The bill, which was opposed by Republicans on the committee, is also expected to
be resisted by the White House, which has expressed concern that the proposal
would place an unacceptable burden on the Treasury.

However, in recent days, the Administration, reversing its earlier opposition,
said that it would support some form of modest capital infusion aid to the
thrift industry.

Now Goes to Full House

The bill, which now goes to the full House, is called the New Worth Guarantee
Act. If enacted into law, it would mark the first time that Congress has passed
legislation to directly assist troubled thrift institutions with specific
financial guarantees while encourging them to remain in the mortgage-lending
business.

However, the legislation, introduced by Representative Fernand J.  St Germain,
Democrat of Rhode Island and chairman of the committee, met with vigorous
resistance from several Republicans.

The Democratic-controlled committee brushed aside what Administration officials
termed a ''more flexible'' substitute capital infusion program, introduced by
Chalmers P. Wylie, Republican of Ohio, tabling the motion with the vote divided
strictly along party lines.

Form of Promissory Note

The St Germain proposal gives Federal regulatory authorities the power to issue
''guarantees'' - a form of governmental promissory note - to an institution
whose net worth has dropped below 2 percent of its assets. An institution's net
worth is equal to its assets minus its liabilities.

The institutions would have to begin to reduce the outstanding value of their
guarantees when their net worth rose to 3 percent of assets.

The proposal, approved in a 25-15 vote, with three abstentions, would authorize
an appropriation of up to $8.5 billion to help pay the debts of institutions
that fail. The bill's supporters emphasized that the Treasury-backed
appropriation would be spent only in the event of actual liquidation.

While the bill was intended primarily to help the savings and loan industry, it
also applies to commercial banks and credit unions. The committee also approved
an amendment to come to the aid of state and federally chartered commercial
banks when their comparable capitalization standard fell to between 4 percent
and 4.5 percent.

Most of the nation's more than 4,500 savings and loan associations and savings
banks are losing money because they must pay more for funds than they are
earning in the form of interest on their homemortgage and long-term bond
portfolios.

Representative Wylie said that, according to figures from the Federal Home Loan
Bank Board, about 2,200 financial institutions could qualify for assistance
under the program.

In addition to its low net worth, an institution seeking aid under the
legislation must have had earnings losses in at least two consecutive quarters,
and must have 20 percent of its loans in residential real estate or securities
backed by residential real estate. The institution would also be required to
demonstrate that it had ''reasonable prospects of long-term viability.''

Mortgage Lending Requirement

In return for the assistance, an institution would have to set aside at least 60
percent of its new deposits for mortgages for single-family homes, manufactured
housing such as mobile homes and small unit cooperatives or condominiums.

The substitute proposal introduced by Representative Wylie, which he said has
been endorsed by Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan, the Federal Home Loan Bank
Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, would authorize Federal
regulators to assist institutions whose net worth had fallen to 3 percent of
assets, as opposed to the 2 percent limit in the St Germain proposal.

Furthermore, the Wylie proposal would give regulators the option of adjusting
the percentage as necessary, and, according to its supporters, would require no
appropriations from the Treasury.

Debate on the Republican proposal was quashed, however, by what some observers
considered a surprise motion by Rep. Frank Annunzio of Illinois to table it.
Rep. Wylie vowed to reintroduce the substitute proposal before the full House,
and said that a similar bill would be announced soon by Senator Jake Garn,
chairman of the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 30, 2014 Wednesday

Million-Dollar U.S. Housing Loans Surge to Record Level

LENGTH: 1241  words


Washington, D.C.: American Land Title Association has issued the following news
release:

Banks are handing out mortgages of as much as $10 million to the wealthy in
record numbers while first-time homebuyers struggle to get loans.

Erin Gorman, managing director at Bank of New York Mellon Corp., said she's
fielding more requests for home loans of at least $2 million than ever before.
She recently provided a mortgage of more than $6 million for a client's purchase
of a second property in Colorado.

"These high-net-worth borrowers do act differently than first-time buyers, who
borrow because they have to," said Gorman, who serves as the national mortgage
sales director at Bank of New York Mellon's wealth management group based in
Boston. "High-net-worth borrowers don't have to borrow. They choose to, so
they're very strategic about what, why, and when they borrow."

Americans from San Francisco to Boston are taking out a record number of
mortgages in excess of $1 million while stiff lending standards crimp total loan
volume. They are borrowing while mortgage rates are still low rather than
liquidate their investments amid a stock market gain of 7 percent this year.

Related:

Home Prices in 20 U.S. Cities Rose at Slower Pace in May
    U.S. Homeownership Rate Falls to Lowest in 19 Years
    Zillow CEO Coveted Trulia Since 2006 Before Chasing Deal

The number of loans from $1 million to $10 million to buy single-family homes in
the 100 largest metropolitan areas surged to more than 15,000 in the second
quarter, the highest ever, according to property data firm CoreLogic.

At the same time, banks are restricting home loans to first-time buyers who
don't have high credit scores. In June, about 28 percent of total existing-home
sales involved new buyers compared with an average of 35 percent since October
2008, according to the National Association of Realtors.
Luxury Homes

Jumbos, or loans of at least $417,000 in most areas, exceed the limit for
government-controlled Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to guarantee. The mortgages are
made to the most creditworthy borrowers and are generally held by banks instead
of being packaged into securities and sold to investors.

In Southern California, millionaires are boosting demand for the largest loans
because of an improving economy and brisk sales of luxury homes gives them
confidence in the market, said Mark Cohen, a mortgage broker at lender Cohen
Financial Group in Beverly Hills. Cohen, whose average loan has increased to $1
million from $800,000 this year, said he gave a $9.9 million mortgage recently
to an executive at a publicly traded company in Brentwood, a neighborhood in Los
Angeles where former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger has lived.

Sales of homes costing at least $2 million in 30 of the biggest metropolitan
areas during the first half of this year rose to the highest since at least
2006, according to CoreLogic. Sales of existing homes of $1 million and more
increased 8.5 percent in June compared with a year ago, the biggest jump among
all price ranges, data from the National Association of Realtors show.

Low Rates

Some borrowers are reluctant to sell part of their portfolios to pay cash for a
home as the stock market reaches new highs, said Jim Francis, head of consumer
lending at MUFG Union Bank, N.A., a subsidiary of Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group
Inc. Many of the bank's clients are business owners who would rather put money
into their firms instead of using it to pay for a house, he said.

Union Bank originated more than 350 loans of at least $2 million this year, said
Francis. Its average loan size is about $900,000.

Interest rates are also driving demand, with borrowers getting mortgages at less
than 3.5 percent and expecting rates to rise in coming months. Some customers
are opting for the seven-year adjustable-rate mortgage, which as of yesterday
was offered at 3.15 percent, over the five-year loan, said BNY Mellon's Gorman.
Dodd-Frank

Loan requests at BNY Mellon for at least $2 million increased 30 percent this
year compared with 2013. The average mortgage increased to $1.1 million from $1
million last year, and clients generally put down about 30 percent, Gorman said.

"There is the mentality that rates are moving up," said Gorman, whose largest
loan this year was $7 million for the refinance of a second home in California.

BNP Paribas SA's Bank of the West is granting jumbo loans to customers with
fluctuating income by including other assets in its calculations. In complying
with the Dodd-Frank legislation's ability to repay requirement, the bank
considers assets in retirement accounts and other investments rather than just
income, said Cyndee Kendall, a regional sales manager for Northern California.
That's helped the bank grant large loans to self-employed borrowers.
Cash Deals

"Those who are buying in the super-jumbo space often have more complex financial
situations," said Kendall, whose bank received 20 percent more jumbo loan
applications in the second quarter compared with the prior year. "There are a
lot of affluent borrowers with assets who may not have stable income. We still
feel comfortable you can justify having the ability to repay by going into the
next layers."

Some wealthy homebuyers still prefer to use cash rather than provide lenders
with documentation of their assets, said David DeSantis, a Washington-based
partner and managing broker at Sotheby's International Realty. Others avoid
mortgages because they don't want to lose a bidding war to all-cash buyers, said
Elyse Arbour, a real estate agent with Rodeo Realty in Brentwood.

All-cash sales made up 32 percent of existing home transactions in June compared
with 31 percent a year ago, according to data from the National Association of
Realtors.
Special Discounts

Lenders are luring wealthy borrowers to try to build long-term relationships as
total home lending slumps amid higher credit standards. Originations are
forecast to drop to $267 billion for the three months ended June 30, which would
be the lowest in 17 years for the second quarter, according to the Mortgage
Bankers Association.

"It's important to us because mortgages are very often how we meet a client,"
said Katherine August-deWilde, president of First Republic Bank (FRC), a jumbo
lender with locations in California, Oregon, Connecticut, Florida and other
states. "We generally address pricing if you have a large relationship."

A Bank of the West wealth management client who takes out a $1.5 million loan
and keeps $750,000 in a wealth management account is eligible to get half a
point off the usual cost for an adjustable-rate mortgage, Bank of the West's
Kendall said.

Customers who have relationships with banks may get access to loan deals that
aren't advertised, such as borrowing against inherited investment assets rather
than income, Sotheby's DeSantis said. At BNY Mellon, more clients have been
choosing a hybrid loan, which enables them to use two mortgages and get an
overall lower blended rate, according to Gorman. Union Bank, Bank of the West
and other lenders said they don't have set maximum amounts for mortgages and
will consider any request.

Cohen, the Beverly Hills broker, said some of his million-dollar plus borrowers
end up paying off their loans before the ARM-term expires.

"These mortgages have a short shelf life," Cohen said. "That's just the
mentality -- move within five years."

For more information please visit: http://www.alta.org

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              371 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             March 8, 2008 Saturday
                                 Every Edition

Veterans' Loans Left Out of Stimulus Plan

BYLINE: Kenneth R. Harney

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 791 words


When Congress and the White House put together the $150 billion economic
stimulus package, they raised the maximum mortgage limits in high-cost areas for
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Housing Administration.

But lawmakers neglected to include a similar increase for the government's
primary home purchase program for veterans: Department of Veterans
Affairs-backed loans. While the limits of the other three programs now extend to
$729,750 in the highest-cost areas, including Washington -- at least through
Dec. 31 -- VA loans remain capped at $417,000.

For home buyers such as Greg Rasnake, a lawyer and disabled veteran who works
for the federal government, the $417,000 VA limit is a deal-killer. He and his
wife and children moved to the Washington area a year ago from Oklahoma. They
have been searching for a single-family detached house in the close-in Virginia
suburbs but have been unable to use the VA loan-guarantee program because of the
effective $417,000 ceiling.

"There's just no way you can find anything here where that limit comes even
close," he said. "You'd think that in a time of war, when you're doing a
stimulus bill and raising all the other loan limits, you might remember the
vets. But that didn't happen."

As a result of the omission, areas with high concentrations of veterans and high
housing costs -- California, Maryland, Virginia, the District and Florida, among
others -- are effectively cut out of the stimulus package's benefits when it
comes to VA loans. Mortgages backed by the VA are especially attractive because
they allow qualified veterans to buy houses without  down payments.

Without a legislative fix, the situation won't change.

You might ask: How could this happen? How could a wartime president, a speaker
of the House who represents high-cost San Francisco and its extensive military
installations, an entire Cabinet agency, and veterans committees in the House
and Senate all fail to include the VA program with generous loan-limit increases
for Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the FHA?

Spokesmen for the Department of Veterans Affairs declined to discuss the matter.
House Veterans' Affairs Committee Chairman Bob Filner (D-Calif.) was blunt: "I
think it was out of ignorance," he said in a telephone interview. "I don't think
[the plan drafters] understood the situation" -- specifically that the VA limits
would not automatically increase along with the higher Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac limits. "Nobody thought about it, so this just slipped through."

The VA program guarantees 25 percent of Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's
conforming-loan limit. Because private lenders generally are willing to make a
no-down-payment loan for four times the guarantee level, the program has an
effective mortgage limit of $417,000 nationwide. The stimulus plan, however,
temporarily reset the Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and FHA limits to 125 percent of
metropolitan-area median home prices, creating dozens of different limits around
the country, without referencing the VA guarantee formula.

"It makes the VA program irrelevant in a lot of places," Filner said. He is
sponsoring legislation that would raise the program's effective limits to 150
percent of the Fannie Mae-Freddie Mac maximums. He also is seeking a "technical
correction" amendment to the stimulus law but said he is not optimistic that it
can be rushed through, given other congressional priorities.

When Rasnake learned that the VA limits were unchanged, he said, he was
"devastated." Rasnake's mortgage loan officer told him he is hardly alone. The
lender said there were many veterans looking to buy homes that he had lined up
for VA financing in anticipation of the higher limits expected from the stimulus
bill.

Although the VA program is smaller than Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the FHA, it
is substantial and carries relatively little risk to the government. The program
guarantees 2.2 million home loans totaling $243 billion, and the VA backs about
11,000 new loans per month, more than half of which go to first-time buyers,
according to Todd Bowers, director of government affairs for the Iraq and
Afghanistan Veterans of America.

Many VA-backed mortgages involve no upfront equity investment -- which typically
raises default rates and foreclosures -- yet the program performs well. During
the third quarter of 2007, the VA 30-day delinquency rate was 6.58 percent,
compared with 12.92 percent for the FHA and 16.3 percent for private subprime
loans, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association. The foreclosure rate for
VA loans during the same period was 1.03 percent, vs. 2.2 percent for FHA and
6.89 percent for subprime.

That's pretty hard to miss. But lawmakers did.

Kenneth R. Harney's e-mail address is KenHarney@earthlink.net

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Virginia North

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              372 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               February 12, 1996

GNMA Recognizes Third Party Interests

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 299 words

DATELINE: Washington


The Government National Mortgage Association says that it now wil recognize
third-party security interests in CNMA servicing rights for both single-family
and multifamily mortgage-backed securities.

The change in policy should make it easier for GNMA issuers to use their
servicing rights as security for warehouse lines of credit, a GNMA official
said.

"In an effort to accommodate the financial needs of our customers, we will
formally acknowledge other security interests in the underlying portfolio of
loans in Ginnie Mae mortgage-backed securities," said GNMA president Kevin
Chavers.

Mr. Chavers said the action should improve the lending terms and conditions that
are imposed upon GNMA issuers.  Those costs savings that issuers realize on
warehouse lines of credit may be passed on to homebuyers using the Federal
Housing Administration and Department of Veterans Affairs home loan guarantee
programs.

Essentially, the change means that a warehouse lender will have a "perfected
interest" in servicing rights that are used as security for a line of a credit.
Previously, the GNMA did not recognize the third party's claim on the servicing
rights in the event of issuer default.

However, GNMA said that when an issuer must be terminated from the program due
to "bankruptcy or criminal action," acknowledgment of the third-party security
interests will be nullified.  The agency said these actions are rare.

In normal defaults, third-party security holders will be able to preserve their
interest in an issuer's portfolio by curing the default of the issuer or moving
the portfolio to another, pre-approved GNMA issuer.  Security interests of third
parties with GNMA servicing arrangements will be "subject and subordinate to all
GNMA contract rights, powers and prerogatives."

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1996 Faulkner & Gray


                              373 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Ways and Means Leaders Offering Private-Use Accord

                            November 4, 1983, Friday

By Craig T. Ferris

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


Democrat and Republican leaders of the House Ways and Means Committee late today
offered a compromise designed to overcome some of the objections to the proposed
tough restrictions on ''private-purpose'' tax-exempt bonds.

The plan, offered by Rep. Dan Rostenkowski, D-Ill., chairman of the committee,
and Rep. Barber B. Conable, R-N.Y., the ranking Republican on the panel, would
modify several of the provisions that would have seriously hampered multifamily
housing bonds and would weaken provisions restricting use of industrial
development bonds to purchase land and existing facilities.

The compromise, which is designed to overcome some objections raised by members
of the House Rules Committee, state and local governments, the municipal
industry, and users of the bonds, would also modify the proposed prohibition on
the use of federal guarantees for the bonds to overcome objections from the
housing industry.

However, the proposal would not eliminate the controversial $150 per person
state volume limit on most private-purpose bonds, which is opposed by states and
localities, users of the bonds, and the municipal industry.

There was no immediate reaction late today from members of the Rules Committee
or state and local groups on the plan's acceptability; however, retention of the
volume state cap is expected to continue to present those groups with serious
problems.

Rep. Rostenkowski and Rep. Conable warned the compromise is as much as they
believe the Ways and Means Committee can be asked to weaken the bill.

A committee staff member said the compromise ''is as far as the chairman will
go.'' The staffer said Rep. Rostenkowski will continue to withhold the overall
tax bill unless the Rules Committee accepts the compromise.

If the Rules Committee does not accept the plan, Rep. Rostenkowski might try to
kill the entire tax bill -- a move that could jeopardize the proposal in the
bill to extend use of single-family mortgage revenue bonds for five years past
their currently scheduled termination at the end of this year.

The compromise would modify the proposals to tighten arbitrage limits for
multifamily housing bonds, by allowing credit enhancement devices, bond
insurance, letters of credit, and guarantees and pledges of securities to be
used outside the proposal to limit the allowable arbitrage to 1 1/8%. That
modification would be allowed only if the present value of the cost of the
credit enhancement for multifamily housing bonds is less than the present value
of the interest expected to be saved as a result of the credit enhancement.

The modification for arbitrage on multifamily housing bonds would also apply if
the enhancement device is obtained through competitive bidding and, except for
servicing, none of the parties providing the device have any other transactions
with other parties to the financing or to the project being financed.

The modification would also exempt student loan bonds from the new arbitrage
limits until Jan. 1, 1986, instead of the proposed Jan. 1, 1984 effective date.

However, the modification would still limit arbitrage on all other bonds
involved to the 1 1/8% level proposed, instead of the current 1 1/2%.

The compromise would allow IDBs to be used to purchase land, if not more than
25% of the bond proceeds were used to acquire the land. That modification would
not affect the original exemption allowing IDBs to be used by ''first-time
farmers'' to purchase land.

It would also modify the proposed prohibition on the use of IDBs to buy existing
buildings, by saying that at least 15% of the cost of the building must be used
for rehabilitation of the facility.

The compromise would also modify the proposed prohibition on federal guarantees
of tax-exempt debt, by exempting most federal guarantees for housing bonds.

The original bill exempted guarantees by the Federal Housing Administration, the
Veterans Administration, and those for student loan bonds.

The compromise would also exempt guarantees by the Federal National Mortgage
Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., and the Government National
Mortgage Association; it would also exempt so-called Department of Housing and
Urban Development project notes, which are used to finance low-income public
housing projects.

However, the modification would not exempt federal deposit guarantees for
tax-exempt bonds, and would not exempt guarantees for Small Business
Administration programs involving tax-exempt debt, or indirect guarantees by
federal agencies, such as those provided by the Bonneville Power Administration
for the Washington Public Power Supply System's nuclear projects 1, 2, and 3.

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 783 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1983 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              374 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 MARCH 15, 1999

Bank United Backs Texas MPF in Court

LENGTH: 552 words

Washington-The first Texas lender to use the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago's
mortgage partnership finance program has filed an amicus brief in defense of MPF
- opposing the state trade group that wants to kill the program.

There is "no basis" to arguments by the Texas Savings and Community Bankers
Association and others that the MPF program represents "unfair competition" to
FHLB members or that the FHLBanks are engaged in retail lending, according to
the amicus brief filed by Bank United in Houston.

"It defies business logic to contend that institutions like Bank United, which
participate in the MPF program voluntarily, do so to jeopardize their
competitive position in the mortgage market," according to the amicus filed in
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit. Bank United is a $ 13.6 billion
thrift that has completed one MPF transaction involving $ 83 million in single
family loans.

MPF is "just another wholesale funding mechanism" that allows FHLB members to be
more competitive with other retail lenders, the Bank United brief says. "At the
same time, the MPF program enables member institutions to avoid the higher
credit guarantee fees charged by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac."

[As previously reported, Freddie Mac has filed an amicus brief in opposition to
the MPF program.]

The chairman of Bank United Corp. is Lewis Ranieri, who is credited with the
development of the mortgage-backed security. Mr. Ranieri also is a homebuilder,
and the National Association of Home Builders has filed an amicus brief in
support of the MPF program.

TSCBA, Western League of Savings Associations, World Savings Bank, Oakland,
Calif., and Charter One Bank, Cleveland, Ohio, are suing the Federal Housing
Finance Board for approving the MPF program.

A U.S. district court in Austin, Texas, upheld the Finance Board's action and
now the MPF opponents are asking the U.S. appeals court to overturn the lower
court's decision. Final briefs are due March 24 and both sides have asked for a
hearing to present their argument before the circuit judges.

Created by the FHLBank of Chicago, the MPF program allows member institutions to
originate mortgages and receive direct funding from the FHLBank for the loan.
The loan is closed in the FHLB's name but the member institution retains the
credit risk.

The opponents contend the FHLBs really are engaged in retail lending, which is
not permitted under their charter. But Bank United argues that in substance, the
transaction is indistinguishable from a mortgage funded through tradition FHLB
advances. There are many ways a wholesaler may provide funds to retail lenders,
according to the amicus brief. "An MPF program loan is just one of them, and its
form of lending should not be seen as suggesting that FHLBanks have entered the
retail lending market," the Bank United brief says.

Meanwhile, Texas and national association of homebuilders contend that the MPF
program makes mortgages available to "more" borrowers who are not served by the
traditional secondary market.

"(I)t is essential that the program not be thwarted by an overly restrictive
interpretation of the FHLBank Act proffered by parties that perceive themselves
as competitors of the FHLBanks," the home builders say.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1999 Faulkner & Gray


                              375 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 8, 2007 Wednesday

Fannie and Freddie come knocking;
U.S.-backed companies keep their sheen as investors shun mortgage securities
packaged by Wall Street

BYLINE: JAMES R. HAGERTY

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: THE WALL STREET JOURNAL; FINANCING; Pg. B9

LENGTH: 877 words


The mortgage-market meltdown isn't over, but it already has produced two clear
winners: Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the U.S.'s biggest investors in home loans.

Until recently, politicians in Washington were arguing about how best to rein in
the two giant government-sponsored companies, both recovering from accounting
scandals and lapses in financial controls. Now, as worry about the housing
market trumps accounting scruples, the political debate has shifted to whether
Fannie and Freddie need to grow even bigger to buy more loans and calm mortgage
investors.

Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.), chairman of the Senate Banking Committee,
yesterday called on the companies' regulator to consider raising the caps placed
last year on the amount of mortgages and related securities Fannie and Freddie
can hold, as a way of ensuring that plenty of money is available to fund
mortgage loans.

Sen. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) also called for higher caps. Both Fannie and
Freddie are pushing for the same move. A spokeswoman for their regulator, the
Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, or Ofheo, said the agency will
respond to the senators shortly.

Fannie's shares gained 3.1 per cent to close at $64.43 (U.S.) on the New York
Stock Exchange yesterday, while Freddie was up 2.7 per cent to $61.64.

The two stocks have held steady over the past month amid anxiety over mortgage
defaults, while shares of Countrywide Financial Corp., the U.S.'s largest
home-mortgage lender, have fallen 27 per cent.

Fannie and Freddie are benefiting because investors are still happy to buy the
mortgage securities they create, backed by loans purchased from lenders
scattered across the country. The two companies collect fees for guaranteeing
the interest and principal payments on the loans backing those securities.
Although Fannie and Freddie are private-sector companies, they were created by
Congress to funnel money into housing, and investors assume that Congress would
bail them out in a crisis.

With loan defaults rising and house prices falling, investors now are shunning,
at least temporarily, mortgage securities packaged by Wall Street firms and
others that don't have any implied backing from Uncle Sam. That makes it hard
for lenders to find buyers for loans that can't be sold to Fannie and Freddie.
Regulations prevent them from buying loans of more than $417,000 on
single-family homes, and they have stricter standards on down payments and
verification of income than were imposed by Wall Street during the housing boom.

The result is a spike in rates on some types of loans that can't be sold to
Fannie or Freddie, such as prime, 30-year, fixed-rate jumbo loans, those above
$417,000. Yesterday, the average rate on such loans was 7.44 per cent, according
to a survey by financial publishers HSH Associates. That's 0.84 percentage point
higher than the average rate on "conforming" loans, those that meet Fannie and
Freddie's standards. Typically over the past decade, the premium paid for jumbo
loans has been around 0.20 to 0.30 point.

Even middle-class people often pay $500,000 to $700,000 for a humdrum home in
high-cost areas. So the higher rates on jumbo loans could be "devastating" for
the housing market in some areas, says Michael Menatian, president of Sanborn
Mortgage Corp. in West Hartford, Conn.

As lenders recoil from riskier types of mortgages, "we're turning a lot of
people away now," says Jeff Lazerson, chief executive of Mortgage Grader, a
mortgage broker in Laguna Niguel, Calif.

Many investors hope that alarm over the housing market will induce Ofheo to ease
restraints on Fannie and Freddie.

But Joshua Rosner, an analyst at the New York research boutique Graham Fisher &
Co., describes as "mass delusion" the idea that they can save the day for
investors exposed to billions of dollars of ill-advised home loans now heading
toward foreclosure. For one thing, he says, Ofheo has required Fannie and
Freddie to follow stricter standards, recently imposed by banking regulators, in
assessing borrowers' ability to repay. So they can't buy up loads of reckless
loans to speculators or people failing to pay bills.

Richard Syron, chief executive of Freddie, agrees that there are limits to what
his company can do. "Neither we nor anyone else can buy at par loans that
probably shouldn't have been made in the first place," he says.

Mr. Syron says Freddie can provide funding to refinance many subprime borrowers
stuck with loans due to reset to sharply higher monthly payments, but not most
of them. In addition, he says, Freddie could help the market by buying and
holding more mortgage securities packaged by Wall Street if the cap on its
holdings rises.

Fannie and Freddie may be able to buy subprime mortgage securities at discounts
that more than make up for the credit risk, Kenneth Posner, an analyst at Morgan
Stanley, said in a research note. They also may be able to charge more for
providing guarantees on securities sold to others, he said: "We can't imagine
anyone complaining - right now there's no other game in town."

The flight of other investors from the mortgage market "does show the role and
the need" for Freddie and Fannie to act as steady providers of mortgage funding,
Mr. Syron says.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              376 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               americanbanker.com

                           February 18, 2014 Tuesday

Make Multifamily the Starting Point for Housing Reform

BYLINE: Shekar Narasimhan and James B. Lockhart

SECTION: REGULATION & REFORM Vol. 1 No. 26

LENGTH: 675  words


Reform of the secondary market for housing finance is a big topic now among
think tanks, industry representatives and on Capitol Hill. Most of this
discussion has centered on the single-family market, because that is the market
that collapsed, helped to precipitate the Great Recession. This recession led to
four million American families losing their homes, according to RealtyTrac data,
and the conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Yet Fannie and Freddie have long played another critical role in our housing
market: providing a secure secondary market for multifamily housing finance.
One-third of all Americans rent their homes and over 16 million households live
in multifamily developments, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.

There is finally some momentum towards reform as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
enter their sixth year of conservatorship. There is a growing consensus it is
time to downsize the government's massive involvement in the housing market.Â
Bills have been introduced in both the House and the Senate to wind-down
enterprises over a five-year period and reduce the direct government role in the
conventional mortgage markets. Both bills mean to protect taxpayers from another
bailout, buy they have very different end games. The Senate bill, introduced by
Sens. BobÂ Corker, R-Tenn., and MarkÂ Warner, D-Va.,Â would maintain a limited
government guarantee for mortgage-backed securities, but only after private
capital has taken significant first-loss risk.Â  The House bill, introduced by
Rep. JebÂ Hensarling, R-Texas,would eliminate any role for the government other
than as a market overseer.

While it is not debatable that the current situation is untenable long-term,
disagreement over the end game could paralyze any attempt to come up with a
solution.Â  This, in turn, could leave room for those who would prefer the
status quo. These advocates argue that the current GSEs, with a few changes,
could simply continue to contribute their growing profits to reduce government
deficits.

However, this would leave the financial system open to what happened before. It
would also render the housing market unable to attract the private capital
needed to protect the taxpayer from further risk. It would also lead to the
permanent nationalization of the system, which is not a solution we support.
Therefore, change is needed now, so where do we start? Multifamily finance
reform, of course. Three key facts are important to understand:

Because the multifamily financial markets have performed well for many years, it
is our key goal that they not be disrupted during the restructuring period.Â
Accordingly, our proposal would do the following:

Multifamily is the foundation of America's housing system and for many, the
first step into homeownership. The support for multifamily housing finance
remains central to the GSEs' public purpose. Reforming the multifamily housing
market first will help lead the way to the housing finance system of the future
where private capital takes first-loss risk and uses its ingenuity to serve all
markets at all times with responsible lending products. This will make us face
up to our obligations to support affordable housing for all Americans while
preserving and enhancing the role of private capital.

We understand several members from both parties of the Senate Banking Committee
are working on a bill that accomplishes many of these goals, and we look forward
to seeing this bill introduced. It is important to reform our housing finance
system and better to do it sooner rather than later.

Shekar Narasimhan, currently managing partner at Beekman Advisors, has over 35
years' experience in real estate finance. He previously ran one of the first
publicly-traded companies in the multifamily finance business. James B. Lockhart
is vice chairman of WL Ross & Co. LLC. He has previously served as director of
the FHFA, regulator of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the twelve Federal Home Loan
Banks, and its predecessor agency the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
Oversight.Â

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_BLOG


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              377 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                  June 1, 1998

Complicated New Mexico Financing for Fannie Mae

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 316 words

DATELINE: Albuquerque, NM


Fannie Mae is piecing together a complicated arrangement to do conventional
mortgage financing for a New Mexico pueblo near here.

The structure involves multiple partners for both the construction lending and
individual mortgages on the 30-50 units in a proposed subdivision.

Mark Vanderlinden, deputy director of Fannie Mae's partnership office here,
detailed the plan at a Department of Housing and Urban Development Native
American housing summit here, but he would not name the pueblo or the lender.

There are nineteen pueblo Indian tribes in New Mexico, and Fannie has just
announced lending agreements with two of them.

But Mr. Vanderlinden said this program does not involve either of the two but
rather an "urbanized" pueblo near here.

Net effect for the tribe will be a significant leveraging of mortgage money, as
envisioned by the Native American Housing Assistance and Self Determination Act.

Fannie Mae will take 50% of the risk for the construction loan, amounting to $
2.5 million or so.

The state Mortgage Finance Authority also will provide a guarantee, while the
tribe will put a deposit into the lending bank.

Thus, a deposit of a couple of hundred thousand dollars will leverage a
construction loan ten times that size.

On the individual mortgages, Mr. Vanderlinden said the tribe will provide a
second mortgage on 50% loan-to-value conventional mortgages.

The project will serve higher-income Indians above 80% of median income, but
there will also be a low-mod component which may use a soft third mortgage
through the Federal Home Loan Bank System's Affordable Housing program.

Groundbreaking on the units is five to six months away, the Fannie Mae official
said.

First mortgages will be at around the MFA loan rate of 6.35%, while the tribal
second mortgages will be for 3%.

Fannie Mae expects to securitize the loans once it buys them from the lender.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1998 Faulkner & Gray


                              378 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

HFAs Look at Wide Variety of Financing Methods

                           December 12, 1983, Monday

By Conrad K. Sterrett; Mr. Sterrett is director of finance for the Virginia
Housing Development Authority.


During the year a number of techniques designed to lower mortgage rates were
considered by state housing finance agencies across the country.  Some of these
techniques were new, and some had been used effectively in previous years.

Each technique had to meet at least two tests: (1) It had to be cost effective,
i.e. the interest rate savings had to be sufficient to justify the cost of the
technique or the additional risk involved, and (2) if the cost of the technique
or the risk involved could not be passed on to the mortgagor or a third party,
the bond issue must have been able to absorb the cost or risk without unduly
weakening the issue.

Techniques fell into four major categories:

Enhancing the credit of the individual mortgages.

Changing the structure of the mortgage to take advantage of lower rates in the
earlier years of the yield curve.

Enhancing the credit of the bonds or the aggregate underlying security for the
bonds.

Changing the structure of the bonds to take advantage of lower rates in the
earlier years of the yield curve.

Enhancing the Credit
Of Individual Mortgages

The credit of single-family mortgages were enhanced by private mortgage
insurance (either 100% or a combination of less than 100% and pool insurance),
by Federal Housing Administration insurance or Veterans Administration
guarantees, or by letters of credit from lending institutions.

Principal alternatives for multifamily issues were FHA insurance, insurance or
guarantees by an insurance company, usually coupled with a guaranteed takeout at
the market rate at the time of takeout, or letters of credit from commercial
banks.

Changing the Structure
Of the Mortgage

For single-family mortgages, utilization of growing equity mortgages (GEMs) or
other graduated-payment mortgages reduce the interest rate, but they eventually
result in higher monthly payments than those for a 30-year fixed rate mortgage,
although the term of the mortgage is shortened.

Adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) provide mortgage rates tied to short-term bond
rates instead of long-term bond rates but offer only limited or no protection to
the mortgagor against an increasing interest rate environment. Accordingly, ARMs
have not proven to be popular among state housing finance agencies.

An alternative multifamily financing is to provide 15-year mortgages with a
30-year amortization schedule and a balloon payment, usually backed by a
guaranteed takeout by a third party.

Enhancing the Credit
Of the Bonds

Principal and interest payments on bonds guaranteed by the Federal Savings and
Loan Insurance Corp. or private insurance companies were utilized for
multifamily financing. FSLIC guarantees are no longer available. Bond guarantees
by the Municipal Bond Insurance Association and American Municipal Bond
Assurance Corp. were considered as alternatives.

Loans-to-lenders mechanisms on which the credit of the lender is utilized in
addition to, or in place of, the credit of the issuer continue to be an
alternative technique. Collateralizing or overcollateralizing a bond issue with
security other than the mortgages to be made from the proceeds remains a
credit-enhancing alternative. Also considered was borrowing or pledging
collateral from such organizations as the Federal National Mortgage Association
or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.

Changing the Structure
Of the Bonds

The traditional way of achieving lower rate has been to increase the proportion
of earlier maturities by assuming a level of prepayments, generally 50% to 100%
of the FHA rate. Failure to reach assumed prepayment levels on previous issues
has reduced the willigness of HFAs and rating agencies to accept high prepayment
assumptions for current issues.

Use of capital appreciation bonds (CABs), compound interest bonds (CIBs), and
zero-coupon bonds became widespread during the year. The principal advantage of
these structures is to place a higher percentage of principal maturing in the
earlier years.

Long-term bonds with an annual or regular put to a third party at par have
allowed issuers to place long-term borrowings at a rate related to shorter-term
rates. A third party receives a fee for assuming the risk that short-term rates
may have risen at the time of the put, causing the bonds to be worth less than
par.

Twenty-year bonds to finance 30-year mortgages were also employed. Under this
structure, cash withdrawals to the HFA from the resolutions are deferred until
the bonds mature.

Also considered were long-term bonds with a floating rate tied to a short-term
municipal index. These bonds also require a third party willing to purchase the
bonds at par. If mortgages from the proceeds are made at a fixed rate, a third
party is required to assume the rate risk in the event the floating rate exceeds
the mortgage rate. Such rate risk can also be passed on to mortgagors by the use
of adjustable-rate mortgages.

Another means of providing fixed-rate mortgages against floating-rate bonds is
the interest rate swap, in which a third party, including European issuers,
agrees to pay the floating rate on the HFA's bonds in return for the HFA's
agreeing to pay a fixed rate on the third party's bonds.

Other Developments

Several new techniques have allowed HFAs to reduce their initial contributions
to or increase the economic feasibility of single-family issues. Such techniques
include junior lien subordinated bonds, mortgage forgiveness (which increases
the proportion of the 1 1/8% spread received in earlier years), and capital
appreciation bonds (which can eliminate the need for capitalized interest). As
in the past, investment agreements with banks were utilized in some instances to
reduce reinvestment risk.

The shelf registration mechanism was utilized to provide quicker access to the
bond markets to take advantage of a window in improving market conditions.
Eurobonds and taxable bonds were considered, and several states continued to
fund single-family mortgages by the issuance of veterans bonds, which are
general obligations of the state. Additional considerations were the issuance of
bonds in $1,000 denominations to appeal to a wider market, and issuance of bonds
as book entries, rather than certificates, to reduce administrative costs.

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1054 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1983 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              379 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           August 18, 2010 Wednesday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

Geithner says US still set to 'backstop' mortgages

BYLINE: James Quinn

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 378 words


THE US government is set to play a continued role in "backstopping" mortgages to
cut the risk of future housing-led recessions, Tim Geithner, Treasury Secretary,
admitted for the first time.

Although the role of collapsed government-run mortgage giants Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac must be drastically altered, Mr Geithner acknowledged that there
remains a place for the government to guarantee mortgages.

The news gives an implicit boost to the US housing market, which remains in the
doldrums with banks repossessing homes at close to record levels.

His comments - made at a White House summit on the future of Fannie and Freddie
- came as new economic data showed that the construction of new houses and
applications to build new properties both fell to their lowest levels in more
than a year in July.

Mr Geithner's words could also lift the American housebuilding sector, which
remains depressed in spite of a raft of government stimulus programmes.

During the summit, Mr Geithner said the risk of removing all federal support
from the mortgage market "is that future recessions could be more severe because
the financial system would not have the capital to support mortgage lending on
an adequate scale".

Any firm proposals as to how the US government will continue to play such a role
- which will centre on the restructuring of Fannie and Freddie - are not
expected until January, however.

US taxpayers have spent $148bn (£95bn) propping up Fannie and Freddie since
their near-collapse in September 2008, the weekend before Lehman Brothers
imploded.

At the time, the pair, which were placed into government "conservatorship",
owned or guaranteed almost 50pc of the US's $12 trillion mortgage market. As a
result, the US provided an implicit guarantee for those mortgages. The comments
came as gloomy housing data were released. Construction of socalled "
single-family" homes in July fell to the lowest rate since May 2009, at an
annualised rate of 432,000, down 4.2pc. Housing permits fell 3.1pc to a 14-month
low.

Jared Franz, associate economist at T. Rowe Price, said that "depressed builder
sentiment argues against a signifi-cant rebound over the next one to two years".

$148bn The amount of US aid required to prop up Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac since
September 2008

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              380 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 26, 2015 Thursday

Reps. Carney, Delaney, & Himes File Housing Finance Reform Legislation to
Protect 30-Year Mortgage & Taxpayers

LENGTH: 1722  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of House of Representative John Carney, U.S Government has issued the
following news release:

Representatives John Carney (DE-At Large), John K. Delaney (MD-6), and Jim Himes
(CT-4) have introduced legislation designed to protect the fixed-rate 30-year
mortgage - a key instrument to ensure home affordability for the middle class -
and shield American taxpayers from future bailouts by reforming the housing
finance system. The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act combines the
private sector's superior ability to price risk with the federal government's
unique ability to provide capacity.

Original cosponsors of The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act are: Rep.
Denny Heck (WA-10), Rep. Gregory Meeks (NY-5), Rep. Patrick Murphy (FL-18), Rep.
Jared Polis (CO-2), Rep. Mike Quigley (IL-5), Congressman David Scott (GA-13),
Rep. Kyrsten Sinema (AZ-9), and Rep. Peter Welch (VT-At Large).

"This proposal seeks to preserve housing affordability while protecting
taxpayers from another bailout," said Congressman Carney. "It finds the middle
ground between public sector and private sector involvement in the housing
sector. If we to want to preserve the dream of home ownership and make sure
taxpayers aren't on the hook for another bailout -- the status quo has to
change. Our bill is the right policy, and it's also an approach that appeals to
both sides of the aisle. As Congress works to reform our housing finance system,
I'm optimistic that a proposal like ours -- that combines private sector pricing
with the government's ability to expand access to credit - can cut through the
partisan divide."


"Without access to quality affordable housing, there's no American Dream for
millions of middle class families," said Congressman Delaney. "I'm proud to work
with Congressman Himes and CongressmanCarney on legislation that keeps the
fixed-rate thirty-year mortgage alive and preserves a government guarantee while
introducing greater fiscal responsibility and stability to the housing finance
system. The financial crisis and the bailout of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac made
it clear that we need reform to protect taxpayers. The Partnership to Strengthen
Homeownership takes the best ideas from both parties to create a 21st century
housing finance system that combines the strengths of the private sector and the
public sector. Housing finance reform is too important for us to ignore and I
look forward to working with my colleagues in both parties in moving this
legislation forward."

"This bill ensures that new homeowners will continue to have access to the
affordable, predictable financing options they need, while safeguarding
taxpayers and our economy from future downturns," saidCongressman Himes. "Our
legislation brings together the market's efficiency in pricing risk with
government's unique ability to provide scale to create a safer, more liquid
housing market that preserves access to affordable housing for American
families."

This legislation, first introduced last Congress, establishes an insurance
program through Ginnie Mae which maintains the full faith and credit of the
federal government, but protects taxpayer investment by requiring adequate
private sector capital and accurate pricing of government reinsurance. All
government guaranteed single-family and multi-family mortgage-backed securities
will be supported by a minimum of 5% private sector capital, which will stand in
a first loss position. The remaining 95% of the risk will be shared between
Ginnie Mae and a private reinsurer on a pari passu basis. Fees paid to Ginnie
Mae for providing these securities will be allocated to affordable housing
programs. The bill winds down Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and allows them to be
sold and recapitalized.

The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership

Private Capital and Privately Priced Government Guarantee

Ginnie Mae will establish a mortgage insurance program where at least 5% of the
"first loss" is held by private entities and the remaining 95% of the risk is
shared on a pari passu basis between the government and private reinsurer.

Ginnie will design and study two types of programs, then implement one , or both
programs, if they further an effective, efficient secondary mortgage market and
maintain the risk sharing principles outlined above.

Program 1: Reinsurance Bid Program

Aggregators and issuers will be permitted to deliver qualified mortgage pools to
Ginnie.  The price Ginnie charges for the guarantee will be ascertained through
an insurance bidding process described below.
    Ginnie will secure forward reinsurance contracts on a periodic basis (30-90
days), with the assistance of a reinsurance broker appointed annually in a
competitive process.
    The bids will seek coverage for two levels of risk on each securitization -
the 5% "first loss" and the remaining 95% "second loss."
    From these bids, Ginnie will contract with a series of carriers for each
risk and aggregate the policies.
    For the first loss, Ginnie will seek bids for 100% of its expected exposure.

    For the second loss, Ginnie will seek bids for 100% of its aggregate
exposure but will offer retrocessional reinsurance for up to 90% of the second
loss cover.
    Ginnie's guarantee fee quote will cover a forward period (Quote Period) as
determined by Ginnie.
    Prices passed onto originators may vary based on quality of product, and
other factors as determined by Ginnie, so long as the overall pricing equals  a
weighted-average bid in a given period.

Program 2: Bond Guarantor Program

Ginnie will reinsure first loss holders of risk through an insurance system
where insurers/guarantors will hold mortgage credit risk on an aggregate, loan
by loan, or security basis.
    In addition to security level coverage, insurers/guarantors are authorized
to issue loan level coverage to lenders as long as the coverage is for 100%, or
if less than 100% loan level coverage, the servicer is responsible for any
losses the guarantor did not cover
    Ginnie will reinsure bond guarantor and/or issuers by entering into
contracts with private sector reinsurers sharing risk on a 90/10 pari passu
basis
    To the extent Ginnie Mae will be reinsuring insolvency of a bond guarantor
and/or insurers, it will be required to enter into risk-sharing contracts with
private reinsurers to assess the risk of default of any entity.

Under either program, each MBS meeting the outlined private sector capital
requirements will carry the full faith and credit of the United States
Government, but with private sector directed pricing.

Banks, life insurance companies, Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs),
insurance companies and other Ginnie approved market participants will  be
eligible to participate in the insurance and risk sharing transactions with
Ginnie Mae

All market participants will be overseen by Ginnie Mae and Ginnie will have
authority to establish necessary capital levels and stress tests

Small Lender Access

During the transition Fannie and Freddie may remain as aggregators of mortgage
loans for small lenders that do not have the sufficient volume to pool and
create these new securities with their mortgage loans on their own, so long as
adequate private sector alternatives do not exist.

    The Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) will be authorized to aggregate and pool
mortgages for small lenders

Issuing Platform

The platform will allow for standardized securities thus creating a single
security and creating a deeper and more liquid TBA market which will reduce the
cost of mortgage credit for consumers.

Standardized Mortgages, Servicing, and Capital Requirements

Transition Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) regulation to Ginnie Mae with
oversight over the secondary mortgage market

Mortgages eligible for the full faith guaranty must meet minimum underwriting
standards

Ginnie will maintain the power to stress test all market particpants and define
adequate capital standards.

Winding Down Fannie and Freddie

Fannie and Freddie will be wound down over a five year period.  Their government
guarantee and charter will be removed and they will repay the government with
interest for the government's investment in the institutions.  The repayment
must take into account both the injection of capital and overall exposure to the
government.

During the transition, Fannie and Freddie may act as an aggregator for small
lenders to retain small lender access to the new Ginnie Platform.

The transition will continue until competitive access for small lenders is
established and Ginnie has achieved an adequate return to taxpayers and
established a competitive private housing finance market.

The assets of Fannie and Freddie will be returned to the private sector and may
operate within the new mortgage system as issuers and/or aggregators

Affordable Housing

Ginnie Mae will charge a fee for the insurance that they provide for these
securities.

The fees charged will be 10 basis points of the total principal balance of these
mortgages.

The money acquired will be allocated to strengthen affordable housing programs
facilitated by the federal government. The funds received will be allocated to
the Housing Trust Fund (75%), the Capital Management Fund (15%) and the Market
Access Fund (10%).

Ginnie will be under a duty to serve all markets

Multifamily Housing

Fannie and Freddie's multifamily business will be spun out as separate entities.
Ginnie will be required to create and implement a workable multifamily guarantee
that utilizes private sector pricing consistent with the single family model.

The current multifamily businesses of Fannie and Freddie will continue to
function within the new multifamily housing market as purely private
organizations with an explicit government guarantee provided by Ginnie Mae and a
private sector reinsurer.

Well-functioning TBA Market

Investors will receive timely principle and interest payments through Ginnie
Mae.

This model will also ensure that one standardized security is delivered to the
TBA Market. This will increase liquidity and limit disruptions to the secondary
mortgage market, which will ultimately benefit consumers.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              381 of 998 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2017 Thomson Financial, All Rights Reserved
                            Reuters Knowledge Direct

                                 March 27, 2017

                                   TMST, Inc.

                            2300 North Ridgetop Road
                              SANTA FE,  NM 87506
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: Main Phone: 1-505-9891900
FAX: 1-505-9898156
URL: Home Page: http://www.tmstcorp.com/
E-MAIL: ir@thornburgmortgage.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
TICKER: THMRQ
CUSIP: 885218800
IRS No.: 850404134
CIK: 0000892535
ISIN: US8852188007
SEDOL: 2885517
Reuters Instrument Code: THMRQ.PK^E12
Display RIC: THMRQ.PK

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: July 28, 1992
PLACE OF INCORPORATION: Maryland
LEGAL STATUS: Equity Issue
OPERATING STATUS: Inactive
EMPLOYEES: 400

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   Thornburg Mortgage, Inc., incorporated on July 28, 1992, is a single-family
(one-to-four unit) residential mortgage lender that originates, acquires and
retains investments in adjustable-rate and variable-rate mortgage (ARM) Assets,
thereby providing capital to the single-family residential housing market. Its
ARM Assets consist of Purchased ARM Assets and ARM Loans and are comprised of
Traditional ARM Assets and Hybrid ARM Assets. Purchased ARM Assets are
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) that represent interests in pools of ARM loans,
which are publicly rated and issued by third parties and may include guarantees
or other third-party credit enhancements against losses from loan defaults. ARM
Loans are either loans that it has securitized from its own loan origination or
acquisition activities, loans that it uses as collateral to support the issuance
of Collateralized Mortgage Debt or loans pending securitization.

   The Company finances the purchases and originations of its ARM Assets with
equity capital, unsecured debt, Collateralized Mortgage Debt and short-term
borrowings instead of deposits or Federal Home Loan Bank advances. All of its
ARM Loans are either Traditional ARM loans or Hybrid ARM loans. It acquires
Purchased ARM Assets and ARM Loans from investment banking firms,
broker-dealers, mortgage bankers, mortgage brokerage firms, banks, savings and
loan institutions, credit unions, home builders and other entities involved in
originating, securitizing, packaging and selling MBS and mortgage loans. It
acquires and originates ARM Loans for its portfolio through its correspondent
lending, wholesale lending, direct retail lending and bulk acquisition programs.
Its correspondent lending program includes 306 approved correspondents.

   It also offers The Thornburg Mortgage Exchange Program for loans it
originates and/or services.

   In the correspondent lending channel, the Company originates mortgage loans
from Company-approved correspondent lenders. It pre-qualify all correspondents
to determine their financial strength, the soundness of their own established
in-house mortgage procedures and their ability to fulfill their representations
and warranties to the Company. The majority of loans originated in the
correspondent channel are originated to its approved specifications, including
its internally developed loan products, credit and property guidelines, and
underwriting criteria. It has 40 correspondent lenders, to which it has granted
delegated underwriting status.

   In June 2006, Thornburg Mortgage, Inc. began originating loans through
mortgage brokerage firms. Its Company-approved mortgage brokerage firms sell its
traditional ARM and hybrid ARM products and submit completed loan applications
and customer documentation, through its Web portal and imaging systems. The
loans are underwritten and closed in Thornburg Mortgage Home Loans, Inc.' s
(TMHL) name. The Company assesses the mortgage brokerage firms'  compliance with
these qualifications on an annual basis. In addition to pre-approving mortgage
brokerage firms, it maintains a list of pre-approved settlement agents and
requires certain insurance policies to be obtained from the closing agents to
mitigate any risk of misappropriation of funds.

   The Company originates mortgage loans through TMHL, which is authorized to
originate loans in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. It utilizes
agreements with one third-party, private label fulfillment vendor for the
processing, underwriting and closing of its direct retail loans. In addition, it
works with nationally recognized providers of appraisal, credit, title insurance
and settlement services. It oversees the activities of these service providers
through onsite visits, report monitoring, customer service surveys, post-closing
quality control, and periodic direct participation in the customer experience.
These services are provided on a private label basis, meaning that these
providers identify themselves as being the Company' s representatives. It uses
three approaches to originate loans directly with borrowers. It originates loans
via its personal service center, where borrowers can call to inquire about loan
products and interest rates, seek advice and counseling regarding qualifying for
a loan and the approval process, and complete a mortgage application.

   On August 21, 2006, the Company acquired ADFITECH, Inc. (Adfitech), a
provider of quality control post-closing audit and document delivery services to
the mortgage industry, from a subsidiary of Centex Corporation. Prior to the
acquisition, Thornburg Mortgage, Inc. partnered with Adfitech for three years on
an outsourced basis for quality control services, imaging and other selected
mortgage-related functions that supported its loan origination business across
all loan origination channels, correspondent, wholesale and direct retail.

   Thornburg Mortgage, Inc. obtains the servicing rights on a majority of the
loans it originates through the correspondent lending channel and on all of the
loans it originates in the wholesale and direct retail lending channels. The
Company contracts with a third-party subservicer to service its loans on a
private label basis. The third-party subservicer collects mortgage loan
payments, manages escrow accounts, provides monthly statements and notices to
borrowers, offers online mortgage servicing information and provides customer
service, loan collection, mortgage exchange processing, loss mitigation,
foreclosure, bankruptcy and real estate-owned management services. Thornburg
Mortgage, Inc. monitors and manages the activities of its subservicer, and pay
fees for this service based on a fixed-fee schedule per mortgage loan.

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
PRIMARY NAICS:
522292 - Real Estate Credit
SECONDARY NAICS:
522294 - Secondary Market Financing
PRIMARY SIC:
6798 - Real Estate Investment Trusts
SECONDARY SIC:
6162 - Mortgage Bankers/correspondents
6159 - Misc Business Credit Institutions
COMPETITORS:

     ·    Federal National Mortgage Assctn Fnni Me
     ·    Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp
     ·    Capstead Mortgage Corporation
     ·    Visa Inc
     ·    American Express Company


* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: December 31, 2007

MOST RECENT EXCHANGE RATE:  1.0
CHART OF ACCOUNTS:  Industry
ACCOUNTING STANDARD:  U.S. GAAP
LATEST AVAILABLE ANNUAL:  20170327

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Cash & Equivalents                     149,109          55,159         147,228
Cash and Short Term                    149,109          55,159         147,228
Investments
Accounts Receivable - Trade,           190,484         328,206         230,479
Net
Total Receivables, Net                 190,484         328,206         230,479
LT Investments - Other              21,739,789      19,072,563      10,396,961
Long Term Investments               21,739,789      19,072,563      10,396,961
Note Receivable - Long Term         13,444,751      32,460,392      31,087,068
Restricted Cash - Long Term            538,505         206,875          26,982
Other Long Term Assets, Total          538,505         206,875          26,982
Other Assets                           209,723         581,857         619,023
Other Assets, Total                    209,723         581,857         619,023
Total Assets                        36,272,361      52,705,052      42,507,741



LIABILITIES ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Accrued Expenses                       149,421         270,169         158,292
Notes Payable/Short Term Debt       33,193,440      48,317,347      38,634,413
Dividends Payable                       47,330          80,442          73,132
Other Current liabilities,              47,330          85,944         537,038
Total
Long Term Debt                         998,500       1,492,905         899,827
Total Long Term Debt                   998,500       1,492,905         899,827
Total Debt                          34,191,940      49,810,252      39,534,240
Other Liabilities                      123,936         161,615          71,085
Other Liabilities, Total               123,936         161,615          71,085
Total Liabilities                   34,512,627      50,327,980      40,300,655



EQUITY ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Redeemable Preferred Stock             254,261         224,968         111,535
Redeemable Preferred Stock,            832,485         224,968         111,535
Total
Common Stock                             1,399           1,138           1,048
Common Stock, Total                      1,399           1,138           1,048
Additional Paid-In Capital           2,896,203       2,477,171       2,235,435
Retained Earnings (Accumulated     (1,797,921)        (14,157)           6,585
Deficit)
Other Comprehensive Income           (172,432)       (312,048)       (147,517)
Other Equity, Total                  (172,432)       (312,048)       (147,517)
Total Equity                         1,759,734       2,377,072       2,207,086
Total Liabilities &                 36,272,361      52,705,052      42,507,741
Shareholders' Equity
Shares Outs - Common Stock              13,994          11,378          10,478
Primary Issue
Total Common Shares                     13,994          11,378          10,478
Outstanding
Total Preferred Shares                  34,878           9,334           4,630
Outstanding



SUPPLEMENTAL ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Shares Outstanding - Preferred               7               5               5
Issue 1



FOOTNOTE
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Full-Time Employees                        400             311             119
Number of Common Shareholders          136,218         137,810         142,356



RATIOS
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Net Debt Incl. Pref.Stock &         34,875,316      49,980,061      39,498,547
Min.Interest('000 USD)
Tangible Book Value, Common            927,249       2,152,104       2,095,551
Equity('000 USD)
Tangible Book Value per Share,              66             189             200
Common Eq (USD)



FOOTNOTE DEBT ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Total Long Term Debt,                      999           1,493             900
Supplemental
Long Term Debt Maturing within             454             948             405
1 Year
Long Term Debt Matur. in Year              545             545             495
6 & Beyond

* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Net Sales                            2,623,503       2,474,487       1,511,334
Revenue                              2,623,503       2,474,487       1,511,334
Total Revenue                        2,623,503       2,474,487       1,511,334
Cost of Revenue                      2,307,242       2,127,803       1,166,877
Cost of Revenue, Total               2,307,242       2,127,803       1,166,877
Gross Profit                           316,261         346,684         344,457
Selling/General/Administrative          36,779          70,390          67,542
Expense
Selling/General/Admin.                  36,779          70,390          67,542
Expenses, Total
Investment Income - Operating           16,868        (25,691)         (6,376)
Interest/Investment Income -            16,868        (25,691)         (6,376)
Operating
Interest                                16,868        (25,691)         (6,376)
Exp.(Inc.),Net-Operating,
Total
Loss(Gain) on Sale of Assets -       1,776,648         (8,489)         (8,567)
Operating
Unusual Expense (Income)             1,776,648         (8,489)         (8,567)
Other Operating Expense                 29,718          28,689          20,805
Other, Net                            (15,074)        (15,912)        (11,791)
Other Operating Expenses,               14,644          12,777           9,014
Total
Total Operating Expense              4,152,181       2,176,790       1,228,490
Operating Income                   (1,528,678)         297,697         282,844
Net Income Before Taxes            (1,528,678)         297,697         282,844
Net Income After Taxes             (1,545,678)         297,697         282,844
Net Income Before Extra. Items     (1,545,678)         297,697         282,844
Preferred Dividends                   (40,452)        (10,751)         (6,103)
Income Available to Com Excl       (1,586,130)         286,946         276,741
ExtraOrd
Basic Weighted Average Shares           12,230          11,106           9,919
Basic EPS Excluding                      (130)              26              28
Extraordinary Items
Diluted Weighted Average                12,230          11,106           9,919
Shares
Diluted EPS Excluding ExtraOrd           (130)              26              28
Items
DPS - Common Stock Primary                  16              27              27
Issue



EXTRAORDINARY ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Net Income                         (1,545,678)         297,697         282,844
Income Available to Com Incl       (1,586,130)         286,946         276,741
ExtraOrd



NORMALIZED ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Total Special Items                  1,776,648         (8,489)         (8,567)
Normalized Income Before Taxes         247,970         289,208         274,277
Normalized Income After Taxes        (390,857)         289,208         274,277
Normalized Inc. Avail to Com.        (431,309)         278,457         268,174
Basic Normalized EPS                      (35)              25              27
Diluted Normalized EPS                    (35)              25              27



RATIOS
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Gross Margin                                12              14              23
Operating Margin                           -58              12              19
Pretax Margin                              -58              12              19
Net Profit Margin                          -60              12              18
Normalized EBIT('000 USD)              264,838         263,517         267,901



SUPPLEMENTAL ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Basic EPS Including                      (130)              26              28
Extraordinary Items
Diluted Net Income                     (1,586)             287             277
Diluted EPS Including ExtraOrd           (130)              26              28
Items
Gross Dividends - Common Stock             198             308             277



FOOTNOTE
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Interest Expense, Supplemental       2,307,242       2,127,803       1,166,877

* * * * * * * * * * CASHFLOW STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2007      12/31/2006      12/31/2005
Net Income/Starting Line           (1,545,678)         297,697         282,844
Unusual Items                        1,793,516        (34,180)        (14,943)
Other Non-Cash Items                  (56,169)          38,358         100,510
Non-Cash Items                       1,737,347           4,178          85,567
Accounts Receivable                    137,722        (97,727)       (112,206)
Prepaid Expenses                        14,857        (68,982)       (104,599)
Accounts Payable                      (81,592)          64,311          63,432
Accrued Expenses                      (39,156)          21,728           4,352
Changes in Working Capital              31,831        (80,670)       (149,021)
Cash from Operating Activities         223,500         221,205         219,390
Sale/Maturity of Investment         25,310,760       9,402,572      10,392,678
Purchase of Investments           (15,663,775)    (20,011,734)    (24,546,954)
Other Investing Cash Flow              270,986         217,704         616,230
Other Investing Cash Flow            9,917,971    (10,391,458)    (13,538,046)
Items, Total
Cash from Investing Activities       9,917,971    (10,391,458)    (13,538,046)
Other Financing Cash Flow            (329,823)       (241,958)           6,617
Financing Cash Flow Items            (329,823)       (241,958)           6,617
Total Cash Dividends Paid            (271,405)       (311,242)       (272,115)
Sale/Issuance of Common                376,094         241,826         363,077
Common Stock, Net                      376,094         241,826         363,077
Sale/Issuance of Preferred             650,922         113,546         111,535
Preferred Stock, Net                   650,922         113,546         111,535
Issuance (Retirement) of             1,027,016         355,372         474,612
Stock, Net
Short Term Debt, Net               (4,014,230)     (2,683,492)       9,141,140
Long Term Debt Issued                6,071,311      10,958,713       5,968,697
Long Term Debt Reduction           (3,529,685)     (2,458,587)     (2,169,961)
Long Term Debt, Net                (6,459,079)      12,959,504       4,003,008
Issuance (Retirement) of Debt,    (10,473,309)      10,276,012      13,144,148
Net
Cash from Financing Activities    (10,047,521)      10,078,184      13,353,262
Net Change in Cash                      93,950        (92,069)          34,606
Net Cash - Beginning Balance            55,159         147,228         112,622
Net Cash - Ending Balance              149,109          55,159         147,228
Cash Interest Paid                   2,400,000       2,000,000       1,100,000

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *
COMPANY SPECIFIC:


Balance Sheet
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Cash Flow
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Descriptive
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Efficiency Ratios
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Financial Strength
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Growth Rates
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Income Statement
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Management Effectiveness
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Per Share Ratios
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Price Related
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Profitability Ratios
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97



Share Related Items
Assets, total - most recent fiscal year ('000                        36,272,360
USD)
Assets, total - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       26,285,320
Assets, total - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                         31,289,290
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent fiscal                         927,249
year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                    (1,324,924)
('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) - most recent quarter                      1,301,391
1 year ago ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        1,759,734
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) in dollars - most recent                        (323,335)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash and Equiv., most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          16,699
Cash and Equivalents ('000 USD)                                         149,109
Liabilities, total - most recent fiscal year                         34,512,630
('000 USD)
Liabilities, total - most recent quarter ('000                       26,608,660
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent fiscal year ('000                         998,500
USD)
LT debt (total) - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                      1,024,741
Receivables - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                        190,484
Receivables - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                            388,303
Shareholder Equity - most recent fiscal year                          1,759,734
('000 USD)
Shareholder Equity - most recent quarter ('000                        (323,335)
USD)
Total debt - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                      34,191,940
Total debt - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          26,026,410
Dividends paid from SCF - most recent fiscal year                       271,405
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow - 1st historical fiscal year ('000                      (47,905)
USD)
Free Cash Flow - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                          40,795
Free Cash Flow - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                           107,668
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                        -691.58
%, FY
Net Income/Total Cash From Operating Activities,                      -1,810.75
%, TTM
Total Operating Cash Flow per Share, Avg. Diluted                        18,274
Shares Outstanding, FY ('000 USD)
Number of historical periods - Annual                                        15
Number of historical periods - Quarterly                                     61
Asset turnover - most recent fiscal year                                    .06
Asset turnover - most recent quarter (annualized)                           .07
Asset turnover - trailing 12 month                                          .07
Net Income/employee - most recent fiscal year                   (4,347,899,000)
('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - most recent quarter                         1,404,318,000
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Net Income/employee - trailing 12 month ('000                   (8,399,925,000)
USD)
Receivables turnover - most recent fiscal year                            10.12
Receivables turnover - most recent quarter                                15.83
(annualized)
Receivables turnover - trailing 12 month                                  13.06
Revenue/employee - most recent fiscal year                         7,379,756.00
Revenue/employee - most recent quarter                             5,000,089.00
(annualized)
Revenue/employee - trailing 12 month                               5,152,405.00
Debt Service to EPS - most recent quarter                              4,428.32
Interest coverage - most recent fiscal year                               15.70
Interest coverage - prior trailing 12 month                               19.75
LT debt/assets - most recent fiscal year                                   2.75
LT debt/assets - most recent quarter                                       3.90
LT debt/equity - most recent fiscal year                                  56.74
LT debt/equity - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                          56.26
LT debt/total capital - most recent fiscal year                            2.78
LT debt/total capital - most recent quarter                                3.99
Payout ratio - most recent fiscal year -1                                107.23
Reinvestment Rate - most recent quarter                                  100.00
Total debt/total assets - most recent fiscal year                         94.26
Total debt/total assets - most recent quarter                             99.01
Total debt/total capital - most recent fiscal                             95.11
year
Total debt/total capital - most recent quarter                           101.26
Total debt/total equity - most recent fiscal year                      1,943.02
Total debt/total equity - most recent quarter, 1                       1,568.16
year ago
Current EBITDA/EV                                                          1.34
Current EBITDA to EV, LFY                                                   .76
Current EBITDA to EV, LTM                                                  1.34
Assets, total % Change - 1 year ago                                      -27.58
Assets, total % Change - year over year                                  -31.18
Book value per share growth rate, 5 year                                  -4.45
EPS Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                            101.37
EPS Change % - prior quarter                                             -85.42
EPS Change % - year over year                                           -601.93
EPS Change %, TTM over TTM                                              -249.15
Gross Margin growth rate, 5 year                                          18.88
Growth rate% -  Revenue, 3 year                                           41.32
Net Income Change % - most recent quarter 1 year                         110.29
ago
Net Income Change % - prior quarter                                      -70.49
Net Income Change % - trailing 12 months                                -291.79
Net Income Change % - year over year                                    -652.76
Revenue Change % - most recent quarter 1 year ago                        -19.83
Revenue Change % - prior quarter                                          -2.09
Revenue Change %, TTM over TTM                                           -26.59
Revenue Change %, year over year                                           6.02
Revenue growth rate, 10 year                                              26.62
Revenue growth rate, 5 year                                               45.53
Revenue/share (5 yr growth)                                               19.86
Revenue/share - 3 Year TTM Growth                                        -31.72
Cash from Operating Activities - 3 Year TTM                              -10.80
Growth
Cost of good sold - most recent fiscal year ('000                     2,307,242
USD)
Cost of good sold - most recent quarter ('000                           418,570
USD)
Cost of good sold - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                      1,798,464
Earnings after taxes - most recent fiscal year                      (1,545,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings after taxes - most recent quarter ('000                        140,047
USD)
Earnings after taxes - trailing 12 months ('000                     (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings After Taxes, Normalized - most recent                        (390,857)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent fiscal year                     (1,528,678)
('000 USD)
Earnings before taxes - most recent quarter ('000                       139,757
USD)
Earnings before taxes - trailing 12 month ('000                     (3,355,984)
USD)
Earnings before taxes Normalized - most recent                          247,970
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EBIT - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                               264,838
EBIT - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                   220,777
EBIT - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                     362,462
EBITD - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                              264,838
EBITD - most recent fiscal year -1 ('000 USD)                           263,517
EBITD - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                  220,777
EBITD - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                    362,462
Interest expense - most recent fiscal year ('000                      2,307,242
USD)
Interest expense - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                       418,570
Interest expense - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                       2,230,608
Net Income available to common - most recent                        (1,586,130)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - most recent                            114,008
quarter ('000 USD)
Net Income available to common - trailing 12                        (3,461,058)
months ('000 USD)
Net Income Available to Common, Normalized - most                     (431,309)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income excluding extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Net Income including extraordinary items - most                     (1,545,678)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Revenue - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          2,623,503
Revenue - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                                498,639
Revenue - prior trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                          2,807,571
Revenue - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                2,060,962
Tax rate - most recent quarter                                             -.21
Taxes paid - most recent fiscal year ('000 USD)                          17,000
Taxes paid - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                               (290)
Taxes paid - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                                 3,986
Total Income Net - most recent fiscal year ('000                    (1,545,678)
USD)
Net Income Before Extraordinary Items, TTM ('000                    (3,359,970)
USD)
Earnings per Share, Normalized, Excluding                             (111,172)
Extraordinary Items, Avg. Diluted Shares
Outstanding, TTM ('000 USD)
Income After Tax, Normalized, TTM ('000 USD)                          (867,157)
Return on average assets - 5 year average                                  -.33
Return on average assets - most recent fiscal                             -3.47
year
Return on average assets - most recent quarter                             2.04
(annualized)
Return on average assets - prior trailing 12                              -1.93
month
Return on average assets - trailing 12 month                             -10.74
Return on average equity - 5 year average                                 -7.59
Return on average equity - most recent fiscal                           -103.02
year
Return on average equity - prior trailing 12                             -49.44
month
Return on investment - 5 year average                                     -4.03
Return on investment - most recent fiscal year                           -44.71
Return on investment - most recent quarter                                37.84
(annualized)
Return on investment - trailing 12 month                                -146.73
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             125,753
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (Common Equity) per share - most                             (8,347)
recent quarter ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           125,753
fiscal year ('000 USD)
Book value (tangible) per share - most recent                           (8,347)
quarter ('000 USD)
Cash per share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           10,656
USD)
Cash per share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                             431
EBITD per share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                            7,717
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                        (129,689)
recent fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - most                            2,735
recent quarter ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items - prior                        (69,942)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS Basic excluding extraordinary items -                             (241,812)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS excluding extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                       (129,689)
fiscal year ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - most recent                           1,225
quarter ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - prior                              (69,943)
trailing 12 month ('000 USD)
EPS including extraordinary items - trailing 12                       (244,202)
month ('000 USD)
EPS Normalized - most recent fiscal year ('000                         (35,266)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY ('000                         (3,917)
USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent FY - 1                           (8,107)
('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter -                           (43)
1 (not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                            1,487
(annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter                              371
(not annualized) ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - most recent quarter, 1                      (13,152)
year ago ('000 USD)
Free Cash Flow per share - trailing 12 month                              2,292
('000 USD)
LT debt/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                            71,354
USD)
LT debt/share - most recent quarter ('000 USD)                           26,454
Revenue/share - most recent fiscal year ('000                           214,509
USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (annualized)                         18,174
('000 USD)
Revenue/share - most recent quarter (not                                  4,531
annualized) ('000 USD)
Revenue/share - trailing 12 month ('000 USD)                             43,880
P/E excluding extraordinary items high, trailing                          11.38
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items low, trailing                            8.87
12 months
P/E excluding extraordinary items, High                                   10.34
P/E excluding extraordinary items, Low                                     9.39
Price to Book - most recent quarter, 1 year ago                            1.27
Price to Free Cash Flow per Share - trailing 12                             .01
months
Price to sales - prior trailing 12 month                                    .57
Price to Equity - most recent fisal year                                    .73
Price to Tangible Book (common) - most recent                              1.39
fiscal year
EBITD Margin - 5 year average                                             14.63
EBITD Margin - most recent fiscal year                                    10.09
EBITD Margin - trailing 12 month                                          17.59
Gross Margin - 1st historical fiscal year                                 12.05
Gross Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                 14.01
Gross Margin - 5 year average                                             18.88
Gross Margin - most recent quarter                                        16.06
Gross Margin - trailing 12 month                                          12.74
Net Profit Margin - 5 year average                                        -6.84
Net Profit Margin % - 1st historical fiscal year                         -58.92
Net Profit Margin % - 2nd historical fiscal year                          12.03
Net Profit Margin % - most recent quarter                                 28.09
Net Profit Margin % - prior trailing 12 month                            -30.61
Net Profit Margin % - trailing 12 month                                 -163.03
Operating margin - 1st historical fiscal year                            -58.27
Operating Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                             12.03
Operating Margin - 5 year average                                         -6.63
Operating margin - most recent quarter                                    28.03
Operating margin - trailing 12 month                                    -162.84
Pretax margin - 1st historical fiscal year                               -58.27
Pretax Margin - 2nd historical fiscal year                                12.03
Pretax Margin - 5 year average                                            -6.63
Pretax margin - most recent quarter                                       28.03
Pretax margin - trailing 12 month                                       -162.84
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent fiscal                             1.40
year
SG&A expenses / net sales - most recent quarter                            1.27
SG&A expenses / net sales - trailing 12 month                               .20
Float                                                                    394.70
Market capitalization ('000 USD)                                          1,316
Shares oustanding - average prior trailing 12                             11.77
month
Shares outstanding - average trailing 12 month                            46.97
Shares outstanding - average, most recent fiscal                          12.23
year
Shares outstanding - average, most recent quarter                        110.05
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent fiscal year                          13.99
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter                              38.74
Shares outstanding - BS, most recent quarter 1                            12.83
year ago
Shares outstanding - current                                             438.72
Shares outstanding Basic - average prior trailing                         11.77
12 month
Shares outstanding Basic - average trailing 12                            28.17
month
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           12.23
fiscal year
Shares outstanding Basic - average, most recent                           41.68
quarter
Float as a Percent of Total Shares Outstanding                            89.97

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
SECURITY TYPE: Ordinary Shares
EXCHANGE: Over The Counter
TOTAL SHARES OUTSTANDING: 91,544,458
NUMBER OF SHAREHOLDERS: 136,218
LISTING TYPE:  Ordinary Shares

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017


                              382 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 18, 2008 Saturday
                                 Every Edition

Not So Jumbo;
Helping Mid-Tier Buyers Into More Affordable Loans

BYLINE: Dina ElBoghdady; Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 812 words


The federal government's efforts to make "jumbo" mortgages more available to
borrowers have created a three-tiered mortgage market in areas with expensive
housing, including the Washington region.

There are the standard loans that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac buy from lenders
and then sell to investors. For years, those loans could not exceed $417,000 for
single-family homes.

There are the loans larger than that, or jumbos. It used to be those were the
higher-interest loans that many borrowers in pricey areas had to use to finance
their homes.

Now there's a middle tier that falls between the $417,000-and-under loans and
the jumbo ones.

"It's kind of like purgatory," said Gibran Nicholas of CMPS Institute, which
trains mortgage bankers and brokers. "It's not heaven, and it's not hell. It's
somewhere in between as far as rates go."

This structure was created earlier this year when the credit crisis deepened and
nervous investors had stopped buying loans that were not backed by Fannie Mae or
Freddie Mac. Back then, the two companies were federally chartered and investors
treated their loans as if they were guaranteed by the federal government, making
them a safer bet. (Since then, the government has seized control of both
enterprises and made that guarantee official.)

When investors stopped buying jumbos, some lenders stopped offering them. Others
raised the jumbo rates. The result: Jumbo rates spiked, meaning people who
needed larger loans faced sharply higher costs.

Enter the federal government.

To bring rates down, the government earlier this year temporarily raised the
limit for loans that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac can buy to $729,750 in some of
the nation's priciest housing markets.

In those markets, that created that middle tier (generally called "jumbo
conforming"), because Fannie and Freddie can now buy loans that fall between the
old $417,000 limit and the new $729,750 cap.

That new cap expires Dec. 31.

At the start of next year, a lower cap -- $625,500 -- should take effect. Of
course, all of this could change in a flash as the government tries out new ways
to untangle the economic crisis.

Here's what this change means to you.

Q What are the interest rates on these loans?

A For the week through Thursday, the average rate was 6.66 percent on a
conforming 30-year fixed-rate mortgage; it was 6.82 percent in the middle tier,
said Keith Gumbinger, vice president of research firm HSH Associates. "It's
fairly priced money. It's competitive," he said. But borrowers who need more
than $729,750 were looking at a 7.92 percent on average on a 30-year fixed rate
loan.

How does that compare with before the change?

The interest rate gap between loans that conformed to Fannie/Freddie standards
and the jumbos widened to historic levels last year. Up until then, the normal
difference between a conforming loan and a jumbo was a little less than a
quarter of a percentage point, Gumbinger said. That had widened to a full
percentage point by March, when the new loan limit kicked in. The middle tier
fills the gap.

The federal government seized control of Fannie and Freddie last month. How will
that affect rates?

Theoretically, that should lower rates because there's less concern about
whether these loans will be backed by the government, said Guy Cecala, publisher
of Inside Mortgage Finance. But there hasn't been much effect so far.

I'm unhappy with the rate on my jumbo loan. Should I refinance?

Chances are that if you took out a fixed-rate jumbo loan recently, refinancing
would make no sense, Gumbinger said. The average 30-year fixed rate on a jumbo
was 7.51 percent as of Oct. 10. A year ago this week, the rate was 7.06 percent.
Two years ago this week, it was 6.57 percent. "Your interest rate will likely be
higher than any time in the past eight years," Gumbinger said.

If you have an adjustable-rate jumbo, you may do better if you refinance into
another adjustable jumbo. But be careful. Although some adjustable jumbos may
reset to a higher rate, others may reset to a lower rate depending on what index
your loan is tied to, Gumbinger said.

How do I know what the limits are in my area?

The loan limits are based on a formula tied to the median price of homes in each
market. For a listing of loan caps by market, go to the government's listing at
http://www.ofheo.gov/media/hpi/AREA_LIST_5_2008.pdf.

What will happen in January?

The set of calculations used to determine the loan limits by region will most
likely factor in drops in home prices, Cecala said. So there's no guarantee that
the areas with the highest caps today will also have the highest caps next year.

Would a jumbo loan insured by the Federal Housing Administration be cheaper?

Not for now, Cecala said. As of Wednesday, the rate on a Fannie and Freddie
middle-tier "conforming jumbo" is 6.875 percent, and the rate on the same loan
insured by the FHA is 7.313 percent.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Prince George's County

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; By Jason Reed -- Reuters; The limit on Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac loans has been raised to $729,750 for the rest of the year. In 2009, that
cap will scale back to $625,500.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              383 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             creditunionjournal.com

                               November 20, 2014

Are New Fannie, Freddie Guidelines a Threat to FHA?

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: MORTGAGES Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 388  words


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's new low down payment loans products may not
represent such a risk to the Federal Housing Administration program as some have
feared.

The more Federal Housing Finance Agency director Mel Watt talks about the yet to
be unveiled 3% and 5% down payment products, the less likely they seems to be
game changers.

These 95% and 97% loan-to-value products will be targeted at creditworthy
borrowers with "stronger credit histories or lower debt-to-income ratios," Watt
told the Senate Banking Committee on Wednesday.

The major factor holding these borrowers back is that they don't have the "money
to make a large down payment and pay for closing costs," Watt said. The GSE
regulator also noted that housing counseling would be a compensating factor.

Jay McCanless and Annie Worthman, analysts at Sterne Agee, said that the
compensating factors outlined in Watt's testimony will be do little to change
the "demand calculus" for low-down payment loans.

"In our view, the potential increase in qualified borrowers would be marginal at
best because willing borrowers/home owners with these attributes would likely be
financed under programs from either the Veterans Administration or the Federal
Housing Administration, which already permits high-LTV loans like the FHFA is
contemplating," they wrote in a note to clients.

Compensating factors for the new Fannie and Freddie products are important,
according to Isaac Boltansky, an analyst at Compass Point.

"But we continue to believe that the more significant determinant of the 3%
down-payment's impact will be the FHFA's forthcoming pricing decisions with
regard to guarantee fees and private mortgage insurance," Boltansky said in a
Nov. 19 report.

FHFA is expected to release the details of the new loan products soon.

Analysts have also warned that the FHA single-family program faces headwinds
going forward due to the new competition from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

FHA's bread and butter is insuring loans with down payments as low as 3.5%. But
FHA is currently charging high premiums to re-capitalize its mortgage insurance
fund, which could give Fannie and Freddie the edge.

"FHA could be adversely selected," if it has to compete with the Fannie, Freddie
and the private mortgage insurance companies, according to a recent Federal
Financial Analytics report.

URL: http://www.cujournal.com

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: CUJOURNAL_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              384 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 July 29, 2013

Private Arena Will Share Credit Risk With a GSE

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 37 No. 43

LENGTH: 428  words


Prodded by its regulator, Freddie Mac sold $500 million in notes to investors
that are based on the performance of a pool of single-family loans totaling
$22.5 billion.

It represents that first transaction by Freddie where private investors will
share some of the credit risk with the government-sponsored enterprise.

Despite its novelty, investors welcomed a chance to buy the first Freddie
"Structured Agency Credit Risk" debt notes.

"Due to investor demand, the size of the offering was increased from $400
million to $500 million, and about 50 broadly diversified investors participated
in the offering," according to Freddie chief executive Donald Layton.

"I would call it quite successful," one Wall Street analyst told NMN. "I would
expect there will be more demand for this product," he added.

Freddie is likely making structural changes before making a second offering.
Fannie Mae is working on its first risk-sharing deal.

Federal Housing Finance Agency acting director Edward DeMarco directed Fannie
and Freddie to develop risk-sharing transactions. The GSE regulator believes it
will provide insight as to how the private sector prices credit risk. And it
will reduce taxpayer exposure to the loans the GSEs guarantee.

"We expect to learn from this transaction, refine the approach and maintain
steady progress with future transactions," DeMarco said last week.

Freddie's CEO seems to agree with that approach. "Our intent is to create a
product that will be well-received by investors and can become repeatable and
scalable over time," Layton said.

The GSE chose very pristine collateral for its first deal. Freddie acquired the
loans between July 1, 2012 and Sept. 30, 2012. The pool had an average
loan-to-value ratio of 75% and no loans had a LTV above 80%. The average credit
score was 766 along with a weighted average debt-to-income ratio of 32%,
according to the Amherst Securities Group.

Investors were offered a $250 million M-1 tranche and a $250 million M-2
tranche.

"We believe the M-1 tranche is very unlikely to take a loss, even in a 2007-type
stress scenario," according to a July 24 report by ASG analysts. Investors in
the M-2 tranche may incur losses if home prices plunge 35%.

"Given these parameters, we believe that bonds make sense to investors on a
risk/return basis at current pricing levels," the ASG report says.

However, the pricing also shows the current guarantee fees that Freddie charges
lenders are too high. "It is clear that the current guarantee fees are high
relative to expected losses," ASG says, even under unfavorable scenarios.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              385 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 20, 2015 Friday

Himes, Delaney and Carney File Housing Finance Reform Legislation to Protect
30-Year Mortgage and Taxpayers

LENGTH: 1732  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the House of Representative Jim Himes, U.S Government has issued the
following news release:

Representatives Jim Himes (CT-4), John K. Delaney (MD-6) and John Carney (DE-At
Large) have introduced legislation designed to protect the fixed-rate 30-year
mortgage - a key instrument to ensure home affordability for the middle class -
and shield American taxpayers from future bailouts by reforming the housing
finance system. The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act combines the
private sector's superior ability to price risk with the federal government's
unique ability to provide capacity.

Original cosponsors of The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act are: Rep.
Denny Heck (WA-10), Rep. Gregory Meeks (NY-5), Rep. Patrick Murphy (FL-18), Rep.
Jared Polis (CO-2), Rep. Mike Quigley (IL-5), Congressman David Scott (GA-13),
Rep. Kyrsten Sinema (AZ-9), and Rep. Peter Welch (VT - At Large).

"This bill ensures that new homeowners will continue to have access to the
affordable, predictable financing options they need, while safeguarding
taxpayers and our economy from future downturns," said Congressman Himes. "Our
legislation brings together the market's efficiency in pricing risk with
government's unique ability to provide scale to create a safer, more liquid
housing market that preserves access to affordable housing for American
families."

"Without access to quality affordable housing, there's no American Dream for
millions of middle class families," said Congressman Delaney. "I'm proud to work
with Congressman Himes and Congressman Carney on legislation that keeps the
fixed-rate thirty-year mortgage alive and preserves a government guarantee while
introducing greater fiscal responsibility and stability to the housing finance
system. The financial crisis and the bailout of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac made
it clear that we need reform to protect taxpayers. The Partnership to Strengthen
Homeownership takes the best ideas from both parties to create a 21st century
housing finance system that combines the strengths of the private sector and the
public sector. Housing finance reform is too important for us to ignore and I
look forward to working with my colleagues in both parties in moving this
legislation forward."

"This proposal seeks to preserve housing affordability while protecting
taxpayers from another bailout," said Congressman Carney. "It finds the middle
ground between public sector and private sector involvement in the housing
sector. If we to want to preserve the dream of home ownership and make sure
taxpayers aren't on the hook for another bailout -- the status quo has to
change. Our bill is the right policy, and it's also an approach that appeals to
both sides of the aisle. As Congress works to reform our housing finance system,
I'm optimistic that a proposal like ours -- that combines private sector pricing
with the government's ability to expand access to credit - can cut through the
partisan divide."

The Delaney-Carney-Himes legislation, first introduced last Congress,
establishes an insurance program through Ginnie Mae which maintains the full
faith and credit of the federal government, but protects taxpayer investment by
requiring adequate private sector capital and accurate pricing of government
reinsurance. All government guaranteed single-family and multi-family
mortgage-backed securities will be supported by a minimum of 5% private sector
capital, which will stand in a first loss position. The remaining 95% of the
risk will be shared between Ginnie Mae and a private reinsurer on a pari passu
basis. Fees paid to Ginnie Mae for providing these securities will be allocated
to affordable housing programs. The bill winds down Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
and allows them to be sold and recapitalized.

The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership

Private Capital and Privately Priced Government Guarantee

Ginnie Mae will establish a mortgage insurance program where at least 5% of the
"first loss" is held by private entities and the remaining 95% of the risk is
shared on a pari passu basis between the government and private reinsurer.

Ginnie will design and study two types of programs, then implement one , or both
programs, if they further an effective, efficient secondary mortgage market and
maintain the risk sharing principles outlined above.

Program 1: Reinsurance Bid Program

Aggregators and issuers will be permitted to deliver qualified mortgage pools to
Ginnie.  The price Ginnie charges for the guarantee will be ascertained through
an insurance bidding process described below.
    Ginnie will secure forward reinsurance contracts on a periodic basis (30-90
days), with the assistance of a reinsurance broker appointed annually in a
competitive process.
    The bids will seek coverage for two levels of risk on each securitization -
the 5% "first loss" and the remaining 95% "second loss."
    From these bids, Ginnie will contract with a series of carriers for each
risk and aggregate the policies.
    For the first loss, Ginnie will seek bids for 100% of its expected exposure.

    For the second loss, Ginnie will seek bids for 100% of its aggregate
exposure but will offer retrocessional reinsurance for up to 90% of the second
loss cover.
    Ginnie's guarantee fee quote will cover a forward period (Quote Period) as
determined by Ginnie.
    Prices passed onto originators may vary based on quality of product, and
other factors as determined by Ginnie, so long as the overall pricing equals  a
weighted-average bid in a given period.

Program 2: Bond Guarantor Program

Ginnie will reinsure first loss holders of risk through an insurance system
where insurers/guarantors will hold mortgage credit risk on an aggregate, loan
by loan, or security basis.
    In addition to security level coverage, insurers/guarantors are authorized
to issue loan level coverage to lenders as long as the coverage is for 100%, or
if less than 100% loan level coverage, the servicer is responsible for any
losses the guarantor did not cover.
    Ginnie will reinsure bond guarantor and/or issuers by entering into
contracts with private sector reinsurers sharing risk on a 90/10 pari passu
basis.
    To the extent Ginnie Mae will be reinsuring insolvency of a bond guarantor
and/or insurers, it will be required to enter into risk-sharing contracts with
private reinsurers to assess the risk of default of any entity.

Under either program, each MBS meeting the outlined private sector capital
requirements will carry the full faith and credit of the United States
Government, but with private sector directed pricing.

Banks, life insurance companies, Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs),
insurance companies and other Ginnie approved market participants will  be
eligible to participate in the insurance and risk sharing transactions with
Ginnie Mae.

All market participants will be overseen by Ginnie Mae and Ginnie will have
authority to establish necessary capital levels and stress tests.

Small Lender Access

During the transition Fannie and Freddie may remain as aggregators of mortgage
loans for small lenders that do not have the sufficient volume to pool and
create these new securities with their mortgage loans on their own, so long as
adequate private sector alternatives do not exist.

The Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) will be authorized to aggregate and pool
mortgages for small lenders.

Issuing Platform

The platform will allow for standardized securities thus creating a single
security and creating a deeper and more liquid TBA market which will reduce the
cost of mortgage credit for consumers.

Standardized Mortgages, Servicing, and Capital Requirements

Transition Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) regulation to Ginnie Mae with
oversight over the secondary mortgage market.

Mortgages eligible for the full faith guaranty must meet minimum underwriting
standards.

Ginnie will maintain the power to stress test all market particpants and define
adequate capital standards.

Winding Down Fannie and Freddie

Fannie and Freddie will be wound down over a five year period.  Their government
guarantee and charter will be removed and they will repay the government with
interest for the government's investment in the institutions.  The repayment
must take into account both the injection of capital and overall exposure to the
government.

During the transition, Fannie and Freddie may act as an aggregator for small
lenders to retain small lender access to the new Ginnie Platform.

The transition will continue until competitive access for small lenders is
established and Ginnie has achieved an adequate return to taxpayers and
established a competitive private housing finance market.

The assets of Fannie and Freddie will be returned to the private sector and may
operate within the new mortgage system as issuers and/or aggregators.

Affordable Housing

Ginnie Mae will charge a fee for the insurance that they provide for these
securities.

The fees charged will be 10 basis points of the total principal balance of these
mortgages.

The money acquired will be allocated to strengthen affordable housing programs
facilitated by the federal government. The funds received will be allocated to
the Housing Trust Fund (75%), the Capital Management Fund (15%) and the Market
Access Fund (10%).

Ginnie will be under a duty to serve all markets.

Multifamily Housing

Fannie and Freddie's multifamily business will be spun out as separate entities.
Ginnie will be required to create and implement a workable multifamily guarantee
that utilizes private sector pricing consistent with the single family model.

The current multifamily businesses of Fannie and Freddie will continue to
function within the new multifamily housing market as purely private
organizations with an explicit government guarantee provided by Ginnie Mae and a
private sector reinsurer.

Well-functioning TBA Market

Investors will receive timely principle and interest payments through Ginnie
Mae.

This model will also ensure that one standardized security is delivered to the
TBA Market. This will increase liquidity and limit disruptions to the secondary
mortgage market, which will ultimately benefit consumers.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              386 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               November 20, 2014

Are New Fannie, Freddie Guidelines a Threat to FHA?

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: SECONDARY Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 387  words


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's new low down payment loans products may not
represent such a risk to the Federal Housing Administration program as some have
feared.

The more Federal Housing Finance Agency director Mel Watt talks about the yet to
be unveiled 3% and 5% down payment products, the less likely they seems to be
game changers.

These 95% and 97% loan-to-value products will be targeted at creditworthy
borrowers with "stronger credit histories or lower debt-to-income ratios," Watt
told the Senate Banking Committee on Nov. 19.

The major factor holding these borrowers back is that they don't have the "money
to make a large down payment and pay for closing costs," Watt said. The GSE
regulator also noted that housing counseling would be a compensating factor.

Jay McCanless and Annie Worthman, analysts at Sterne Agee, said that the
compensating factors outlined in Watt's testimony will be do little to change
the "demand calculus" for low-down payment loans.

"In our view, the potential increase in qualified borrowers would be marginal at
best because willing borrowers/home owners with these attributes would likely be
financed under programs from either the Veterans Administration or the Federal
Housing Administration, which already permits high-LTV loans like the FHFA is
contemplating," they wrote in a note to clients.

Compensating factors for the new Fannie and Freddie products are important,
according to Isaac Boltansky, an analyst at Compass Point.

"But we continue to believe that the more significant determinant of the 3%
down-payment's impact will be the FHFA's forthcoming pricing decisions with
regard to guarantee fees and private mortgage insurance," Boltansky said in a
Nov. 19 report.

FHFA is expected to release the details of the new loan products soon.

Analysts have also warned that the FHA single-family program faces headwinds
going forward due to the new competition from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

FHA's bread and butter is insuring loans with down payments as low as 3.5%. But
FHA is currently charging high premiums to re-capitalize its mortgage insurance
fund, which could give Fannie and Freddie the edge.

"FHA could be adversely selected," if it has to compete with the Fannie, Freddie
and the private mortgage insurance companies, according to a recent Federal
Financial Analytics report.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              387 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Countrywide shares brighten up a grey day as Budget renews optimism;
Market report

BYLINE: Ben Harrington

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 763 words


ESTATE agency giant Countrywide leapt 13.4pc on its first day of "grey market"
trading as it returned to listed life after six years in private hands.

According to Bloomberg, Countrywide shares gained 47 to 397p after being priced
on Tuesday at 350p, the top of the initial public offering range.

Dealers chased Countrywide higher amid hopes that the company - whose brands
include Bairstow Eves, Churchills and Hamptons International - will benefit from
an increase in the volume of house sales following the Budget. George Osborne
yesterday revealed plans to help people buy homes without saving up a big
deposit, announcing a Help to Buy scheme available from 2014 for people wanting
to buy a home, old or new, with the Government offering mortgage guarantees
totalling £130bn.

Housebuilding companies' shares reacted positively to another Budget initiative
that will offer interest-free loans for five years for people who want to buy
new-build homes. The loans will be worth up to 20pc of the value of homes, up to
a maximum price of £600,000, with the buyer contributing 5pc as a deposit.

After the announcement, Barratt Developments jumped to the top of the FTSE 250
leaderboard, gaining 15.8 to 255.6p. Taylor Wimpey was not far behind, rising 5¼
to 90.8p, while Redrow put on 7.4 to 191.4p, Bellway advanced 47p to £11.88 and
Persimmon added 38½p to £10.10.

Overall, the FTSE 100 slipped 8.62 points to 6432.70 and the FTSE 250 dipped
just 5.24 points to 14030.68.

Toby Morris, senior sales trader at CMC Markets, said: "Traders gave a muted
response to George Osborne's Budget and response from Ed Miliband that bordered
on the ridiculous."

Aviva was one of the worst-performing blue-chip stocks, retreating 8.2 to 315p,
as it traded ex-dividend.

Some mining companies remained in the doldrums after the sector took a pounding
on Tuesday, with the FTSE mining index sinking 3.5pc, its biggest daily decline
since May. Metal prices were hit by talk of destocking in China and the banking
crisis in Cyprus.

Yesterday, Anglo American topped the blue-chip loserboard, retreating 47p to
£17.73.

However, broker Jefferies said it was advising clients to buy both Rio Tinto, up
28p to £31.35, and BHP Billiton, down 20p to £19.61. Christopher LaFemina said:
"Patient investors who buy highquality miners such as Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton
at current levels will be rewarded over time."

Marks & Spencer faded 5.7 to 392.3p as sources close to Qatar continued to play
down recent speculation about a takeover bid from the country's sovereign wealth
fund. However, one trader said there is "something going on" and was adamant
another party is casting an eye over the retail stalwart.

National Grid marked time at 392.4p, despite Credit Suisse raising its target
price on the power distributor to 800p from 707p. The broker upped its rating on
hopes of a higher dividend, adding: "National Grid expects to announce a new
dividend policy by May 16 (we think as soon as late March). We see around a 70pc
probability of a positive outcome."

BAE Systems also failed to move higher amid bid speculation. Traders claimed a
US buyer, possibly either General Dynamics or Lockheed Martin, is stalking the
company. The shares, though, were flat at 393.4p.

On a more positive tack, Royal Bank of Scotland benefited from a Liberum upgrade
to "buy" on valuation grounds. The shares rallied 6.6 to 300.2p.

Engineer Smiths Group edged up 2p to £13.20 following news of a 6pc increase in
dividend after generating interim pre-tax profits of £223m on a 6pc increase in
half-year revenue of £1.4bn.

Among the smaller companies, baker Greggs dipped 43½ to 502½p after
disappointing annual results. Traders were concerned as the mid-cap group's 2012
like-for-like sales were down 2.7pc and margins have weakened.

HSBC downgraded airline company Flybe Group to "neutral" and lowered its target
price to 50p from 70p. However, that did not stop the shares from gaining 1¾ to
reach 48½p. Asos rallied the most in three months after the UK's biggest
online-only fashion retailer said quarterly sales soared 37pc. The shares jumped
244p to £33.55.

FTSE 250-listed Bank of Georgia improved 30p to £14.83 as Cannacord Genuity took
up coverage with a "buy" rating. Analyst Gareth Hunt said: "Bank of Georgia
offers investors exposure to a 'traditional' loan-driven, high-return banking
model. We believe the bank can continue to deliver double-digit net income
growth while simultaneously generating around 20pc return on equity, and also
maintaining regulatory capital ratios of around 19pc."

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              388 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

Countrywide shares brighten up a grey day as Budget renews optimism;
Market report

BYLINE: Ben Harrington

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 763 words


ESTATE agency giant Countrywide leapt 13.4pc on its first day of "grey market"
trading as it returned to listed life after six years in private hands.

According to Bloomberg, Countrywide shares gained 47 to 397p after being priced
on Tuesday at 350p, the top of the initial public offering range.

Dealers chased Countrywide higher amid hopes that the company - whose brands
include Bairstow Eves, Churchills and Hamptons International - will benefit from
an increase in the volume of house sales following the Budget. George Osborne
yesterday revealed plans to help people buy homes without saving up a big
deposit, announcing a Help to Buy scheme available from 2014 for people wanting
to buy a home, old or new, with the Government offering mortgage guarantees
totalling £130bn.

Housebuilding companies' shares reacted positively to another Budget initiative
that will offer interest-free loans for five years for people who want to buy
new-build homes. The loans will be worth up to 20pc of the value of homes, up to
a maximum price of £600,000, with the buyer contributing 5pc as a deposit.

After the announcement, Barratt Developments jumped to the top of the FTSE 250
leaderboard, gaining 15.8 to 255.6p. Taylor Wimpey was not far behind, rising 5¼
to 90.8p, while Redrow put on 7.4 to 191.4p, Bellway advanced 47p to £11.88 and
Persimmon added 38½p to £10.10.

Overall, the FTSE 100 slipped 8.62 points to 6432.70 and the FTSE 250 dipped
just 5.24 points to 14030.68.

Toby Morris, senior sales trader at CMC Markets, said: "Traders gave a muted
response to George Osborne's Budget and response from Ed Miliband that bordered
on the ridiculous."

Aviva was one of the worst-performing blue-chip stocks, retreating 8.2 to 315p,
as it traded ex-dividend.

Some mining companies remained in the doldrums after the sector took a pounding
on Tuesday, with the FTSE mining index sinking 3.5pc, its biggest daily decline
since May. Metal prices were hit by talk of destocking in China and the banking
crisis in Cyprus.

Yesterday, Anglo American topped the blue-chip loserboard, retreating 47p to
£17.73.

However, broker Jefferies said it was advising clients to buy both Rio Tinto, up
28p to £31.35, and BHP Billiton, down 20p to £19.61. Christopher LaFemina said:
"Patient investors who buy high-quality miners such as Rio Tinto and BHP
Billiton at current levels will be rewarded over time."

Marks & Spencer faded 5.7 to 392.3p as sources close to Qatar continued to play
down recent speculation about a takeover bid from the country's sovereign wealth
fund. However, one trader said there is "something going on" and was adamant
another party is casting an eye over the retail stalwart.

National Grid marked time at 392.4p, despite Credit Suisse raising its target
price on the power distributor to 800p from 707p. The broker upped its rating on
hopes of a higher dividend, adding: "National Grid expects to announce a new
dividend policy by May 16 (we think as soon as late March). We see around a 70pc
probability of a positive outcome."

BAE Systems also failed to move higher amid bid speculation. Traders claimed a
US buyer, possibly either General Dynamics or Lockheed Martin, is stalking the
company. The shares, though, were flat at 393.4p.

On a more positive tack, Royal Bank of Scotland benefited from a Liberum upgrade
to "buy" on valuation grounds. The shares rallied 6.6 to 300.2p.

Engineer Smiths Group edged up 2p to £13.20 following news of a 6pc increase in
dividend after generating interim pre-tax profits of £223m on a 6pc increase in
half-year revenue of £1.4bn.

Among the smaller companies, baker Greggs dipped 43½ to 502½p after
disappointing annual results. Traders were concerned as the mid-cap group's 2012
like-for-like sales were down 2.7pc and margins have weakened.

HSBC downgraded airline company Flybe Group to "neutral" and lowered its target
price to 50p from 70p. However, that did not stop the shares from gaining 1¾ to
reach 48½p.

Asos rallied the most in three months after the UK's biggest online-only fashion
retailer said quarterly sales soared 37pc. The shares jumped 244p to £33.55.

FTSE 250-listed Bank of Georgia improved 30p to £14.83 as Cannacord Genuity took
up coverage with a "buy" rating. Analyst Gareth Hunt said: "Bank of Georgia
offers investors exposure to a 'traditional' loan-driven, high-return banking
model. We believe the bank can continue to deliver double-digit net income
growth while simultaneously generating around 20pc return on equity, and also
maintaining regulatory capital ratios of around 19pc."

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              389 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            MAIL ON SUNDAY (London)

                             March 18, 2012 Sunday

LENGTH: 757 words


NEWBUY CUTS THE RISK OF MORTGAGES a[#x20ac]" FOR LENDERS

CASH GUARANTEE TO EASE HOMES CRISIS IS BRANDED A `BUNG' FOR BIG HOUSEBUILDERS

BY RICHARD DYSON

HOUSING Minister Grant Shapps joined David Cameron last week to announce what
was billed as the Government's big housing initiative a[#x20ac]" the NewBuy
scheme.

This aims to offer mortgages of up to 95 per cent of a property's value, meaning
buyers with deposits of just five per cent can buy a home.

Cameron said: `We have lenders who are not lending, so builders cannot build, so
the buyers cannot buy a[#x20ac]" and it needs the Government to step in and help
unblock the market.'

With increasing numbers of would-be buyers trapped in accommodation where
monthly rent often far exceeds the cost of a mortgage, many agree there is an
urgent need for action. But is the NewBuy scheme the answer?

How does NewBuy work?

AFTER the credit crunch, lenders withdrew most mortgages where borrowers had
less than a 15 per cent deposit. Where such mortgages remained, interest rates
were painful.

With house prices stubbornly high, this meant new buyers suddenly had to find
far bigger deposits a[#x20ac]" up to _640,000 in Britain's costlier regions,
such as the South-East.

NewBuy tries to solve this problem. Housebuilders and the Government have
contributed to a fund that will protect lenders from losses if borrowers fail to
meet their repayments and properties are sold at a loss.

NewBuy will allow lenders to claim up to nine per cent of a property's value if
this happens. In return for this reduced risk, participating lenders are
offering lower rates to borrowers.

Will I qualify and what properties can I buy?

BORROWERS can buy in single or joint names and it can be their first home or a
move up the ladder. Borrowers will need a deposit of between five and ten per
cent. The property must be a newly built house or flat priced under _6500,000
and marketed by participating builders.

So far these include Taylor Wimpey, Linden, Redrow, Persimmon, Bovis, Barratt,
Crest Nicholson and Bellway.

Who is lending and how much will the mortgages cost?

NATIONWIDE Building Society, Barclays and NatWest Home Loans have so far
released mortgage details under the NewBuy tag. Halifax and Santander have said
they will offer loans shortly. Only fixed rates are available over a range of
years.

NatWest's deals are at 4.29 per cent (two years) or 4.99 per cent (five years)
with fees of _6499. Barclays' are dearer at 4.99 per cent (two years) and 5.89
per cent (four years), also with a _6499 fee. Nationwide offers a three-year
rate of 5.69 per cent and a five-year at 5.99 per cent, both with a _6999 fee.

Fees can be added to loans in all cases. Lenders will undertake their normal
credit and income checks and early redemption penalties are likely to apply for
the length of the fixed rates. Once the fixed terms are over, borrowers revert
to lenders' standard variable rates. The hope is that they will then have enough
equity to qualify for other, mainstream mortgages if they wish to switch.

What are the risks?

ALTHOUGH NewBuy cuts the risks for lenders it doesn't reduce them for borrowers.
If your home is repossessed and sold at a loss you will be liable for any
shortfall between the sale price and the mortgage. In other words, it will not
make any difference that your lender has claimed losses from the NewBuy
`emergency buffer'.

The other major risk is that all newly built property is difficult to value and
there is a possibility of overpaying. Where a deposit is merely five per cent,
this leads to a greater risk of negative equity.

Lenders say they have learnt from the years before the financial crisis when
some developers sought to inflate or disguise the real values of their homes
with a range of complex incentives such as cashbacks, rental guarantees or
furnishings. Lenders say they will seek accurate valuations and be alert to
possible `price distortions'. Some critics have already branded NewBuy as a
`taxpayer-funded bung for big housebuilders'. Others are more moderate, but
still urge caution. Matt Griffith of lobby group pricedout.org.uk, which
represents those who cannot afford to buy, says: `NewBuy is not the greatest
scheme. I would not be surprised to see considerable numbers of purchasers in
negative equity come the next election.'

Mortgage expert David Hollingworth of broker London & Country in Bath, Somerset,
says: `NewBuy does improve the availability of mortgages for those with small
deposits, but borrowers need to remember that the smaller their deposit, the
higher the risk of negative equity.'

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2012 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              390 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 24, 2015 Tuesday

Washington: Housing reform bill gives Ginnie Mae larger role

LENGTH: 247  words

DATELINE: Washington


The National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the following news
release:

Last week, three moderate Democratic representatives introduced legislation they
say is aimed at protecting the 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage through a new
program involving government-sponsored enterprise Ginnie Mae.

Reps. John Delaney, D-Md., John Carney, D-Del., and Jim Himes, D-Conn.,
introduced the "Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act" on Thursday. The
bill would establish an insurance program through Ginnie Mae.
Government-guaranteed, single-family and multi-family mortgage-backed securities
would be supported by a minimum of 5 percent private sector capital, with the
remaining 95 percent of risk shared between Ginnie and a private reinsurer. The
bill would also wind down GSEs Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and allow them to be
sold and recapitalized.

NAFCU staff will review the bill and continues to monitor the housing finance
reform debate for its effect on credit unions.

In the last Congress, The Senate Banking Committee and the House Financial
Services Committee both reported Housing Finance Reform bills, but neither saw
action before the full Senate or House.

NAFCU continues to push for housing finance reform that guarantees access to the
secondary mortgage market for credit unions, and ensures fair pricing based on
loan quality rather than volume.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              391 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Manufactured Home Loans Back Issue

                           September 25, 1987, Friday

By ANDREW ALBERT

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Green Tree Acceptance Corp. is about to take its first step into the public
market for asset-backed securities, selling $75 million in double A notes
collateralized by loans for manufactured homes.

The St. Paul-based lender plans to win the high rating by using a letter of
credit to guarantee payment on part of the issue, according to John W. Brink,
Green Tree's treasurer and chief financial officer. He said the issue is
expected to have an average life of between five and six years. Interest and
principal payments will be made monthly.

Paperwork for the deal was done in advance through a shelf registration that
underwriter Merrill Lynch & Co. has filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. The notes will be sold through a tax advantaged real estate mortgage
investment conduit.

A Merrill official said the deal would be priced in the "very near future." "We
sell loans every quarter," said Mr. Brink, adding that Green Tree would likely
return to the public market in the future.

Manufactured houses are similar in appearance to mobile homes, but they are
usually larger and not as equipped for transport. Loans for manufactured homes
are considered less secure than conventional home mortgages, partly because they
are financed as personal property instead of real estate. In addition, buyers of
manufactured homes generally earn lower incomes than owners of conventional
single-family homes.

Green Tree, with about $2.7 billion in receivables, is among the nation's
largest lenders to purchasers of manufactured and mobile homes.

In July, Merrill Lynch closed a $150 million private placement of securities
backed by Green Tree's mobile home loans. It was the fourth private asset-backed
offering that either Merrill or Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. handled for the
firm.

Meanwhile, Green Tree has begun advertising its desire to purchase mobile home
loan portfolios with values greater than $10 million. Mr. Brink said any loan
purchases would supplement the company's origination activities conducted
through 40 offices across the country.

SECTION: THRIFTS AND MORTGAGES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 348 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1987 American Banker, Inc.


                              392 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               September 28, 1992

HUD Financing Limit Repealed

BYLINE: By TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A congressional conference committee has voted to repeal the Department of
Housing and Urban Development's limitation on financing closing costs into
government-insured mortgages.

After passage of the 1990 National Affordable Housing Act, HUD prohibited home
buyers from rolling more than 57% of their closing costs into Federal Housing
Administration guaranteed mortgages.

HUD Secretary Jack Kemp has repeatedly warned that eliminating the 57% limit
could increase the rate of default.

In a letter to the House Appropriations Committee earlier this year, Secretary
Kemp threatened to recommend a veto of the bill based on its FHA provisions
alone.

Eliminating the 57% limit will cause an additional 3,700 FHA defaults annually,
HUD estimated.

"The 57% ratio was determined by the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse to be
necessary to meet the capital requirements mandated in NAHA, and at the same
time to reduce FHA's default rate below 11%," Secretary Kemp wrote.

HUD earlier this year said the fund has a real economic deficit of $ 2.7
billion, reflecting anticipated losses on FHA loans originated before reforms
were implemented.

HUD and its critics agree that the financial health of FHA's Mutual Mortgage
Insurance Fund is improving, but they disagree about the fund's current status
and the degree of risk posed by removing the 57% limitation.

However, the Mortgage Bankers Association contends that management reforms and
statutory loan-to-value limitations are reducing FHA's default rate.

The 57% limit may actually increase risk to the FHA by steering low-risk
borrowers toward private mortgage insurance, according to MBA.

The National Association of Realtors and the National Association of Home
Builders also had lobbied for a repeal of the 57% limit.

Under the 1990 housing law, single-family FHA mortgages cannot have an LTV that
exceeds 98.75% of a home's appraised value for homes under $ 50,000 or 97.75% of
the appraised value for homes valued above $ 50,000.

Closing costs are included in this calculation, but the up-front FHA mortgage
insurance premium is excluded from the LTV calculation.

MBA estimated that for a $ 70,000 home with closing costs of 2%, the homebuyer
would need an additional $ 572 at closing after HUD implemented the 57% ratio.

In addition to repealing HUD's 57% limitation, the appropriations bill raises
the maximum FHA loan amount to 75% of the Freddie Mac/Fannie Mae loan limit.

Currently, this would raise the FHA ceiling in high-cost areas to almost $
152,000 from the current limit of $ 124,875.

The FHA changes were included in an appropriations bill for HUD, Veterans
Affairs and independent agencies last week, although actual legislative language
was not available as NMN went to press.

The changes are expected to increase FHA business.  The House Appropriations
Committee had estimated that raising the FHA mortgage ceiling and eliminating
the 57% limitation would generate $ 43 million in additional FHA insurance
premiums annually.

However, the appropriations bill will reduce the aggregate loan guarantee limit
for the FHA next year.

In fiscal 1993, FHA will be able to insure $ 57.1 billion in single-family
mortgages, down from a cap of $ 60 billion in fiscal 1992.

During fiscal 1991, the FHA endorsed $ 50 billion in single-family mortgages for
insurance.

The Government National Mortgage Association will see its cap for securitization
of mortgages increase to $ 77.7 billion under the bill.

In 1992, GNMA was limited to securitization of $ 74.7 billion in mortgages.

In 1991, GNMA made $ 66.2 billion commitments for mortgage-backed securities.

MBA said the changes will increase FHA's portfolio of sound loans.  Currently,
low-risk borrowers are choosing private mortgage insurance over FHA, according
to mortgage bankers.

"As an insurance fund, the FHA needs that good, solid homebuyer in its portfolio
so it can do the low-balance, low-income loan," said Michael Ferrell,
legislative counsel for the MBA.

Mr. Ferrell said he doubts the Administration will consider vetoing the
appropriations bill over the proposed FHA changes.

The bill includes funding for a space station supported by the Administration,
and veterans programs.

In the area of Veterans Affairs, the bill would change the so called "no-bid"
formula on foreclosure of homes with VA guarantees.

Mortgage bankers say the change will increase the cost to lenders when a
VA-backed mortgage goes into foreclosure.

In addition, the change is retroactive and will apply to VA-backed mortgages
already in existence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              393 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Maryland Thrift Says Deposits Are Safe From Subsidiary's Mortgage-Debt Woes

                            August 20, 1985, Tuesday

By David LaGesse; American Banker


Officers at Community Savings & Loan Association, a privately insured thrift in
Maryland and parent of the troubled Epic group of real estate companies,
continued to say yesterday that deposits at the thrift remained safe from
problems at Epic.

Epic officers stunned the market for mortgage-backed securities on Friday with
the announcement that some of its privately issued securities were suffering
from late payments by holders of the underlying mortgages. The late payments
only affect some of the $1 billion in mortgage-backed securities that Epic has
used to finance its syndications business in single-family residences.

The most pressing question for regulators was the impact of Epic's problems on
Community, whose depositor lines began growing on Saturday with the awareness of
Epic's problems. State regulators officially said the late payments on Epic
securities held no apparent threat to Community, whose deposits of more than
$360 million are insured by the Maryland Deposit Insurance Fund.

But observers questioned whether Community might have made loans to Epic's
partnerships, added payment guarantees, or even invested its equity in Epic's
partnerships, possibly leading to severe losses at the thrift if the real estate
group's borrowers actually default.

In a related development, underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs & Co. said
yesterday that a default of the Maryland thrift ''could represent significant
problems'' for the mortgage insurer of the recent $5.275 million Alabama Housing
Finance Authority multifamily residential development bond issue.

Press reports on Monday said the thrift was owed as much as $56 million by the
Epic companies - loans made by the thrift to make up for as much as a $16
million monthly cash shortfall in Epic's real estate syndications.

But Community's officers, many of whom also run the much larger Epic companies,
said Friday and Monday that they expected there to be ''no effect on
Community.''

An officer at the Maryland Deposit Insurance Fund, which took over the private
Maryland Savings-Share Deposit Insurance Corp., said it was monitoring the
situation closely at Community but planned no immediate action. Before
responding, regulators must wait to see if Epic indeed defaults on any of its
mortgage-backed securities and to see what effect that would have on Community,
said Norm Silverstein, the fund's director.

Wall Street traders reported Monday that prices on other government-guaranteed
mortgage securities continued to rise, perhaps as a response to the new problems
in privately guaranteed mortgage securities.

A similar ''flight-to-quality'' occurred after BankAmerica Corp. announced a $95
million loss last year from private mortgage-backed securities it had
guaranteed. Those securities, backed by apparently worthless guarantees from
small insurance firms, were found to be backed by commercial real estate with
grossly inflated values.

While the numbers in Epic's case appear even larger, traders report that overall
losses would probably be smaller because of the different nature of the
underlying collateral. If Epic's mortgages must be liquidated to pay off the
security holders, the value of the underlying single-family homes would likely
cover the principal - if not also the interest - due to holders of the mortgage
securities.

Many of the home loans and related securities also carry mortgage insurance from
major companies, an assurance that the potential loss is spread out and that the
loans come under the scrutiny of respected underwriters.

But if the Epic securities actually suffer defaults - the late payments
apparently enjoy some remaining grace periods - the impact, nonetheless, would
ripple through the market for fixed-income securities, particularly for
mortgage-backed securities.

Epic said Friday that some of its limited partners, who invest in single-family
homes through Epic syndications, were late in making payments on mortgages, also
received through Epic. Epic issued mortgage-backed securities, which are
interests in pools of mortgages that are sold to institutional investors, to
finance purchases by the limited partnerships.

But the complex financing arrangements ground to a halt after Aug. 8, when the
Federal Home Loan Bank Board told officials at Community that the thrift must
sell the Epic syndication business to qualify for federal deposit insurance.
Like most thrifts in Maryland that remain under the Maryland Deposit Insurance
Fund, Community must qualify for federal insurance by year's end or face
liquidation.

Epic's officers said they could no longer raise money in the capital markets
once they were told that Epic must be sold, though observers have questioned if
the company has quietly exacerbated its problems to gain more time from the Bank
Board to sell its syndication business.

Over the last decade, Epic created a highly profitable business buying
single-family homes and repackaging them as tax shelters. Epic would buy model
houses and lease them back to the builders, or buy unoccupied houses in large
tract developments and rent them.

Epic said it now owns more that 20,000 single-family houses, worth a total of
$1.5 billion.

To finance the purchases of the houses, Epic sold securities that were backed by
the mortgages that the tax shelter partnerships took out. The mortgages were
bundled into pools and sold to large institutional investors.  Epic continues to
service the mortgages - to collect payments from the limited partners for
dispersal to the owners of the mortgage securities.

It is some of those payments to those large institutional investors that Epic
has not been able to make.

The mortgage insurance companies that guaranteed at least parts of Epic's loans
and securities are following the situation closely. Mortgage Guaranty Insurance
Corp. in Milwaukee has a potential exposure of $60 million to $70 million if all
of Epic's loans and securities go sour, said John McCormack, MGIC president.

He said that MGIC provided insurance on both the primary loans that Epic would
write for its limited partnerships that bought the homes, and also provided some
insurance for the performance of the pools of mortgages that backed the security
sales.

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1045 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1985 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              394 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                             March 23, 2010 Tuesday

Biz Break: A 'fragile' real estate recovery; plus: Google-China dispute

BYLINE: By Frank Michael Russell frussell@mercurynews.com

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY; News; Local; Business; High-Tech; Columnists; Opinion;
Science and Tech; Columnists

LENGTH: 687 words


Today: Reports show a "fragile" recovery in the nation's housing market. A
Chinese Internet official criticizes Google's move to redirect users to its Hong
Kong search engine. Adobe Systems releases a bullish forecast for its current
quarter.

Home sales fall

The nation's real estate recovery may be in trouble, at least according to a
report today from the National Association of Realtors.

Existing-home sales nationwide were down 0.6 percent last month to a seasonally
adjusted rate of 5.02 million homes, the association reported.

"Although sales have been higher than year-ago levels for eight straight months
and home prices are much more stable compared to the past few years, the housing
recovery is fragile at the moment," Lawrence Yun, the Realtors' chief economist,
said in a statement today.

Nationwide, the median sales price last month was $165,100, down 1.8 percent
from a year earlier.

More real estate news

Mortgage giants: The real estate market has benefited in recent months from
support by the government   in the form of tax credits for many homebuyers, as
well as a federal takeover in September 2008 of mortgage giants Freddie Mac and
Fannie Mae.

According to an Associated Press report, lawmakers in Washington today are
considering how to put the mortgage market back in good shape. Treasury
Secretary Timothy Geitner told the House Financial Services Committee that
there's "some role for a guarantee of some sort" from the government for
mortgage securities, according to AP.

KB Home: The California homebuilder reported a $54.7 million loss for its most
recent quarter, an improvement from a $58.1 million loss a year earlier. KB
Home's revenue dropped 14 percent to $264 million.

"Encouraging data in recent months suggest that a number of housing markets may
be stabilizing or starting to rebound, though we do not yet see, in many
respects, a sustained nationwide recovery," KB Home CEO Jeffrey Mezger said in a
statement.

Google's dispute with China

The Chinese government today criticized Google's decision to redirect users of
its Google.cn search site to its uncensored site in Hong Kong.

"This is totally wrong," a Chinese government Internet official told the Xinhua
News Agency, according to an Associated Press report. "We're uncompromisingly
opposed to the politicization of commercial issues, and express our discontent
and indignation to Google for its unreasonable accusations and conducts."

Google's move came after it said in January that it was no longer willing to
censor search results on its Chinese site after the Mountain View Internet giant
was hit by a cyberattack from within China.

In a blog post Monday, David Drummond, Google's chief legal officer, described
redirecting users to the Hong Kong site as a "sensible solution" to the dispute.

Adobe earnings

San Jose graphic-design and Internet software maker Adobe Systems reported
earnings for its most recent quarter just after the stock markets closed this
afternoon.

Revenue jumped 9 percent from a year earlier to $858.7 million. However, profit
dropped nearly 19 percent to $127.2 million.

Adobe forecast sales in its current quarter of $875 million to $925 million. The
outlook exceeded expectations of Wall Street analysts, according to Bloomberg
News.

"The market trends enabling our diverse business remain strong and we are
bullish about the upcoming launches of Flash Player and Creative Suite," Adobe
CEO Shantanu Narayen said in a statement accompanying the results.

Silicon Valley tech stocks

Up: Apple, Cisco Systems, Oracle, Intel, Hewlett-Packard, VMware.

Down: Google, Gilead Sciences, eBay, Yahoo.

The blue chip Dow Jones industrial average: Up 102.94, or 0.95 percent, to
10,888.83.

The tech-heavy Nasdaq composite index: Up 19.84, or 0.83 percent, to 2,415.24.

And the widely watched Standard & Poor's 500 index: Up 8.36, or 0.72 percent, to
1,174.17.

Check in weekday afternoons for the 60-Second Business Break, a summary of news
from Mercury News staff writers, The Associated Press, Bloomberg News and other
wire services. Contact Frank Russell at 408-920-5876. Follow him on Twitter at
http://twitter.com/mercspike .

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2010 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              395 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 18, 2015 Sunday

Washington: FHFA releases new market goals for GSEs

LENGTH: 336  words

DATELINE: Washington


The National Association of Federal Credit Unions has issued the following news
release:

The Federal Housing Finance Agency yesterday released a 2015 scorecard for
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Common Securitization Solutions LLC that outlines
goals for the entities, including furthering credit availability and foreclosure
prevention activities for consumers.

The goals advance those outlined in FHFA's Strategic Plan for the
Conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. They include:

safely and soundly maintain credit availability and foreclosure prevention
activities for new and refinanced mortgages to foster a resilient housing
market;
 reduce taxpayer risk through increasing the role of private capital in the
mortgage market; and
 build a new single-family securitization infrastructure for use by the
government-sponsored enterprises and adaptable for use by other participants in
the secondary housing market.

"Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac made significant progress toward achieving the goals
in FHFA's Strategic Plan for the Conservatorships last year and we look forward
to building on that progress in 2015," FHFA Director Mel Watt said in response
to accomplishments made last year by the GSEs. "These objectives will allow FHFA
to work with Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Common Securitization Solutions to
build a strong, vibrant national housing finance market, which will create new
homeownership and rental opportunities for existing and potential borrowers."

GSEs, specifically Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, are an important liquidity source
for credit union mortgages. NAFCU has commented on FHFA's strategic goals and
the single-security issue in past comment letters to the agency.

As the 114th Congress begins, NAFCU continues to advocate for housing reform
that guarantees access for credit unions to the secondary mortgage market, and
fair prices based on loan quality rather than volume.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              396 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 20, 2013

How Large a Role for Government In Finance?

BYLINE: Edward Demarco

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 4 Vol. 37 No. 34

LENGTH: 1571  words


At the most fundamental level, the key question in housing finance reform is
what, and how large, should be the role of the federal government?

Let me start with a brief review of some basic economics that many of you are
familiar with, but at times gets lost in the policy debate on housing. A typical
way of considering the government's role in the marketplace is in the context of
a potential market failure. Broadly speaking, in housing finance there are at
least two potential market failures that are often considered; each may lead to
an under-provision of mortgage credit.

A potential market failure could arise in housing finance if market participants
have undue or unnecessary concerns about the ongoing stability and liquidity of
mortgage credit in a purely private market across various economic environments.
If this view prevails in the housing market, less credit will be provided than
would be the case in the absence of this type of uncertainty. The government
response to this type of potential market failure could take a number of
approaches, ranging from establishing standards and greater transparency for the
market; to providing liquidity or credit support under certain market
conditions; to providing a government guarantee that largely eliminates
uncertainty.

Another potential market failure is what is often thought of as the positive
externality associated with homeownership. In this view, the benefits of
homeownership extend beyond the individual household to the broader aspects of
society, hence if left solely to the market the number of homeowners will be
less than optimal. A common government approach to increase market demand is to
provide some type of subsidy or other assistance to encourage or facilitate such
consumption. Direct subsidies to assist with down payments, lower the cost of
mortgage credit, or ease the eligibility terms for a mortgage are methods of
delivering subsidies through the housing finance market. Other government
policies beyond the housing finance market also are used. Prominent among these
is the mortgage interest tax deduction.

The country's housing finance system evolved over the years to address both of
these issues. I could spend much time going over that history, but for
simplicity let me make two points.

First, FHA, VA and other direct government credit guarantee programs have
historically targeted certain borrowers that may lack access to credit or where
the public policy goal was to subsidize financing to encourage homeownership.
Ginnie Mae aids this process by providing a securitization vehicle to broaden
access to capital markets for certain government credit programs.

Second, the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were
established to promote liquidity and provide stability in housing finance on a
national basis. They accomplished this task by linking mortgage originators to
capital markets. They were established as relatively unique entities that were
chartered by Congress, owned by private shareholders, provided a specific set of
benefits not available to other companies, and given a public mission.

The general notion of GSE status resulted in an important benefit, the ability
to fund their operations at rates lower than other private sector companies.
Some amount of this benefit was passed on to borrowers in terms of lower rates,
but over the years questions were raised in terms of how much of that benefit
remained with management and shareholders. Over time, other requirements were
added to their mission, through mandates like the affordable housing goals,
which were intended to recapture some of those benefits for the public.

While there does not seem to be broad agreement in Washington on many issues,
there does seem to be relatively broad agreement that the Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac model of the past posed systemic risk and ultimately failed. That model
relied on investors providing funding for housing at preferential rates based on
a perception of government support. That perception ultimately turned out to be
correct and has resulted in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac drawing $187.5 billion in
funds from Treasury as of Dec. 31, 2012.

With the collapse of the private securitization market in 2007, and its limited
recovery to date, we are left with a single-family market dominated by
government support. At the end of 2012, there was $10 trillion in single-family
mortgage debt outstanding. About 13% was guaranteed through direct government
programs, 52% was owned or guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and the
remainder not guaranteed by the federal government. The non-government share
largely reflects pre-crisis private-label securities.

On a flow basis, the numbers are much different. Measured by securities
issuance, the proportion supported by the government is over 90%.

I think it is clear that the government's role in housing finance will not
recede to zero. FHA and other traditional government credit programs are
typically what are used to address credit market failures or to achieve public
policy goals, and I would expect that to continue. Whether the targeting,
structure, and other aspects of these programs should be reconsidered will be an
important part of the housing finance reform debate. Deciding what part of that
market should be served by the traditional government credit programs is
essential to framing the debate for the government's role in the rest of the
market.

For the remainder of the market, I perceive a consensus among policymakers that
we need to get private capital back into the market. In this context, most
people are referring to private capital absorbing the credit risk that is
supported by the federal government through the financial support currently
provided to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

There are two broad ways that private capital could be employed to take on
credit risk. One is through issuers of mortgage-backed securities or other
financial institutions guaranteeing the credit on those securities by
maintaining appropriate levels to capital. I will refer to this as an
"issuer-based approach." Another is for securities to be issued or structured in
such a way that market participants themselves advance the capital to absorb
credit risk, or what I will refer to as a "securities-based approach." Both
approaches could be used in the near term to attract private capital. However,
in considering structural reform of our housing finance system, each approach
has benefits and questions that need to be fully considered.

An issuer-based approach is generally associated with a financial institution
guaranteeing principal and interest repayment to investors. In this model, the
issuer's guarantee is backed by its shareholders' capital.

In general, proposals to establish an issuer-based future structure with a
government guarantee have some common elements. These proposals would rely on
federally chartered or approved entities that would have the ability to issue
explicitly guaranteed securities. The entities would be regulated for capital
adequacy and overall safety and soundness, and there would be a payment of an
insurance fee to the federal government for the use of the explicit guarantee.
These types of proposals make clear that the government guarantee would only
apply to securities issued, and not to the equity of actual issuers. And they
often assume private mortgage insurance would be required at the loan level for
low down payment mortgages.

While that sounds like a novel concept, it is similar to the Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac model. Pre-conservatorship, the enterprises were said to benefit
from an implicit guarantee. There was a safety and soundness regulatory
structure, but it did not have a full range of powers. In the end, the
securities, both debt and MBS, issued by the enterprises were provided financial
support by Treasury, while the shareholders have not benefited from that
support.

Would replacing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's implicit guarantee with an explicit
one, improving the regulatory structure, and charging for the government
guarantee resolve all the shortcomings and inherent conflicts in the old
enterprise model, or would it produce its own problems?

Clearly if the securities offered in a reformed housing finance market have a
government guarantee, those securities will be priced favorably and have a high
degree of liquidity to reflect that guarantee. This would ensure a reliable
source of funds to the housing market.

However, this approach would not provide market-based pricing of credit risk of
the underlying mortgages. In these structures, much like the banking system and
deposit insurance, private sector capital through equity investment would stand
in a first loss position, with a government guarantee that was funded through an
insurance premium being available to cover other losses.

This type of structure requires a significant amount of regulatory safety and
soundness oversight to protect against the moral hazard associated with
providing a government guarantee. It also relies heavily on federal regulators
rather than private investors to measure risk and set the capital needed to
absorb losses across a wide array of possible economic environments. While such
an outcome has certain merit and some attractive features, a number of issues
need further exploration.

Edward DeMarco is acting director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              397 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Orange County Register (California)

                           September 16, 2011 Friday

Lower loan limits may dampen home sales rise

BYLINE: JEFF COLLINS Register writer, The Orange County Register

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D

LENGTH: 471 words


Home sales jumped 10.2percent in the Golden State last month, but a Realtor
economist warned that the congressional debt ceiling debate and federal mortgage
revisions may have killed chances for the trend to continue.

Based on last month's pace of closed home sales, California would see 497,390
single-family homes change hands in a year, the California Association of
Realtors reported Thursday.

But those transactions stemmed from deals signed in July or earlier - "before
the debt ceiling debate in early August and subsequent heightened concern about
the future direction of the economy," said CAR Chief Economist Leslie
Appleton-Young.

State Realtors also have fretted about the end later this month of federal
finance provisions allowing high-dollar homebuyers to qualify for lower cost,
"conforming" mortgages.

"How these events and the impending reduction in the conforming loan limits will
impact home sales and prices in the coming months remain to be seen,"
Appleton-Young added.

Unless Congress steps in, the limit on lower-cost conforming loans will drop to
$625,500 from $729,950 in most "high-cost states" on Oct. 1. The limit
establishes the maximum mortgage amount the Federal Housing Administration,
Fannie Maeand Freddie Maccan buy or guarantee.

CAR warned in June that the decreased loan limits would affect more than 30,000
potential homebuyers in California. The association calculated that 13.3 percent
of Orange County home sales would be ineligible under FHA-backed loans and 6.2
percent of loans sponsored by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would be nixed. The
association also reported:

The median price of an existing single-family home in California - or price at
the midpoint of all sales - dropped 7.4 percent from a year ago to $297,060.

Although down from a year ago, last month's median was the highest since
December.

The median price of an existing condo or townhome was $228,060, down 9.8 percent
from year-ago levels.

Last month's annualized sales projection of 497,390 was up from 457,930 units a
year based on July's sales pace and up from 451,520 units a year based on the
pace in August 2010. CAR projects how many houses would sell in 2011 if sales
continued at August's pace for an entire year.

In Orange County, CAR reported:

The median price of an existing single-family home was $508,910, down 9.4
percent from year-ago levels. (By comparison, DataQuick reported that figure
Wednesday to be $480,000, also down 9.4 percent in the past year.)

House sales rose 9.4 percent (compared with a gain of 13.1 percent reported by
DataQuick).

"August's median price marked the highest since December 2010, signifying that
prices may be stabilizing in some market segments, as investors and first-time
buyers continue to see value and opportunity in the market," said CAR President
Beth L. Peerce.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The median price of an existing single-family home in California is
down 7.4 percent from a year ago to $297,060, but is the highest since December.

DOCUMENT-TYPE:  Story

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 Orange County Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              398 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Bond Buyer

                            June 18, 2008 Wednesday

Housing: Senators Reach Tentative Deal on Stimulus Bill With Bonds

BYLINE: Peter Schroeder And Lynne Funk

SECTION: WASHINGTON; Pg. 4 Vol. 364 No. 32904

LENGTH: 614  words


Senate Republicans and Democrats yesterday reached a tentative agreement on a
bipartisan housing stimulus bill containing several tax-exempt bond provisions,
including $10 billion of additional mortgage revenue bonds for the refinancing
of subprime loans and first-time mortgages, as well as permanent relief from the
alternative minimum tax for housing bonds.

Housing sources said yesterday that Senate leaders are working on final
specifics of the legislation, and could vote on it as soon as today. The sources
said the Senate leaders hope to get support from House leaders on the bill, so
that it can be approved by both chambers and sent to President Bush within the
next few weeks.

"We're cautiously optimistic and we're very pleased that our critical bond and
credit priorities are in the tentative agreement," said Barbara Thompson,
executive director for the National Council of State Housing Agencies.

Senate Banking Committee chairman Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., and ranking
minority member Richard Shelby, R-Ala., announced the agreement yesterday, and
detailed several of its provisions.

The bill would contain nearly all of the tax-exempt bond provisions found in
legislation approved by the House earlier this year, as well as some new items.

A new provision would allow single-family mortgage revenue bonds to be used to
finance mortgages for victims in presidentially declared disaster areas. That
provision would apply to bonds issued after May 1, 2008, and prior to Jan. 1,
2010, and is estimated to cost $96 million over 10 years.

Another new provision would extend and expand certain GO Zone incentives, under
the Gulf Opportunity Act of 2005, to rebuild the local and regional economies
devastated by hurricanes. This provision is estimated to cost $1.3 billion over
ten years.

In addition, the measure contains many tax-exempt bond provisions similar to
those found in the House bill. The additional $10 billion of mortgage revenue
bonds would be provided in 2008 and is estimated to cost $1.475 billion over 10
years. The repeal of the AMT on tax-exempt housing bonds, low-income housing
credit, and the rehabilitation credit would cost $2.093 billion over 10 years.

To minimize the harmful effects of foreclosures, the bill would provide $3.92
billion in supplemental community development block grant funds to communities
hardest hit by foreclosures and delinquencies.

The bill also would simplify technical rules for tax-exempt housing bonds. It
would allow for a one-time refunding of bonds reissued within four years of the
original issuance, and would also update the housing bond rules to conform to
certain aspects of the low-income housing tax credit rules. These proposals
would cost an estimated $592 million over 10 years.

The bill would allow all tax-exempt bonds to be guaranteed temporarily by the
federal home loan banks. Currently, only housing bonds can receive the guarantee
and remain tax-exempt. The estimated cost of this proposal would be $126 million
over 10 years.

In other benefits for multifamily low-income housing, the bill temporarily would
increase the low-income housing tax credit, which is currently set at $2 for
each person residing in a state. In 2008 and 2009, the credit would be increased
an additional 20 cents for each person residing the state for large population
states. For small states, there would be an increase of 10% for the small state
set-aside. This provision is estimated to cost $1.084 billion over 10 years.

In addition, the measure would simplify the technical rules relating to the
low-income housing tax credit for an estimated cost of $254 million over 10
years.

http://www.bondbuyer.com/ http://www.sourcemedia.com/

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: b


                        Copyright 2008 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              399 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

FHLMC Guarantee Mortgate Certificates Lauded

                             March 20, 1981, Friday

By JOHN YOCH

DATELINE: NEW YORK


A First Boston Corp. fixed-income investment analyst has recommended for
portfolio consideration Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. guaranteed mortgage
certificates, although these are not very liquid or widely held. He says they
currently are inexpensive relative to other mortgage related securities.

"If prepayments continue at low levels, GMCs will have yields similar to or
greater than participation certificates, while at the same time affording
shorter average lives and greater certainty of return," Dexter Senft, First
Boston vice president, writes in a recent investment commentary.

The primary advantage of GMCs is that they currently guarantee more rapid
payment of principal than passthrough securities such as Government National
Mortgage Association singlefamily and graduated-payment mortgage pass-through
securities, the commentary said.

The advantages of GMCs are in large part an accident of history, Mr. Senft said
in an interview.

These securities have liberal guaranteed minimum-payment schedules which were
set at times when mortage prepayment activity was brisk, he said. This makes
them attractive relative to pass-through securities when prepayment rates are
low.

Principal on GMCs is paid annually and interest semiannually, in contrast to
pass-throughs which make monthly pro rata payments of interest, principal and
prepayments.

Prepayment Levels Drop

Mortgage prepayments recently have declined to record low levels as the result
of high mortgage rates and slow housing turnover caused by cold weather.

The FHLMC has had to announce minimum paydowns recently on GMCs. For GNMA
single-family and graduated-payment mortgages, as well as FHLMC participation
certificates, the ratio of monthly prepayments to outstanding pools recently has
been around 0.1% or 0.2%, compared with levels of 0.5% to 1% in the late 1970s.

This worst-case prepayment scenario is likely to continue in the foreseeable
future, especially in light of wraparound financing. In this environment, GMCs
will remain attractive relative to pass-throughs, Mr. Senft said.

GMCs had tended to be overpriced after the interest-rate downturn of
second-quarter I980, when prepayments increased. But the market subsequently
swung the other way, and they are now undervalued, he said.

However, "it took a couple of times for them (FHLMC) to announce minimum
payments before it sank in," and prices adjusted downward, he said.

A GNMA might pay amortization of 0.5% to 1.5% per year, in addition to 3% or 4%
in prepayments. But a GMC pays 6% to 8% of the original principal amount, even
though only 50% or so might still be outstanding, he said.

Offsets Illiquidity

This helps offset some of the illiquidity of GMCs. This illiquidity is probably
a primary reason for their relative cheapness, Mr. Senft said.

There are only about $3 billion in GMCs out anding, and the last issue, for $150
million, was Dec. 3, 1979. But investors willing to tolerate illiquidity might
stand to gain in the longer run, Mr. Senft said.

Traders in government agency securities say the GMCs tend to offer 20 to 25
basis points greater yield than passthroughs.

Traders said this advantage might not compensate many for the liquidity giveup,
because the difference is slight in light of current high yields. But one added,
"If you intend to hold to maturity, you obviously want the highest yield."

The GMC, introduced in 1975 to appeal to nontraditional mortgage investors,
allows holders to resell at par to the FHLMC in 15, 20 or 25 years and is not
treated as a mortgage investment for tax purposes.

"It is a method of participating in the mortgage market with a bond-type
instrument," Mr. Senft said.

Commercial banks might want to add GMCs to their trust portfolios, although
their mortgage-related investment portfolio holdings generally are in more
liquid types of securities, he said.

Traders said pension and bond funds seem to be among the more active investors
in GMCs, and funds usually swap them depending on their spread relationships
with Treasury issues.

The FHLMC announced minimum payments for all seven of the issues for which
principal was paid March 15 and had made minimum payments previously on three
issues. The remaining seven issues pay principal on Sept. 15.

FHLMC incurs a deficit if the minimum payments exceed its actual mortgage
principal collections and is now carrying a deficit on all 14 obligations.
Minimum payments continue until the deficits are paid off.

SECTION: Securities; Pg. 65

LENGTH: 750 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1981 American Banker, Inc.


                              400 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                                 July 21, 2016

Republican Platform Softens Stance on Winding Down Fannie, Freddie

BYLINE: Bonnie Sinnock

SECTION: COMPLIANCE & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 930  words


The official platform of the Republican Party has softened language calling for
the end of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, while continuing to demand reform.

The platform that party officials approved at this week's Republican National
Convention in Cleveland states that, "The utility of both agencies should be
reconsidered." That contrasts with the 2012 version of the platform, which
stated, "Both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac should be wound down in size and
scope."

It's unclear what the significance of the change is or why it was made. Top
Republican leaders, including House Financial Services Committee Chairman Jeb
Hensarling, haverepeatedly called for the end of the government-sponsored
enterprises.There is no sign that they have eased up on that view. Additionally,
Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, the Republican vice presidential nominee, is aclose
ally to Hensarlingand has previously endorsed privatizing Fannie and Freddie.

Still, because Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has not weighed in
on the issue, the change in the platform has opened the door to speculation.

"I think they wanted to set a marker out that there are some things that need to
be changed [with the GSEs] but they're not necessarily shutting them down," said
Brian Montgomery, a former Federal Housing Administration commissioner during
the George W. Bush administration and the current vice chairman of Washington,
D.C., consulting firm The Collingwood Group. "I'm just thinking or speculating
that they realize that it's much easier said than done."

Montgomery added historically, party platforms don't necessarily have much
impact on voters' decisions, "but maybe they should."

A Republican administration and Congress would do away with "the jumble of
subsidies and controls that complicate and distort home-buying" at the two GSEs,
according to the 2016 platform.

The change in stance could reflect acknowledgement of and frustration with
ongoing difficulties in removing agencies from the market due to their
continuing outsized presence in it, even as their regulator and conservator has
taken steps to try to reduce taxpayers' exposure.

"For nine years, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have been in conservatorship and the
current administration and Democrats have prevented any effort to reform them,"
the platform states.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency has mandated the agencies scale back their
loan portfolios and, to some extent, the credit risk of loans they securitize;
but the GSEs still buy and guarantee the bulk of the single-family loans in
today's market.

"Nobody has come close to replacing what they do, and so I think that it [the
change in the Republican platform's wording] is just an acknowledgement that the
mortgage market would come pretty close to coming to a halt and Fannie and
Freddie no longer existed," said Brent Nyitray, director of capital markets at
iServe Residential Lending in Stamford, Conn. "The private-label market has just
been largely dormant. That's what I take it to mean."

While the Republican Party may be acknowledging that winding down the GSEs is a
tall order given how they've become entrenched in the market during the last
four year, it has been consistent in signaling that is plans to reduce the range
of loans that they and the FHA guarantee.

"I would assume from the Republican standpoint they're sick and tired of
affordable housing mandates and all that sort of stuff. I certainly would
imagine if Trump wins, that aspect of it will probably be de-emphasized," said
Nyitray.

Lawmakers from lower-cost areas where homes generally cost less than $200,000
traditionally have questioned higher-cost FHA loans, said Montgomery. "They used
to say, 'What are you doing lending to rich people to buy $725,000 homes?' There
aren't many markets where they can do that and that can be the median price in
some of those markets, and now they [the high-cost loan limits] are down to
$625,000, but that still sounds high to some of them. So it doesn't sound like
that view has changed a whole lot."

The 2016 platform states the party would ensure FHA lending does not support
high-income individuals, as opposed to saying it would limit it to helping
first-time home buyers and low- and moderate-income borrowers in 2012. It also
says in 2016 that, "We will end the government mandates that required Fannie
Mae, Freddie Mac, and federally-insured banks to satisfy lending quotas to
specific groups."

The Republicans also said they would "scale back the federal role in the housing
market, promote responsibility on the part of borrowers and lenders, and avoid
future taxpayer bailouts."

With efforts to cultivate private securitization alternative slow to grow, some
believe this could mean a Republican administration would be more open to a
public sector alternative for reducing GSE risk to taxpayers, such as removing
their role as issuers and having them operate more like Ginnie Mae. Ginnie
insures bond payments while lenders act as approved issuers for it. Separate
government agencies insure the credit risk of loans in securitized Ginnie pools.

"I think that the right side of the aisle would be more willing to look at a
model like that that is more palatable and minimizes taxpayer exposure than
having the GSEs continue to issue bonds on their own and have the credit risk
associated with the bonds. I think it's something that should be evaluated,"
said Joseph Murin, a former Ginnie chairman who headed the agency between
January 2008 and August 2009. Murin is currently chairman of the investment
advisory firm JJAM Financial LLC in Pittsburgh.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              401 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                January 17, 1985

MBA Hits User Fees on Housing, Sees Systematic US Withdrawal

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 591 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


The Mortgage Bankers Association of America last week lashed out at what it
called a "systematic pattern of Federal withdrawal from the housing market."

MBA president Robert J. Spiller, in a statement prepared for the annual senior
executives conference here, said the Administration plans for increased fees on
Federal agency mortgage activity are "really disguised tax hikes for moderate-
and middle-income homebuyers."

Earlier Mr. Spiller, chairman of Boston Five Cents Savings Bank, told NTN that
the fees are another manifestation of the Administration's effort to end Federal
involvement with housing without having to publicly justify the withdrawal.

MBA specifically opposed proposals by the Office of Management and Budget --
which have cleared the White House -- to increase closing costs on Federal
Housing Administration and Veterans Administration-insured mortgages.

The OMB proposals, which appear in the fiscal 1986 budget, include a series of
user fees to Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae, as well as additional fees
to users of FHA and VA financing.

"MBA opposes increasing or instituting fees," in this fashion, Mr. Spiller said.

MBA "supports user fees" when they are designed "to make these programs
actuarially sound," when the fees are devoted to covering cost of administering
the programs, including salaries, overhead, and the cost of any defaults.

"The current FHA single-family mortgage insurance program not only covers its
costs but actually makes a profit, as does the GNMA mortgage-backed security
program," the MBA pointed out.

The VA home loan guaranty program, while not self-sustaining currently, is an
entitlement program for veterans that guarantees no-downpayment loans.

Supplemental fees tacked on to FHA, VA, and GNMA programs "could well lead to a
rapid, unceremonious unraveling of their effectiveness."

The proposal to increase FHA up-front mortgage insurance premiums from 3.8% to
5% would add $ 627 to the median FHA transaction -- a $ 52,000 mortgage.

Coupled with the increased GNMA fee that would be passed on to consumers this is
an additional $ 928 an average FHA borrower must pay, MBA estimated.

The increased fee for veterans is more burdensome, Mr. Spiller said.

They would be charged an additional four points at closing on the average VA
loan of $ 63,000.

This would mean an extra $ 2,500 dollars in up-front charges.

Coupled with the GNMA increase, the new charges would amount to about $ 2,900.

If a buyer chose to finance the funding fee, the monthly payments on an average
VA loan would jump by $ 30.

Such an increase also would imply a higher qualifying income for borrowers,
"effectively undercutting the whole purpose of the program," said MBA.

With the added costs to the VA program from the GNMA increase, sellers would
have to pay more points.

They might choose not to sell to veterans using VA financing.

The proposal also includes additional fees to Freddie Mac and Fannie Mac, which
along with GNMA operate at no cost to the government.

These institutions are "pivotal in securing adequate supplies of affordable
mortgage credit."

Mr. Spiller said "emphatically" that the fees "are a dangerous attack on Federal
support for housing in this country."

The OMB proposals are "the latest attempt in a long series of back-door
initiatives that slowly, but exactingly, will cut the legs off programs which
foster home-ownership."

The administration's approach, because of its subtlety, is "that much more
sinister," the MBA president said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              402 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         assetsecuritizationreport.com

                                   July 2016

Republican Platform Softens Stance on Winding Down Fannie, Freddie

BYLINE: Bonnie Sinnock

SECTION: NEWS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 930  words


The official platform of the Republican Party has softened language calling for
the end of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, while continuing to demand reform.

The platform that party officials approved at this week's Republican National
Convention in Cleveland states that, "The utility of both agencies should be
reconsidered." That contrasts with the 2012 version of the platform, which
stated, "Both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac should be wound down in size and
scope."

It's unclear what the significance of the change is or why it was made. Top
Republican leaders, including House Financial Services Committee Chairman Jeb
Hensarling, haverepeatedly called for the end of the government-sponsored
enterprises. There is no sign that they have eased up on that view.
Additionally, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, the Republican vice presidential nominee,
is a close ally to Hensarling and has previously endorsed privatizing Fannie and
Freddie.

Still, because Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has not weighed in
on the issue, the change in the platform has opened the door to speculation.

"I think they wanted to set a marker out that there are some things that need to
be changed [with the GSEs] but they're not necessarily shutting them down," said
Brian Montgomery, a former Federal Housing Administration commissioner during
the George W. Bush administration and the current vice chairman of Washington,
D.C., consulting firm The Collingwood Group. "I'm just thinking or speculating
that they realize that it's much easier said than done."

Montgomery added historically, party platforms don't necessarily have much
impact on voters' decisions, "but maybe they should."

A Republican administration and Congress would do away with "the jumble of
subsidies and controls that complicate and distort home-buying" at the two GSEs,
according to the 2016 platform.

The change in stance could reflect acknowledgement of and frustration with
ongoing difficulties in removing agencies from the market due to their
continuing outsized presence in it, even as their regulator and conservator has
taken steps to try to reduce taxpayers' exposure.

"For nine years, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have been in conservatorship and the
current administration and Democrats have prevented any effort to reform them,"
the platform states.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency has mandated the agencies scale back their
loan portfolios and, to some extent, the credit risk of loans they securitize;
but the GSEs still buy and guarantee the bulk of the single-family loans in
today's market.

"Nobody has come close to replacing what they do, and so I think that it [the
change in the Republican platform's wording] is just an acknowledgement that the
mortgage market would come pretty close to coming to a halt and Fannie and
Freddie no longer existed," said Brent Nyitray, director of capital markets at
iServe Residential Lending in Stamford, Conn. "The private-label market has just
been largely dormant. That's what I take it to mean."

While the Republican Party may be acknowledging that winding down the GSEs is a
tall order given how they've become entrenched in the market during the last
four year, it has been consistent in signaling that is plans to reduce the range
of loans that they and the FHA guarantee.

"I would assume from the Republican standpoint they're sick and tired of
affordable housing mandates and all that sort of stuff. I certainly would
imagine if Trump wins, that aspect of it will probably be de-emphasized," said
Nyitray.

Lawmakers from lower-cost areas where homes generally cost less than $200,000
traditionally have questioned higher-cost FHA loans, said Montgomery. "They used
to say, 'What are you doing lending to rich people to buy $725,000 homes?' There
aren't many markets where they can do that and that can be the median price in
some of those markets, and now they [the high-cost loan limits] are down to
$625,000, but that still sounds high to some of them. So it doesn't sound like
that view has changed a whole lot."

The 2016 platform states the party would ensure FHA lending does not support
high-income individuals, as opposed to saying it would limit it to helping
first-time home buyers and low- and moderate-income borrowers in 2012. It also
says in 2016 that, "We will end the government mandates that required Fannie
Mae, Freddie Mac, and federally-insured banks to satisfy lending quotas to
specific groups."

The Republicans also said they would "scale back the federal role in the housing
market, promote responsibility on the part of borrowers and lenders, and avoid
future taxpayer bailouts."

With efforts to cultivate private securitization alternative slow to grow, some
believe this could mean a Republican administration would be more open to a
public sector alternative for reducing GSE risk to taxpayers, such as removing
their role as issuers and having them operate more like Ginnie Mae. Ginnie
insures bond payments while lenders act as approved issuers for it. Separate
government agencies insure the credit risk of loans in securitized Ginnie pools.

"I think that the right side of the aisle would be more willing to look at a
model like that that is more palatable and minimizes taxpayer exposure than
having the GSEs continue to issue bonds on their own and have the credit risk
associated with the bonds. I think it's something that should be evaluated,"
said Joseph Murin, a former Ginnie chairman who headed the agency between
January 2008 and August 2009. Murin is currently chairman of the investment
advisory firm JJAM Financial LLC in Pittsburgh.

URL: http://www.asreport.com

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: STRUCTUREDFINANCENEWS_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              403 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                January 13, 1986

Freddie Mac to Start Buying 2d Mortgages

BYLINE: By PAUL HERRON

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. will purchase second mortgages from
qualified housing lenders beginning today (Jan. 13).

Michael F. Coffey, acting executive vice president for marketing and sales,
estimated Freddie Mac will buy about $ 1 billion of seconds in 1986.

When the portfolio reaches about $ 500 million -- estimated "late this year" --
the corporation will begin to sell participation certificates backed by the
seconds.

Mr. Coffey said the maximum purchase would be $ 66,625 on owner-occupied,
one-to-four-family properties.

This is half of the maximum loan amount the corporation is authorized to
purchase on single-family homes in all states except Alaska and Hawaii.

Second mortgages offered for sale to Freddie Mac must be fixed-rate, fully
amortizing with maturities from five to 15 years.

Mr. Coffey said in the current market the agency would buy second mortgages that
would provide a yield of 10.5%.  The rate would change with market conditions.

He said the agency will place no restrictions on points, fees or rates charged
by lenders to individual borrowers.

In addition, he said, the agency will not restrict the use of the funds by the
home borrower.

The funds, he said, can be used for home improvements, new business ventures,
college educations, investments, medical expenses and second homes; in fact, for
any purpose, "that is not prohibited by state law."

Lenders not presently servicers in Freddie Mac's home improvement loan program,
including lenders approved to sell HILs, but not active servicers, must apply
specifically for second mortgage seller servicer approval.

The agency terminated its HIL purchase contract plan as of Jan. 10.

Mr. Coffey said the FHLMC's minimum second loan commitment would be $ 25,000,
and added that offers to sell seconds in excess of $ 5 million would be
considered "on a negotiated basis."

Two yields will be offered to sellers: one for loan maturities toward five and
seven years, and another for loan maturities of five to 15 years, he said.

The total financing-to-value is a maximum of 80%.

Thus, a borrower with a home valued at $ 100,000 and a $ 40,000 first mortgage
outstanding may qualify for a $ 40,000 second mortgage.

The seconds program employs the same thorough underwriting procedure used for
first mortgages, Freddie Mac said.

A borrower's monthly debt should not exceed 33%-36% of gross income.

Total monthly debt includes fixed housing costs and other monthly debt.

Fixed housing costs encompass mortgage principal and interest payments for first
and second mortgages, hazard insurance premiums and real estate taxes.

Total monthly debt includes installment debt with 10 or more payments, mortgage
insurance premiums, home owner association dues, condominium maintenance fees,
alimony and child support payments.

Second mortgages eligible for Freddie Mac differ significantly from the home
equity loan product.

The home equity line of credit has a variable interest rate and no fixed term,
where the borrower can draw down funds up to a maximum amount in several draws.

The fixed rate of the seconds program minimizes borrower rate risk.

Another stabilizing feature is the fixed payment.

The corporation will not purchase a second mortgage if the first mortgage
permits negative amortization.

There will be 30-, 60-, 90- and 120-day mandatory commitments.  Pair-offs on
mandatory commitments are available, Mr. Coffey said; 120- and 240-day optional
commitments are also available.

There are no commitment fees on mandatory commitments.

Loans must be originated on FNMA/FHLMC second mortgage instruments (prior to May
1, 1986, FNMA/FHLMC HIL documents with a due-on-transfer rider may be used).

Mr. Coffey said that Freddie Mac not only will closely scrutinize the
creditworthiness of borrower but those institutions from which it purchases
seconds, but when it puts its guarantee on the mortgages "as they are sold to
investors in the form of Freddie Mac securities," it wants to provide the "best
possible incentive to make funds available for housing."

As outlined by Mr. Coffey, Freddie Mac had additional rationale for entering the
second mortgage market.

He said that housing economists estimate that some $ 2 trillion in single-family
equity is available for collateralizing second mortgages, "offering a vast
potential for the homeowners, lender and investor alike."

And the fact that now both Freddie Mac and the Federal National Mortgage
Association are buying second mortgages, will increase competition and
eventually reduce the cost of second mortgage financing for borrowers.

Finally, he said, lenders, in addition to generating new fee and service income,
could better match liabilities with assets by selling their whole second loans
or participations to Freddie Mac.

Freddie mac said the second mortgage industry has vast potential for the
homeowner, the lender and the investor alike.

Only a fraction of the total home equity available for collaterizing seconds has
been tapped.

Demographics have contributed to the recent growth in the industry and are
expected to spur its continuing popularity.

The post-war or baby-boom generation has reached the mid-30s to late-40s age
group, arriving with a substantial amount of equity tied up in housing.

The volume of second originations grew from $ 10 billion in 1978 to an estimated
$ 75 billion in 1985.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture, Michael F. Coffey, executive vice president of the Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corp., fields a question about Freddie Mac's decision to buy
second mortgages.; Graph 1, Lenders Share of Market; Graph 2, Second Mortgage
Originations

                   Copyright 1986 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              404 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 13, 2009

OPEN FORUM: Meeting the Financial Challenges

BYLINE: James Lockhart, Director, Federal Housing Finance Agency

SECTION: Pg. 4 Vol. 33 No. 28

LENGTH: 1509  words


Excerpts Of Mr. Lockhart's Comments Before The Women In Housing and Finance
Symposium In Washington Recently Are Presented As Our Open Forum. (second Of Two
Parts.)

Two additional facilities were also implemented when the conservatorships began.
Under the first, Treasury has purchased $107 billion in mortgage-backed
securities and has made it clear it will continue to be an active buyer. The
second is an unlimited secured credit facility that acts as a liquidity backstop
for Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Home Loan Banks, but it has not been
needed.

Two other critically important programs introduced by the Federal Reserve Bank
in November are helping to reduce mortgage interest rates. Under the first, a
facility of $500 billion or more, the Federal Reserve Bank has purchased $217
billion in Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae mortgage-backed securities
since the beginning of January. The second program is a purchase of up to $100
billion or more in Fannie Mae Freddie Mac, and Federal Home Loan Bank debt, of
which $47 billion has been purchased.

When you add this all up to over a trillion dollars, the U.S. government has
made it critically clear to every investor that it is standing behind Fannie
Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Home Loan Banks. Indeed, we have seen that
these programs have had a very positive impact on mortgage rates, which have
fallen 150 basis points since conservatorship began to 5.03% in Freddie Mac's
latest weekly report. These lower rates provide an important opportunity to do
two things - refinance and modify mortgages to help stabilize housing prices.

As confidence is restored and the present large spread to Treasury rates is
reduced, mortgage rates could move lower because spreads are still 140 basis
points higher than when this started.

We are also hoping lower rates will have a positive impact on the new buyers who
have been on the sidelines waiting "for things to get better" before they buy.

Now turning to the third strategy of instilling best practices in the mortgage
market, FHFA's position has consistently been that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
need to be the leaders in developing mortgage market best practices. They have
to take a leadership role with all mortgage participants to never let the abuses
of 2004 to 2007 recur. In 2007, Fannie and Freddie issued guidance letters to
their lender customers focusing on nontraditional and subprime mortgages.
Crafted by federal depository institution regulators and adopted by many state
financial regulators, the program was designed to be a proactive way for the
enterprises to be sure sellers were clear what mortgages Fannie and Freddie
would buy, guarantee or accept in a private-label mortgage-backed security.

The enterprises have led the industry in developing and implementing strategies
to identify mortgage fraud, and reporting to the Department of the Treasury's
FinCEN database. In late December, FHFA announced Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
will implement a revised Home Valuation Code of Conduct, effective May 1. The
code enhances protections for the independence of appraisers while maintaining
lenders' ability to address unprofessional appraisal practices and ensure
appraisal quality. The code also requires appraisal quality control testing,
reporting on appraiser misconduct, and the creation of the Independent Valuation
Protection Institute.

In January, FHFA announced it will require loan-level identifiers for loan
originators and appraisers beginning Jan. 1, 2010. If originators or appraisers
have contributed to the incidences of mortgage fraud, these identifiers will
enable the enterprises to address the problem. Additional efforts to expand
mortgage fraud prevention and detection are under consideration by the
enterprises and their industry partners, and I hope to be reporting on those
soon.

Well before the conservatorship, we put pressure on the enterprises to reduce
preventable foreclosures through aggressive loan modifications. FHFA took
several strong actions to ensure the maximum effort by the enterprises to modify
loans to prevent foreclosures and also took a leading role in efforts to address
the foreclosure crisis in the PLS market. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the
Federal Home Loan Banks are the largest owners of PLS, with about $250 billion
of once-AAA mortgage-backed securities. Fannie and Freddie's holdings of $178
billion, about 55% have been downgraded to junk levels.

The average price continues to fall from the price of mid-s$60 reported at the
end of December.

These price falls and the other-than-temporary impairments have been a major
destroyer of capital at the GSEs. The only good news is we had their portfolios
capped in 2006 and 2007 when the worst of these securities were issued.

While Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac own or guarantee almost 31 million of the total
55 million mortgages, about 56% of all single-family mortgages, they only
represent 20% of serious delinquencies. Almost the opposite, private-label
mortgage-backed securities represent 15% of the mortgages but 50% of the serious
delinquencies. If we are going to stabilize the housing market, we have to
address that PLS 50%.

When I announced in November the new streamlined modification program developed
jointly with Treasury, HUD, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Hope Now's members, we
were optimistic that it would make immediate inroads on the problem of
increasing foreclosures across the country. It became clear pretty quickly that
the program needed to be even more aggressive to reach more troubled borrowers.
At the same time, the enterprises suspended foreclosures and developed programs
to protect renters living in foreclosed properties. FHFA's Foreclosure
Prevention Report shows that for the first quarter of conservatorship, October
through December, there were almost 24,000 loan modifications, an increase of
76% from the previous quarter. But in the face of millions of families facing
the potential loss of their homes, much more has to be done.

FHFA understands the nation's deep concern over the human tragedies of the
foreclosure crisis.

Significant loan modifications are the best way to help the people involved,
their communities, and the economy. We have not taken a position on the pending
bankruptcy cramdown legislation, but I have said for a long time that forcing
people into bankruptcy is the wrong solution. Aggressive loan modifications,
including, as many PLS investors are now proposing, principal reductions, are
the right solutions. Legislative changes to existing bankruptcy laws should be
approached extremely carefully to avoid unintended consequences for individuals
and for our weakened financial institutions. We have consistently advocated
doing everything possible to give homeowners incentive to accept meaningful loan
modifications rather than endure the hardships of bankruptcy.

That is why FHFA was pleased to work with the White House, the Treasury
Department, the regulators and the enterprises in the development of the
Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan. The plan is a major step in reducing
preventable foreclosures and stabilizing the housing market. The Treasury
Department estimates it will help 7 million to 9 million families refinance or
modify their mortgages. The plan aggressively builds on FDIC's and SMP's
foreclosure prevention efforts with many people teed up to be quick
beneficiaries.

In the Home Affordable Refinance initiative, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will
provide access to low-cost refinancing for responsible homeowners with loans the
enterprises already own or guarantee. Because Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac already
hold the credit risk on these mortgages, no additional credit enhancements, such
as mortgage insurance, will be required. However, we expect existing mortgage
insurance to be rolled over. The program guidelines will allow 4 million to 5
million borrowers to be eligible for a refinanced mortgage with a current
loan-to-value of 80% to 105%. To make refinancing work, second mortgages holders
will have to resubordinate those seconds. Of course, with lower payments on the
primary mortgage, holders of seconds will be better protected.

Fannie and Freddie also are working directly with more than 3,000 loan servicers
across the country to help implement the $75 billion Home Affordable
Modification plan. They estimate that several million of their own mortgages
will be eligible for modifications over the next three years. Modifications need
to be paired with the Federal Housing Administration's expanded and improved
Hope for Homeowners program and the aggressive Troubled Asset Relief Program
efforts to purchase second mortgages. As agents of the Treasury, Fannie Mae as
administrator and Freddie Mac as compliance enforcer will play key roles in the
implementation and ongoing oversight of the modification program.

Given the enterprises' role in the industry as leaders in establishing best
practices, their involvement brings the necessary accountability to a federal
program supported with taxpayer dollars.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              405 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 9, 2011

Many Lenders Want to Save 30-Year Fixed-Rate Loan

BYLINE: Lew Sichelman

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 35 No. 32

LENGTH: 606  words


As the debate begins to unfold concerning the future of housing finance,
panelists at the Mortgage Bankers Association's National Secondary Market
Conference were unanimous in their endorsement of the 30-year fixed-rate
mortgage.

The long-term fixed rate product has been the backbone of the American housing
market since its inception in the mid-1930s. But detractors point out that other
industrialized countries have gotten along just fine without it and so can the
United States.

But Ginnie Mae president Theodore Tozer indicated the naysayers haven't been
talking to the foreign investors he has.

"It's interesting that we're talking about phasing out the 30-year mortgage when
other countries wish they had it," Tozer told the opening session of the
three-day conference held in New York last week. "Other countries are envious of
our 30-year mortgage."

Ginnie Mae has been instrumental in leveraging its government guarantee to keep
funds from foreign investors flowing into the domestic housing market.

At a press conference the following day, the MBA's Michael Fratantoni also spoke
up on behalf of the 30-year loan, saying that homebuyers' favorite mortgage is
simply "not a product" for depository institutions.

According to the MBA's monthly tabulation of mortgage applications, nearly 87%
of borrowers who intended to occupy the homes they were buying choose a 30-year
fixed-rate loan.

During the sparsely attended opening session, Tozer said that considering the
fragile nature of the current market, now is not the time to eliminate the
30-year loan from lenders' mortgage menus.

"This is the worst time to do it," he said. "To shift risk to the consumer in
today's world would exacerbate delinquencies. In today's interest rate
environment, things can only go up."

Kevin Neylan, a senior vice president at the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York,
said the future of the housing market would be "very uncertain" without the
30-year fixed-rate loan.

Although "you could make a case that some borrowers would be better off" with a
less expensive adjustable-rate product, Neylan said, "most consumers seem to be
risk averse."

He also said that while some of the smaller lenders served by the Federal Home
Loan Bank System might opt to retain their fixed-rate products on their balance
sheets, it wouldn't be enough to support the loan demand.

"Consumers should have a choice," added Fannie Mae's Zach Oppenheimer. "The
confidence and certainty (of a fixed-rate loan) can't be beat."

Oppenheimer got to choose between a FRM and an ARM when he bought his first
house.

Even though the fixed loan came with a rate of 13.25%, he opted for the FRM over
the lower-cost ARM because he "wasn't sure he would have the income over time"
to cover the possibility that the rate on the adjustable loan would move higher.

"ARMs have benefits, but they are a much riskier product," the Fannie Mae
executive said, noting that fixed-rate mortgages have never accounted for less
than 75% of mortgage originations.

He also pointed out that ARMs have a "very different performance level" than
fixed-rate loans, which have a delinquency rate of just a quarter of that of
ARMs.

In the same vein, Paul Mullings, senior vice president for single-family
sourcing at Freddie Mac, told the session that fixed-rate loans "act as an
economic shock absorber" for borrowers when house prices are falling.

"In markets with a higher percentage of FRMs, prices declined much, much less"
than in locations where ARMs were the dominant loan, he said.

Adjustable-rate mortgages tend to be popular during times when interest rates
spike, such as the 1980s, when the prime rate hit 20%.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2011 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              406 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Multifamily Housing Mortgages Back Big Freddie Mac Offering

                           August 21, 1985, Wednesday

By DAVID LaGESSE

DATELINE: NEW YORK


In an effort to create a larger secondary market for mortgages on multifamily
housing projects, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. on Tuesday announced an
offering of some $800 million in new securities backed by the loans.

The federally sponsored agency hopes the new security will spawn the easy
trading in loans on apartment dwellings that has become the hallmark of
securities backed by mortgages on single-family residences, said Leland C.
Brendsel, executive vice president at the federal mortgage agency, also known as
Freddie Mac.

That would lower the costs for developers who finance their projects, and should
lead to lower rental rates for consumers, said Lewis Ranieri, managing director
at Salomon Brothers Inc., lead managers of the initial offering.

Mr. Brendsel also said that Freddie Mac will try to sell some $100 million of
the initial offering to European investors, which would make it one of the first
major sales of mortgage-backed securities to foreign institutions. The sales
overseas became possible with the announcement late last week by the U.S.
Treasury that mortgage-backed securities no longer are subject to the mandatory
30% withholding of interest payments when sold overseas, Mr.  Brendsel said.

That news generally should help the mortgage markets to seek foreign capital, a
source that up until now has been ''in its baby stages - if it's even out of the
womb,'' said Lawrence Fink, managing director of First Boston Corp., a
co-manager for Freddie Mac's initial offering.

Both Freddie Mac and the Federal National Mortgage Association, another
federally sponsored agency that is called Fannie Mae, have bought multifamily
project mortgages for years but have yet to create a liquid market for
securities backed by those loans.

Fannie Mae has created some securities backed by the multifamily loans in swaps
with institutions on a case-by-case basis for a volume last year of about $400
million, said Rebecca Boyd, Fannie Mae senior vice president. But the
institutions largely have held those loans in portfolio, using them largely as
collateral for borrowings.

Fannie Mae also has bought some $1.2 billion in multifamily loans that it holds
in portfolio, largely because they carry better rates and shorter terms and help
the agency in its effort to restructure its assets, Ms. Boyd said.

Freddie Mac largely has commingled its multifamily loans in securities that
largely included single-family mortgages, Mr. Brendsel said.

But the agency began a new program to buy multifamily loans about 18 months ago
that fit specific requirements. The idea was to design a loan program that would
be attractive to developers and to the institutional investors who would have to
buy the securities, he said.

''There just has not been much volume generated in the other multifamily loan
purchase programs,'' Mr. Brendsel said.

The agency has accumulated about $1 billion in the new loans before structuring
the new participation certificate, or Freddie Mac ''PC.'' It is the first of the
agency's securities to be backed exclusively by multifamily loans.

The securities also provide ''call protection'' to institutional investors
because Freddie Mac only buys mortgages that include a 54-month ''lockout'' - or
period when the developer cannot prepay the loan. The lockout guarantees to the
eventual owner of the mortgage that the loan will not be prepaid before 54
months, providing the investor protection from having to reinvest the principal
sooner than expected.

That lack of call protection has long hampered sales of securities backed by
single-family mortgages to nontraditional investors, such as pension funds and
life insurance companies that prefer fixed-maturity securities.

The securities carry maturities of 10 years to 15 years, providing medium-term
investments that also are attractive to institutional investors, Mr. Ranieri
said.

Some participants expect the multifamily security to take on added significance
if the federal government revises the income tax codes. The reduction of overall
income tax rates would make owning homes less attractive and promote the demand
for rental units, said Richard Pratt, president of Merrill Lynch Mortgage Corp.,
a co-manager of Freddie Mac's initial offering.

SECTION: MORTGAGE SECURITIES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 713 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1985 American Banker, Inc.


                              407 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

IDB Proposal Fails Because it Contains State Volume Cap

                            November 7, 1983, Monday

By Craig T. Ferris

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 4


A compromise proposal on a House bill to severely restrict "private-purpose"
tax-exempt bonds has done very little to defuse objections to the bill, sources
said today.

The compromise, offered late yesterday by the two top members of the House Ways
and Means Committee, would modify several provisions that would hamper
multifamily rental housing bonds and the use of industrial development bonds to
purchase land and existing buildings.

But the compromise proposal contains a controversial provision to impose a
$150-per-person state volume limit on most private-purpose bonds.  Because of
the volume cap, the bill is still strongly opposed by a majority of the House
Rules Committee, states and localities, the municipal industry and users of the
bonds.

"The compromise proposal does overcome some -- but not all -- of the objections
concerning the curbs on multifamily housing bonds, the use of IDBs for land and
existing buildings and federal guarantees, but it does nothing to overcome the
almost universial opposition to the state volume cap," a local government
lobbyist said.

"It is not a compromise at all" because it still includes the proposed state
volume cap, a spokesman for the National Governors Association said.  "There is
nothing for us to accept and we are still opposed to the overall bond plan," he
said.

Although the compromise was designed to break a stalemate that has been holding
up action on the overall $8 billion tax bill, sources said a majority of the
House Rules Committee is still firm in their opposition to the overall bond
restrictions because the compromise does nothing to alter the volume cap, which
many on the panel consider "onerous."

A spokesman for Rep. Martin Frost, D-Tex., a member of the rules panel who has
been leading the opposition to the bond restrictions, said today that most of
the committee "is not very much interested in the compromise" because it does
nothing to modify the overall state volume limit.

Other sources said a majority of the Rules Committee is still supporting an
amendment by Rep. Frost that would "gut" the proposals by eliminating the cap
and most of the other major restrictions.

But the two top members of the Ways and Means Committee, Reps. Dan Rostenkowski,
D-Ill, the chairman, and Barber Conable, R-N.Y., the ranking GOP member of the
panel, who proposed the compromise, and most of the members of the tax committee
still support the state volume limit because they believe it is the only way to
curb the explosion in the use of the bonds and stem the increasing loss in
revenues to the Treasury, committee sources said.

Rep. Dan Rostenkowski does not want drastic changes made in the bond provisions
and has threatened to continue to "sit" on the tax bill until the rules panel
gives in and agrees to send the bill to the House floor with a rule permitting
no substantive amendments.

Although some believe the compromise might open the door to further negotiations
to resolve the bond dispute, Rep. Rostenkowski and Rep. Conable said their
proposed compromise is as far as they will go to weaken the bond proposals.

"This is it," a committee staffer said.  The compromise "is as far as the
chairman is willing to go even if it means there will be no tax bill," the
staffer said.

If that happened, the move could jeopardize the proposal in the bill to extend
the use of single-family mortgage revenue bonds for five years beyond their
currently scheduled Dec. 31, termination date.

If the Ways and Means Chairman can change enough votes on the rules panel,
sources said he might take the bill back to the committee on Tuesday.  But
others warned that Rep. Rostenkowski will withdraw the bill again unless he is
certain that he has the votes to prevent further changes in the bond
restrictions.

Although the proposed compromise was designed to overcome the objections of
multifamily housing supporters to the bond restrictions, most of those groups
remain opposed to the overall curbs because the compromise would retain the
provision that puts the housing bonds under the overall state volume limit,
according to sources.

The housing groups are split, with about 70% of them still opposing the bond
proposals because the cap has not been removed, especially the limit for
multifamily housing.

The other 30% of the housing groups now think they should support the compromise
because it solves many of their technical problems and because they fear that a
continued stalemate on the tax bill will jeopardize the extension of
single-family mortgage bonds.  However, those groups have indicated they would
fight the limit in the Senate.

The new plan would also modify some of the proposed arbitrage limits on
multifamily housing bonds, "but not enough," according to one housing official.

However, there were indications that the committee staff was willing to bend
further on the proposed arbitrage limit on multifamily bonds.  But other sources
said it is doubtful that Rep. Rostenkowski would agree to further modifications.

A spokesman for the Council of State Housing Agencies said the compromise might
solve some of the problems concerning the ban on IDBs used to buy land, existing
buildings and the prohibition on federal guarantees to back the bonds.

But he said his group still has problems with the arbitrage provision, despite
the slight change that was proposed.

Rep. Rostenkowski had been hoping to satisfy the objections of the multifamily
housing groups to get them on his side to open up enough of a wedge on the rules
committee to get the panel to permit no further amendments that could weaken the
bill.

The compromise, unveiled late Thursday, would also modify the proposed
prohibition on the use of federal guarantees for the bonds to overcome
objections from the housing industry.

The compromise would aid multifamily housing by modifying the proposals to
tighten arbitrage limits for multifamily housing bonds by allowing credit
enhancement devices, such as bond insurance, letters of credit, and guarantees
and pledges of securities, to be used outside the proposal to limit the
allowable arbitrage on all private-purpose bonds to 1 1/8%.

But that modification would be allowed only if the present value of the cost of
the credit enhancement for multifamily housing bonds is less than the present
value of the interest expected to be saved as a result of the credit
enhancement.

The modification for arbitrage on multifamily housing bonds would also apply if
the enhancement device is obtained through competitive bidding and, except for
servicing, none of the parties providing the device have any other transactions
with other parties to the financing or to the project being financed.

The modification would also exempt student loan bonds from the new arbitrage
limits until Jan. 1, 1986, instead of the proposed Jan. 1, 1984 effective date.

However, the modification would still limit arbitrage on most other
private-purpose bonds to the 1 1/8% level proposed in the original bill, instead
of the current 1 1/2%.

The compromise would also allow most IDBs to be used to purchase land, if not
more than 25% of the bond proceeds were used to acquire the land.  That
modification would not affect the original exemption allowing IDBs to be used by
"first-time farmers" to purchase land.

It would also modify the proposed prohibition on the use of most IDBs to buy
existing buildings, by saying that at least 15% of the cost of the building must
be used for rehabilitation of the facility.

The compromise would also modify the proposed prohibition on federal guarantees
of tax-exempt debt, by exempting most federal guarantees for housing bonds.

The original bill exempted guarantees by the Federal Housing Administration, the
Veterans Administration, and those for student loan bonds.

The compromise would now also exempt guarantees by the Federal National Mortgage
Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., and the Government National
Mortgage Association; it would also exempt so-called Department of Housing and
Urban Development project notes, which are used to finance low-income public
housing projects.

However, the modification would not exempt federal deposit guarantees for
tax-exempt bonds, and would not exempt guarantees for Small Business
Administration programs involving tax-exempt debt, or indirect guarantees by
federal agencies, such as those provided by the Bonneville Power Administration
for the Washington Public Power Supply System's nuclear projects 1, 2, and 3.

"The compromise does appear to solve some of the technical problems with the
original bill, but it will includes the cap and means that we still oppose the
overall package," a spokesman for the Municipal Finance Officers Association
said.

"The volume cap will not differentiate between kinds of the bonds that serve a
public purpose and those that are just a vehicle for providing low interest
loans to private firms and individuals," the MFOA staffer said.

In addition, the volume cap will throw the whole question of allocating the use
of the bonds into the state legislatures where users of the bonds with the most
money and influence are likely to get their projects approved before people with
more socially desirable projects that are also more politically controversial,
the staffer said.

The bond restrictions, approved nearly three weeks ago by the Ways and Means
Committee, would apply to private-purpose bonds that include small-issue IDBs,
so-called exempt IDBs, including multifamily housing and pollution control IDBs,
and student loan bonds.  Private-purpose bonds are generally th ose issued by
states and localities or their agencies in which the proceeds of the bonds, or a
substantial portion of the benefits, go to private firms and individuals.

The curbs would not apply to single-family mortgage bonds and exempt
private-purpose bonds, such as those for edcuational facilities or private
non-profit hospitals, or to traditional bonds issued by states and localities
for public proposes.

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1693 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1983 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              408 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             March 18, 2011 Friday

FDIC Suit: Wamu Leaders Took 'Extreme' Risks

BYLINE: Joe Adler

SECTION: WASHINGTON; Pg. 3 Vol. 176 No. F311

LENGTH: 683  words


WASHINGTON - The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. sued three top executives of
Washington Mutual Bank, alleging their "extreme and historically unprecedented
risks" in the bank's mortgage lending operations helped cause the biggest bank
failure in U.S. history.

The lawsuit, filed late Wednesday in U.S. District Court in Seattle, targets
former chief executive officer Kerry Killinger, chief operating officer Stephen
Rotella and David Schneider, who ran the Seattle thrift company's home loans
division. The suit also charges that Killinger's and Rotella's wives were
involved in property transfers before and after Wamu's September 2008 failure.

The court documents indicate an exact amount of damages sought has not yet been
set, but damages could exceed $900 million. The suit seeks damages at least
equal to the amount of properties that the agency alleges were "fraudulently
transferred" by the Killingers and the Rotellas, and an order freezing such
assets.

The complaint says the three men's "gross negligence and breaches of fiduciary
duty" caused "Wamu to lose billions of dollars."

"They focused on short-term gains to increase their own compensation, with
reckless disregard for Wamu's longer-term safety and soundness," it said.

The suit said that Killinger developed the company's high-risk lending strategy
and that he, Rotella and Schneider put it into practice. The home loans division
"recklessly made billions of dollars in risky single-family residential ...
loans, dramatically increasing the risk profile of loans in Wamu's
held-for-investment ... loan portfolio," the suit alleges.

The portfolio included payment-option adjustable-rate mortgages, home equity
lines of credit and subprime mortgages, the FDIC said. The strategy also
included use of stated-income and stated-asset loans, documents say.

"Defendants thus gambled billions of dollars of Wamu's money on the prospect
that the Bank somehow would manage to avoid losses on higher-risk loans to
high-risk borrowers in high-risk areas, despite their own awareness of the
inevitable decline in the overheated housing market," the FDIC said.

The suit says Wamu took those risks even though it knew it lacked the
infrastructure to handle so many risky loans.

Lawyers for Killinger responded in a long e-mailed statement that the suit was
"baseless and unworthy of the government."

"Trial in a courtroom that honors the rule of law - and not the will of
Washington, D.C. - will confirm that Kerry Killinger's management, diligence and
commitment to Washington Mutual responsibly and consistently served the
interests of its depositors, customers and shareholders," said Brendan Sullivan
Jr. of Williams & Connolly and Barry Kaplan of Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati.

Echoing Killinger's own congressional testimony about the failure, the attorneys
cited federal assistance - including Troubled Asset Relief Program funds - that
went to other large institutions suffering losses from the housing crisis, but
not to Wamu.

"Had the benefits extended to Wall Street institutions within weeks of the
seizure - e.g., increases in insurance limits, guarantees of bank debt, Tarp
purchases and capital injections, and added liquidity by the Federal Reserve -
been extended to Washington Mutual, it too would have weathered the global
financial crisis," they said.

With the filing, the FDIC has now commenced six lawsuits pinning the blame for
failures on former officers and directors. But the action against Wamu's former
management is by far the most significant. Wamu, whose assets stood at more than
$300 billion when it failed, was the biggest bank ever to be seized by the
government. However, the FDIC's transfer of Wamu's operations to JPMorgan Chase
& Co. cost the Deposit Insurance Fund nothing.

An FDIC spokesman said the agency does not comment on pending litigation, but he
said the agency "as receiver will initiate lawsuits against former officers,
directors and other professionals of failed institutions when the case has merit
and is expected to be cost-effective. This is done on behalf of creditors of the
failed institution."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2011 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              409 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                     March 3, 1990, Saturday, Final Edition

VA Seeks to End Mobile Home Program;
Defaults Said to Threaten Agency's Loan Guarantees for All Housing

BYLINE: Ann Mariano, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 1108 words


The Department of Veterans Affairs is urging Congress to kill a mortgage
guarantee program for veterans who buy mobile homes because nearly 30 percent of
the loans made over the last 19 years have gone into default.

VA Deputy Secretary Anthony J. Principi told a House subcommittee last week that
the manufactured, or mobile, home problems threaten the "financial solvency" of
the department's loan guarantee program for all housing and burden many veterans
with heavy debt. The VA requires veterans to cover the department's losses on
foreclosed homes, but actually collects only a small percentage of the amount.

With the Department of Housing and Urban Development's mobile home losses added
to VA's losses, the cost to the government could total more than $ 650 million.
VA officials said the department has lost $ 166.6 million in the last five years
and the HUD inspector general estimated HUD's total losses at more than $ 500
million.

In contrast to the high rate of manufactured home losses, a little more than 5
percent of the loans on other single-family houses have gone into default,
Principi said. "On balance," he said, the manufactured home program is "not
providing a viable benefit to veterans, despite our efforts over the years to
improve the program."

The inspectors general for both departments have recommended that the mobile
home programs be killed. The HUD inspector general's most recent report, issued
last October, noted that the inspector general has reported abuse and fraud in
the mobile home program since 1982.

But the VA encountered skepticism on Capitol Hill last week, when several
members of Congress questioned whether the government has tried hard enough to
clean up abuses of the mobile home program or has regulated the industry
adequately.

Mobile homes are the only kind of housing some veterans and lower-ranking
military men and women can afford, according to several members of the House
Veterans Affairs Committee's subcommittee on housing and memorial affairs.

Rep. Harley O. Staggers Jr. (D-W.Va.), the subcommittee chairman, told Principi
the department should consider ways to improve the program before moving to
abolish it. He said the VA could allow members of the National Guard and
military reserve units, who now are not eligible for VA home loans, to use the
program as a way to bring in more income from fees. "I'm concerned now about
Vietnam vets and peacetime vets" whose homeownership opportunities could be
limited by cutbacks in housing programs, he said.

Manufactured homes are "another vital avenue for homeownership," said Rep. Dan
Burton (R-Ind.). He proposed higher down payments, which would give owners a
bigger stake in their properties and discourage them from "walking away" from
payments.

Representatives of veterans' organizations urged Congress to find ways to
improve the manufactured home program instead of killing it. Richard W. Johnson
Jr., legislative affairs director for the Non-Commissioned Officers Association,
said counseling for veterans before they buy homes "could do more to reduce
foreclosures than anything else."

More than 112,000 veterans and active duty military personnel have owned mobile
homes under the VA guarantee program since it began in 1970, according to the VA
inspector general. In a report last September, the inspector general said the
guarantee program was not achieving its purpose of helping low- and
moderate-income veterans own homes and should be terminated.

The "inherent weaknesses" of the loan guarantee program will be "difficult, if
not impossible, to correct," according to the inspector general's report.
Manufactured homes "almost always depreciate in value, in contrast to
conventionally built homes," which increase in value in most markets, the report
said.

In addition to the price of the home itself, loans cover a number of costs,
including set-up charges, dealers' profits and furniture, often resulting in
loans that are 20 percent to 40 percent more than the price the manufacturers
charge for a home. Thus when the mobile home is sold, it often does not bring in
enough to cover the outstanding debt.

In efforts to cut down on losses, the VA has changed its rules in recent years
to require a down payment, for the first time, and adopted stricter credit and
income standards. As a result, the number of veterans buying mobile homes has
declined yearly from 13,502 in 1983 to 834 last year, according to the
department.

The inspector general said that since the program now serves few veterans, its
demise would not be a big loss.

But Dennis Cullinan, representing the Veterans of Foreign Wars, said this is a
reason to preserve mobile home guarantees instead of killing them. With fewer
loans being made, the VA is risking "negligible financial exposure" and should
continue the program for the veterans who need it. Without access to
manufactured housing, some veterans would be denied a benefit earned by their
military service, Cullinan said. He said the problems besetting veterans' mobile
home loans are "due in large part to fraud and scandals within the manufactured
housing industry itself."

Some critics say shoddy manufacturing practices and inadequate regulation have
proved to be serious flaws. HUD established and implemented construction and
safety standards for the industry in 1974 and has since been responsible with
enforcing the standards and inspecting factory production.

HUD, also facing big losses, has launched an effort to better regulate the
manufactured housing industryand its own insurance program. Any new regulations
will cover all manufactured housing production.

The department is drafting new regulations it hopes will prevent abuses like
those of the past, a department official said in an interview. When a veteran
buys a mobile home, he or she fills out the loan application in the office of
the dealer who sells the home.

Although the lender is supposed to verify income, credit and other information
on the application, the HUD inspector general has reported that lenders and
dealers often did not provide accurate information. This was a major cause of
HUD losses, according to the inspector general.

The HUD official, who requested anonymity, said the loan application rules have
been tightened. Much of the big loss can be attributed to economic collapse in
the oil states a few years ago, he added. About three-quarters of the loan
defaults came between 1984 and 1986 in Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana.

"If handled correctly, [manufactured homes] offer an opportunity for affordable
housing that's not federally subsidized," he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1990 The Washington Post


                              410 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 22, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Fannie Mae appraisal tool out in 2015

LENGTH: 267  words

DATELINE: Wellington


Office of Minister Jo Goodhew, The Government of New Zealand has issued the
following news release:

Government-sponsored enterprise Fannie Mae announced it would make its appraisal
analysis tool available to lenders in early 2015, which will allow lenders to
use Fannie's database of appraisal and market data.

Fannie built the tool - Collateral Underwriter - to appraise data from the first
electronic lender appraisals in 2012. It will give lenders an overall risk score
for appraisals, with details about which aspects of the appraisal may be suspect
or need attention.

Andrew Bonn Salle, the executive vice president of single-family underwriting,
pricing, and capital markets for Fannie, said, "Our goal is to provide relief on
appraisal representations and warranties in the future, and we will work with
[the Federal Housing Finance Administration] to do so. We want to be the
business partner of choice for lenders by providing the tools and products
lenders need. Collateral Underwriter will help lenders build their businesses
safely and strongly."

Mel Watt, the director of Fannie Mae's conservator FHFA, recently spoke about
proposals that would allow Fannie and Freddie Mac to expand mortgage credit and
protect lenders from penalties, offering mortgages with down payments as low as
3 percent. NAFCU continues to advocate housing reform that would guarantee
access for credit unions to the secondary mortgage market and ensure fair
pricing based on loan quality instead of volume.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              411 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                                October 20, 2015

Mortgage Insurers Pursue Deeper Coverage on GSE Loans

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: COMPLIANCE & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 485  words


WASHINGTON - Private mortgage insurers are seeking a larger share of the credit
risk on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac-guaranteed loans.

The trade group U.S. Mortgage Insurers released a study Monday that shows deeper
mortgage insurance coverage could significantly reduce the loss exposure of
Fannie and Freddie caused by defaults or foreclosures while also reducing costs
for homebuyers.

Currently, mortgage insurers like Radian Guaranty and Genworth Financial can
provide maximum first-loss coverage down to 63% of a mortgage's loan-to-value
ratio. On a $100,000 home purchase loan where the borrower made a 3% down
payment, the value of the home would have to drop below $63,000 before the GSEs
would experience a loss.

Under the trade group's proposal, mortgage insurers could increase maximum
coverage to 50% so the house price would have to fall below $50,000 before
Fannie and Freddie would experience a loss.

"Promotion of greater front-end risk sharing with mortgage insurance is a way to
help build a stronger and more sustainable housing system," said Rohit Gupta,
president and chief executive of Genworth Financial in a statement. During a
conference call on Monday, he said mortgage insurers are talking to FHFA
officials about their plan.

Radian Guaranty President Teresa Bryce Bazemore said the proposal would allow
the GSEs to lower their guarantee fees, which would reduce borrower's costs.

"It is also a good time for the MIs to engage in these discussions since we have
now built financial strength," Bazemore said Monday.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency issued mortgage insurer capital standards
earlier this spring and they go into effect Dec. 31. Insurers have to meet all
the new requirements by February 2016 to certify compliance.

"FHFA remains committed to exploring additional ways that Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac can share credit risk with the private sector and we are reviewing the
analysis prepared for USMI on providing deeper mortgage insurance coverage," a
FHFA spokesperson said.

At the Mortgage Bankers Association annual convention, FHFA Director Mel Watt
did not mention mortgage insurance in his prepared remarks regarding credit
risk. But he emphasized the success of the GSEs' risk transfer transactions,
where credit risk is auctioned off to private investors.

"Since 2013, the enterprises have transferred a significant portion of credit
risk on single-family mortgages with an unpaid principal balance exceeding $700
billion," Watt said. He stressed the FHFA will continue to work with the GSEs on
the other innovative risk transfer transactions, "such as credit linked notes."
Credit linked notes allow a securities issuer to transfer a specific credit risk
to investors.

"FHFA and both enterprises are committed to building on recent progress and we
view credit risk transfers as a key part of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's credit
guarantee business going forward," Watt said.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              412 of 998 DOCUMENTS

           St. Louis Daily Record/St. Louis Countian (St. Louis, MO)

                             October 7, 2005 Friday

Freddie Mac gives hurricane victims break from payments

BYLINE: New Orleans CityBusiness Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 468 words


(This article was originally published in New Orleans CityBusiness, another
Dolan Media publication).

Single-family mortgage borrowers whose lives were disrupted by Hurricane Rita
may defer their October and November payments if their mortgages are owned by
Freddie Mac, the company announced.

In addition to suspending the next two months of mortgage payments, Freddie Mac
said it was extending to victims of Hurricane Rita the same special mortgage
servicing relief policies it announced to ease the financial pressures on
borrowers with Freddie Mac-owned mortgages after Hurricane Katrina.

The temporary suspension applies to Freddie Mac-owned single-family loans in
federally declared disaster areas where FEMA's Individual Assistance programs
are being made available. None of these temporary measures will affect Freddie
Mac's guarantee on its Mortgage Participation Certificates. "We are determined
to go the extra mile to help Texas and Louisiana borrowers cope with this year's
unusually destructive storms in the Gulf of Mexico," said Freddie Mac Chairman
and CEO Richard F. Syron.

"Protecting investors while helping borrowers overcome unexpected shocks like
hurricanes Rita and Katrina is part of Freddie Mac's mission to keep America's
housing finance system affordable, stable and liquid."

After November, servicers have the discretion to continue suspending or reducing
payments on Freddie Mac-owned mortgages for a total of 12 months on a
case-by-case basis, depending upon each borrower's specific circumstances.
Servicers must make their determinations before the mortgages' December payments
due date. A servicer is the company to which borrowers send their monthly
mortgage payments.

For those borrowers who may have already made their October mortgage payments,
Freddie Mac is giving its servicers the discretion to automatically return
payments withdrawn through an automated clearinghouse but not yet reported to
Freddie Mac. Borrowers who made their October payments through other means have
the option to contact their servicers to request their payment's return. In
either case, borrowers will still be required to work with their servicer to
reinstate their mortgage once the temporary suspension period ends.

Freddie Mac also instructed its servicers:

- not to report to credit bureaus any reversed and suspended payments on Freddie
Mac-owned loans as a result of Hurricane Rita during the suspension period;

- to suspend all late fees, collection and foreclosure activities in the
federally declared major disaster areas during the suspension period; and

- extend to all National Guard members on state duty involved in Hurricane Rita
recovery operations mortgage relief comparable to the relief available under the
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: General news

                      Copyright 2005 Dolan Media Newswires


                              413 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              St. Charles County Business Record (St. Charles, MO)

                             October 7, 2005 Friday

Freddie Mac gives hurricane victims break from payments

BYLINE: New Orleans CityBusiness Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 468 words


(This article was originally published in New Orleans CityBusiness, another
Dolan Media publication).

Single-family mortgage borrowers whose lives were disrupted by Hurricane Rita
may defer their October and November payments if their mortgages are owned by
Freddie Mac, the company announced.

In addition to suspending the next two months of mortgage payments, Freddie Mac
said it was extending to victims of Hurricane Rita the same special mortgage
servicing relief policies it announced to ease the financial pressures on
borrowers with Freddie Mac-owned mortgages after Hurricane Katrina.

The temporary suspension applies to Freddie Mac-owned single-family loans in
federally declared disaster areas where FEMA's Individual Assistance programs
are being made available. None of these temporary measures will affect Freddie
Mac's guarantee on its Mortgage Participation Certificates. "We are determined
to go the extra mile to help Texas and Louisiana borrowers cope with this year's
unusually destructive storms in the Gulf of Mexico," said Freddie Mac Chairman
and CEO Richard F. Syron.

"Protecting investors while helping borrowers overcome unexpected shocks like
hurricanes Rita and Katrina is part of Freddie Mac's mission to keep America's
housing finance system affordable, stable and liquid."

After November, servicers have the discretion to continue suspending or reducing
payments on Freddie Mac-owned mortgages for a total of 12 months on a
case-by-case basis, depending upon each borrower's specific circumstances.
Servicers must make their determinations before the mortgages' December payments
due date. A servicer is the company to which borrowers send their monthly
mortgage payments.

For those borrowers who may have already made their October mortgage payments,
Freddie Mac is giving its servicers the discretion to automatically return
payments withdrawn through an automated clearinghouse but not yet reported to
Freddie Mac. Borrowers who made their October payments through other means have
the option to contact their servicers to request their payment's return. In
either case, borrowers will still be required to work with their servicer to
reinstate their mortgage once the temporary suspension period ends.

Freddie Mac also instructed its servicers:

- not to report to credit bureaus any reversed and suspended payments on Freddie
Mac-owned loans as a result of Hurricane Rita during the suspension period;

- to suspend all late fees, collection and foreclosure activities in the
federally declared major disaster areas during the suspension period; and

- extend to all National Guard members on state duty involved in Hurricane Rita
recovery operations mortgage relief comparable to the relief available under the
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: General news

                      Copyright 2005 Dolan Media Newswires


                              414 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                   NOVEMBER 26, 2003 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

Business News in Brief

BYLINE: Compiled from staff reports, the Associated Press,, Bloomberg News,
Reuters, and other wire services

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1338 words


In the Region

Boeing to produce seven Army helicopters in Ridley Park

The U.S. Army has approved the acquisition of seven new CH-47F Chinook
helicopters. The contract will be awarded to Boeing Integrated Defense Systems,
the House Armed Services Committee said, and the company will produce the
helicopters at the Boeing Army Rotorcraft facility in Ridley Park, Delaware
County. Delivery of the first is expected to take place by the summer of 2006.
Separately, Boeing Co. said it received a federal income-tax refund and related
interest of about $1.1 billion. According to a filing with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, the refund and interest are related to a partial settlement
of tax years 1992 to 1997 with the IRS and will strengthen the jet builder's
cash balances. Boeing estimated that the partial settlement would increase
fourth-quarter net income by $700 million, or 87 cents a share, and
fourth-quarter operating cash flow by $1.1 billion.

Discovery Laboratories finds basis for a pulmonary drug

Discovery Laboratories Inc., Doylestown, which has a protein lipid complex that
mimics human lung surfactant, said positive results of a Phase 3 clinical trial
for respiratory distress syndrome in premature infants would form the basis for
a new-drug application the company will file with the Food and Drug
Administration in the first quarter of next year. The clinical trial for
Surfaxin, a substance that keeps the lung from collapsing, enrolled 1,294
patients.

ViroPharma, Schering-Plough in deal over cold treatment

ViroPharma Inc., Exton, said that Schering-Plough Corp., Kenilworth, N.J., had
signed an option agreement to license an intranasal formulation of ViroPharma's
antiviral compound pleconaril to treat the common cold. Schering-Plough will pay
ViroPharma an up-front $3 million fee, and ViroPharma will conduct clinical
studies to evaluate the new pleconaril formulation by mid-2004. Based on the
study results, Schering-Plough would pay a $10 million license fee to develop
and market intranasal pleconaril as a cold treatment. ViroPharma would receive
milestone payments and royalties based on sales. In 2002, the FDA issued a "not
approvable" letter for an oral tablet formulation of pleconaril to treat the
common cold.

SL Industries sells assets of Surface Technologies Inc.

SL Industries Inc., Mount Laurel, said its subsidiary, Surface Technologies
Inc., had sold the operating assets of its coatings and platings business. The
sale included the current assets and equipment of Surface Technologies with the
undisclosed buyer paying $600,000 in cash plus the assumption of certain
liabilities. As a result of the sale, the company said it expected to record an
after-tax loss of $575,000 and to use all the proceeds of the sale to pay
severance, closing costs, and a required contribution to a union pension plan.
SL Industries designs, manufactures and markets power and data-quality equipment
and systems for industrial, medical, aerospace and utility applications.

Baja Fresh Mexican Grill opens first area restaurant

Baja Fresh Mexican Grill, Thousand Oaks, Calif., opened its first restaurant in
the region, in the Abington Shopping Center at 1437 Old York Rd., Abington. The
company said it had other restaurants under construction in Conshohocken,
Montgomeryville and Springfield, Delaware County.

Elsewhere

Ford told to pay $23.7 million over rollover accident

The California Supreme Court ordered Ford Motor Co. to pay $23.7 million to a
family involved in a 1993 rollover accident after the U.S. Supreme Court threw
out a $290 million judgment in the same case. Ford had called the original $290
million award to the Romo family the largest personal injury award ever upheld
by an appeals court. The Supreme Court threw the damages out and sent the case
back to the state court after ruling in a different case that punitive damages
must be reasonable and proportionate to the harm suffered. The damages stemmed
from the crash of a 1978 Bronco near Ceres, Calif. Three members of the Romo
family were killed and three others were injured when the vehicle overturned
several times, causing the roof to cave in.

Senate recesses without agreement on pension funding

The Senate recessed for the Thanksgiving holiday after failing to agree on a
proposal for easing pension-funding requirements for airlines and other
beleaguered industries. The bill would grant a two-year moratorium on catch-up
contributions - called deficit-reduction payments - to companies with
extra-large pension shortfalls, such as bankrupt UAL Corp.'s United Airlines. It
would also allow all companies to assume a more generous rate of return on their
pension funds for two years, thereby reducing their pension liabilities.

Plan to extend ban on Net-access taxes dead for year

A proposal to extend a federal ban on Internet access taxes is dead for the
year, as the Senate was unable to reach an agreement, officials said. Bob
Stevenson, a spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist (R., Tenn.), said
senators were unable to reach a compromise to allow an extension of the ban,
which expired Nov. 1. The Senate is wrapping up business for the year and is
moving toward adjournment. The ban, first passed in 1998, prevents state and
local governments from taxing Internet access services such as America Online
and Earthlink. It also limits state and local governments' ability to levy taxes
that target Internet commerce. It does not address the broader issue of
simplifying sales taxes on Internet transactions.

Fannie Mae to raise its home-loan limit to $333,700

Fannie Mae, the largest U.S. housing finance company, said it would lift the
limit on single-family-home loans it can guarantee and purchase to $333,700 from
$322,700. Fannie Mae's announcement follows a report from the Federal Housing
Finance Board showing that the average single-family-home purchase price in
October rose $8,039, or 3.4 percent, to $243,756 from a year ago.
Congressionally chartered Fannie Mae sells guarantees for home loans to lenders.
These guarantees of timely payment of principle and interest allow mortgage
bankers to resell their loans as securities. The new loan limits are effective
in 2004.

Southwest flight attendants stage a labor demonstration

Southwest Airlines flight attendants upset with a standoff in contract
negotiations took their case to passengers yesterday as the Thanksgiving travel
rush began at Nashville International Airport. The "holiday gathering" was one
of several being held across the nation as part of a campaign to pressure
Southwest, which is entering the Philadelphia market, for better pay. The flight
attendants had holiday "quiz cards" detailing their job responsibilities and
signs that said "Working for free: That's just 'plane' nuts." Other events were
scheduled for Albuquerque, N.M.; Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; San Jose, Calif.; Salt
Lake City; and St. Louis. The Dallas-based company and the Transport Workers
Union, which represents 7,200 Southwest flight attendants, held 18 months of
unsuccessful contract negotiations before a federal mediator was called in two
months ago to help settle the dispute.

Deere beats earnings estimates as its markets improve

Deere & Co. posted higher-than-expected quarterly earnings as improved markets
and the weaker dollar helped offset planned production slowdowns. The maker of
farm equipment said higher shipments of lawn-care, construction and forestry
equipment drove its stronger sales in the quarter. The company said its net
income in its fourth quarter ended Oct. 31 rose to $70.6 million from $68
million a year ago. On a per-share basis, net income fell to 27 cents from 28
cents the year before. Analysts polled by Reuters Research had expected, on
average, earnings of 17 cents a share. Fourth-quarter revenue was $3.9 billion,
up 14 percent from $3.4 billion during the same period last year.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              415 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           October 22, 2015 Thursday

Mortgage Insurers Pursue Deeper Coverage on GSE Loans

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: LAW & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 163

LENGTH: 485  words


WASHINGTON - Private mortgage insurers are seeking a larger share of the credit
risk on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac-guaranteed loans.

The trade group U.S. Mortgage Insurers released a study Monday that shows deeper
mortgage insurance coverage could significantly reduce the loss exposure of
Fannie and Freddie caused by defaults or foreclosures while also reducing costs
for homebuyers.

Currently, mortgage insurers like Radian Guaranty and Genworth Financial can
provide maximum first-loss coverage down to 63% of a mortgage's loan-to-value
ratio. On a $100,000 home purchase loan where the borrower made a 3% down
payment, the value of the home would have to drop below $63,000 before the GSEs
would experience a loss.

Under the trade group's proposal, mortgage insurers could increase maximum
coverage to 50% so the house price would have to fall below $50,000 before
Fannie and Freddie would experience a loss.

"Promotion of greater front-end risk sharing with mortgage insurance is a way to
help build a stronger and more sustainable housing system," said Rohit Gupta,
president and chief executive of Genworth Financial in a statement. During a
conference call on Monday, he said mortgage insurers are talking to FHFA
officials about their plan.

Radian Guaranty President Teresa Bryce Bazemore said the proposal would allow
the GSEs to lower their guarantee fees, which would reduce borrower's costs.

"It is also a good time for the MIs to engage in these discussions since we have
now built financial strength," Bazemore said Monday.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency issued mortgage insurer capital standards
earlier this spring and they go into effect Dec. 31. Insurers have to meet all
the new requirements by February 2016 to certify compliance.

"FHFA remains committed to exploring additional ways that Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac can share credit risk with the private sector and we are reviewing the
analysis prepared for USMI on providing deeper mortgage insurance coverage," an
FHFA spokesperson said.

At the Mortgage Bankers Association annual convention, FHFA Director Mel Watt
did not mention mortgage insurance in his prepared remarks regarding credit
risk. But he emphasized the success of the GSEs' risk transfer transactions,
where credit risk is auctioned off to private investors.

"Since 2013, the enterprises have transferred a significant portion of credit
risk on single-family mortgages with an unpaid principal balance exceeding $700
billion," Watt said. He stressed the FHFA will continue to work with the GSEs on
the other innovative risk transfer transactions, "such as credit-linked notes."
Credit-linked notes allow a securities issuer to transfer a specific credit risk
to investors.

"FHFA and both enterprises are committed to building on recent progress and we
view credit risk transfers as a key part of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's credit
guarantee business going forward," Watt said.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              416 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               November 19, 1990

New England Hiring Texas Thrift Executives

SECTION: Pg. 9

LENGTH: 303 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


New England financial institutions are recruiting former executives of Texas
thrifts in an effort to obtain experienced real estate workout staff, according
to the chief executive of a healthy Texas institution.

Milton Thomas, president of First American Savings Banc, North Richland Hills,
said that a substantial number of former Texas thrift officials have been hired
by institutions in the Northeast.

Mr. Thomas, whose institution has maintained a sound capital base throughout the
downturn in Texas, said that officials who are not tainted by investigations
remain in demand.

The Texas CEO made his comments at a session with reporters during the annual
convention here of the U.S. League of Savings Institutions.

Mr. Thomas also noted that churches are among the borrowers being adversely
affected by changes in thrift capital requirements.

First American, which has just over $ 100 million in assets, was an important
source of funds for church building programs, Mr. Thomas said.

But because these mortgages now are considered commercial loans, the thrift must
set aside 8% capital, compared with 4% on single-family home loans.

The higher capital requirements have made it necessary to charge more than the
single-family rate for church loans.

In most cases, he pointed out, the loans have the church building as collateral
and also have personal guarantees of parishioners, usually up to $ 5,000 each.

Mr. Thomas was optimistic about the Dallas-Fort Worth real estate outlook.

He pointed out that apartment occupancy in the area is at 92-95% and "nothing
has been built in five years."

The area's employment outlook is improving substantially, Mr. Thomas said,
suggesting that the housing market will firm further.

He said the West Dallas market "will be good for the next five years."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture, Milton Thomas, president of First American Savings Banc, North
Richland Hills, Tex., following a session with reporters during U.S. League
convention in San Francisco.

                   Copyright 1990 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              417 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

New Housing Issues Climb 40% in 1988, To $15.61 Billion; Highest Since 1985

                          January 18, 1989, Wednesday

By Matthew Kreps


New issues of municipal housing bonds jumped 40% in 1988, to $15.61 billion, as
issuers rushed to market first to avoid the threat of expiring tax-exempt
bonding authority and then to escape new bond restrictions.

Last year's new-issue volume of tax-exempt housing bonds was the highest since
1985, when a record $37.47 billion of bonds was issued. In 1987, issuers sold
$11.19 billion of bonds, up 3% from 1986's volume of $10.82 billion.

The market started the year slowly but accelerated each quarter. Issuers sold 75
issues totaling $1.67 billion in the first quarter, 107 issues totaling $3.44
billion in the second, 148 issues totaling $4.75 billion in the third, and 149
issues totaling $5.75 billion in the fourth.

Goldman, Sachs & Co. was the leading senior manager of housing bonds in 1988,
with 65 issues totaling $2.46 billion. Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. was the
leading co-manager, participating in 90 issues totaling $5.31 billion, followed
closely by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets with 83 issues totaling $5.29 billion.

Issuers sold 265 single-family mortgage issues totaling $12.36 billion, or 79%
of 1988's housing volume. The single-family volume was up a hefty 48% from 1987,
when $8.35 billion was issued. The 1988 volume was the highest since 1985, when
$15.67 billion was sold. More than two-thirds of the single-family bonds were
sold in the second half of the year.

Several underwriters said issuers began to rush bonds to market in the third
quarter because they were afraid Congress would allow their authority to sell
tax-exempt bonds to lapse on the Dec. 31 "sunset" date set by the Tax Reform Act
of 1986. In late October, Congress enacted a technical corrections tax law that
extended the sunset for another year, but not without restrictions.

"Even though the single-family bonding authority was extended, new restrictions
on mortgage programs and arbitrage encouraged issuers to come to market before
Dec. 31," said Ann Kaplan, vice president for investment banking at Goldman
Sachs.

Jack Bowers, managing director and head of the housing finance department at
Merrill Lynch, said single-family issuers began to increase their sales of
convertible-option bonds in the third quarter as a way to use up their 1988 bond
allocations at low short-term rates before their bonding authority lapsed. Those
sales continued even after the sunset date was extended, he said, because the
issuers thought the convertible-option structure was a good idea in itself.

"Had they gotten an extension longer than 12 months, they might have delayed
their plans. But a 12-month horizon was still too short for them," Mr. Bowers
said.

Convertible-option bonds accounted for $5.26 billion of new issues in 1888 -
one-third of the overall housing volume. This was a 43% increase from 1987, when
$3.69 billion of convertible bonds were issued. Sixty "mixed-rate" issues
combined a total of $1.99 billion of convertible bonds with $1.47 billion of
fixed-rate bonds.

Favorable mortgage rates also played a part in the heavy fourth quarter volume,
said Joseph Lhota, a vice president of PaineWebber Inc. "Mortgage rates were low
enough that they made mortgages more quickly than they expected. They then
needed more funds, so they went back to the market with new issues late in the
year," Mr. Lhota said. "The state housing agencies have made their mortgage
delivery systems more efficient than ever."

Multifamily housing issues rose 14% in 1988, to $3.25 billion, from $2.84
billion in 1987. This sector slumped badly in 1986, dropping to $3.55 billion
from $21.8 billion the year before, after the 1986 tax act imposed severe
restrictions on tax incentives and tax-exempt financing for multifamily housing
projects. The 1986 volume was pumped up by more than $1 billion of taxable bonds
backed by guaranteed investment contracts, but the technique, used primarliy to
earn arbitrage profits, sparked a furor and quickly fell out of favor, causing a
further contraction of new issues in 1987.

"The new-money market for multifamily bonds was limited in 1988," Mr. Bowers
said, "and the stringent requirements of the tax reform act will keep the volume
very low and insignificant, except in areas that can provide other incentives,"
such as rent subsidies, tax abatements, and free land.

Current refundings of housing bonds declined 26% in 1988, to $3.76 billion from
$5.08 billion the year before. Most of the decline came in single-family
refundings that disposed of unused proceeds from older issues.

A glut of unused proceeds had spurred the use of current refundings in 1986,
when sharp declines in conventional mortgage rates made it impossible for
housing agencies to make loans from proceeds of high-rate 1985 issues. That glut
has since dissipated, but the refunding technique continues to be useful for
getting rid of prepayments exceeding the agencies' projections.

Issuers refunded $2.14 billion of single-family bonds last year, roughly half of
the $4.15 billion figure for 1987. They sold $1.27 billion of refunding bonds to
dispose of excess prepayments and revenues, $503 million to dispose of unused
proceeds, $98 million to dispose of both prepayments and unspent proceeds, and
$248 million for other reasons.

State and local governments also refunded $1.62 billion of multifamily bonds, up
74% from $932 million in 1987. Mr. Bowers said some refundings were done to take
out of escrow variable-rate issues originally sold in 1985 with three-year call
provisions. Other refundings were done, he said, to cure technical defaults for
housing projects that were completed but are not generating enough revenues.
These refundings restructure the debt often as floating-rate bonds - to
eliminate projects' cash flow problems.

Ms. Kaplan said one major multifamily refunding - a $236 million issue by the
New York City Housing Development Corp. in December - was an escrow issue
originally sold in 1985 with a three-year letter of credit. The refunding rolled
the bonds over into another short-term issue, which will be refunded into
separate long-term issues for each of the eight to 10 housing projects when they
get under way, she said.

More than two-thirds of last year's housing bonds - $10.82 billion - were
subject to the alternative minimum tax for individuals and corporations. All
new-money housing bonds, except for multifamily issues sold by 501(c)(3)
nonprofit organizations, are subject to the minimum tax. Current refundings are
fully tax-exempt only if they are refunding tax exempt bonds.

Issuers also sold $920 million of taxable housing bonds, accounting for 6% of
the overall housing volume. Two issuers - the Alaska Housing Finance Corp. and
the Arkansas Development Authority - accounted for 72% of the taxable volume.

The Alaska agency sold $375 million of bonds to finance a program that helps
state residents refinance their home mortgages, and the Arkansas authority sold
$216 million of multifamily bonds so it could purchase mortgages of low-income
housing projects from the Government National Mortgage Association, and $68
million of collateralized mortgage obligations.

Issuers used credit enhancements, such as collateralization with federal housing
agency securities, bond insurance, and bank letters of credit, to enhance 198
issues totaling $6.32 billion, or 41%, of the 1988 housing volume. In 1987,
$4.65 billion, or 42%, of the housing volume was enhanced.

Issuers collateralized 92 issues totaling $3.83 billion, or 25% of the volume,
with securities from the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corp., and the Government National Mortgage Association.

Ginnie Mae debt was the overwhelming choice, being used for 88 issues totaling
$3.18 billion. A combination of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities was used
for one $100 million sale, and Fannie Mae securities were used for four issues
totaling $63 million. In 1987, collateralization was used to enhance $3.01
billion of bonds, or 27% of the volume.

Insurance companies provided bond insurance policies, surety bonds, and
guarantees to repay principal and interest for 42 issues totaling $1.26 billion,
or 8% of the volume, up from $749 million and 7% of the volume in 1987.

Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corp. was the leading insurer, with seven
issues totaling $396 million, followed by Financial Security Assurance Inc.,
with $293 million, Financial Guaranty Insurance Co., with $234 million, Bond
Investors Guaranty Insurance Co., with $100 million, and AMBAC Indemnity Corp.,
with $45 million. Eight other insurance companies - all multiline concerns,
which insure more than one line of business and do not segregate pools of
capital against the risk of default - provided guarantees for $192 million of
bonds.

Thirty-seven commercial banks and thrifts provided letters of credit for 64
issues totaling $1.22 billion, or 8% of the housing volume. The Bank of Tokyo
was the leader in this field, with two issues totaling $247 million, followed by
Sumitomo Bank of Japan, with $125 million; Sanwa Bank of Japan, with $101
million; Citibank, with $82 million; and Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank of Japan, with $74
million.

Nearly 97% of the letters of credit were used for multifamily bonds, and 87%
were convertible-option issues. In 1987, letters of credit were used for $890
million, or 8%, of the year's housing bonds.

State housing agencies continued to account for the bulk of the housing bond
volume in 1988, with 245 issues totaling $10.97 billion, or 70% of the total.
Local agencies issued 234 issues, but they totaled only $4.64 billion, or 30% of
the volume. In 1987, state agencies sold $7.38 billion of bonds, for a 66% share
of the market, while local agencies sold $3.81 billion, or a 34% share.
Single-family bonds accounted for 90% of last year's state housing volume but
only for 54% of local housing bond sales.

Housing bonds were sold in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
and the Virgin Islands in 1988. California issuers dominated the states with 56
issues totaling $2.14 billion, or 14% of the national total. New York State was
a distant second, with $990 million, followed by Wisconsin, with $562 million;
Florida, with $549 million; and Massachusetts, with $543 million. Three other
states - Alaska, Arkansas, and Minnesota - each sold more than $500 million of
bonds in 1988.

The California Housing Finance Agency was the leading issuer last year, with
eight issues totaling $756 million. Next came the Massachusetts Housing Finance
Agency, with $542 million; the New York State Mortgage Agency, with $542
million; the Ohio Housing Finance Agency, with $511 million; and the Alaska
Housing Finance Corp., with $511 million. The busiest issuer among U.S. city
agencies was the New York City Housing Development Corp., which ranked eighth
among all issuers, with $354 million.

All housing issues in The Bond Buyer's data mature in 13 months or longer.
Issues sold to finance home loan programs for veterans are included, but bonds
sold for college and university student dormitories, nursing homes, and
retirement communities are excluded.

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1868 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1989 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              418 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                            November 2, 2007 Friday

Home-buyers flock to the city

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 931 words


The changing behaviour of people, many of whom now prefer to live a convenient
life in central Bangkok rather than the suburbs, has resulted in a boom in city
condominiums and a downturn in single-house projects.

Many property developers must now be very careful in launching new projects, and
they find the best strategy for selling their current projects is to join with
banks in offering low-interest loans and increase the alternatives for mortgage
insurance to protect the loan.

It is already the fourth quarter, and the economic slowdown and political
problems still overwhelm consumers worried about their long-term financial
stability. This influences them to delay their purchasing decisions. Thus,
property developers are working hard to adjust themselves through more marketing
campaigns, including offering discounts and giving premiums, which ultimately
creates very strong competition within the industry.

Housing Finance Association president Kitti Patpongpibul said property
developers were trying to attract consumers who had purchasing power but that
they were few in number, because most did not want to spend at the moment.

"Actually, demand exists, but people are waiting to see the political and
economic situation and for the possibility of banks decreasing interest rates
following the US Federal Reserve," Kitti said.

He believes consumer confidence will recover in these final months of the year
if Thailand really does hold a general election and the political situation
becomes clearer.

Property developers today must be very careful when launching new projects, due
to the credibility of consumers and their ability to pay loans.

Many units that consumers have already reserved have had to be resold, because
bank loans for the customers were not approved. If the banks had approved the
loans, they could have ended up with additional non-performing loans later.

Government Housing Bank managing director Khan Prachuabmoh said since banks and
other financial institutions must be very careful and project developers wanted
to accelerate revenue, both partners would have to work together on co-marketing
campaigns.

Many campaigns are launched a month before the end of each quarter, including
offers of very low interest and special prices for life-assurance packages.
These campaigns generate additional costs, but the developers must shoulder the
burden.

"Special Low Interest with Relaxed Payment Periods" is the campaign that Lalin
Property joined with Bangkok Bank to offer customers.

A Lalin source said many customers had problems with credibility in asking for
bank loans, so the campaign should help.

The campaign features two alternatives. First, if customers apply for mortgage
insurance, interest for the first year will be 3 per cent, then the minimum
lending rate (MLR) minus 0.75 per cent after that until the end of the loan
period. For customers who do not apply for mortgage insurance, interest for the
first year will be 3.25 per cent, then the MLR minus 0.75 per cent after that
until the end of the loan period.

As of May 28, the bank's MLR was equal to 7 per cent per year. The maximum loan
was 95 per cent of the housing price but less than 100 per cent of the estimate
of the asset's price, and the maximum payment period was 30 years.

The offer was good from June 1 to September 30.

The banks also offer loans for all kinds of residences, including single houses,
townhouses, commercial buildings, condominiums, houses that need to be
refurbished, even vacant lots for constructing houses.

Mortgage insurance features a life-assurance package that guarantees Bualuang
Home Loan customers their families will own the property fully without if
anything unexpected happens to them, such as death or disability.

Pumipat Sinacharoen, CEO of Bangkok City Smart, Asian Property Development's
property-broker arm, said the market for second-hand homes followed the
direction of the new-home market when the economy rose or fell.

As a result, the industry also often sees house brokers launch campaigns, and
Bangkok City Smart is one of them. It links to Asian Property's website and also
tries to enhance customers' convenience by offering relief from service charges
amounting to between Bt30,000 and Bt100,000 if the initial customers can sell
their homes to subsequent customers. Selling prices are also not much different
from other selling activities done by property developers.

This campaign will end this month. Although it is a short period, it is a good
example of how a broker helped its parent company. The company has also joined
with Siam Commercial Bank to offer special interest rates for customers who buy
furniture to decorate their units in Siam Pathumwan Condo and joined with
Kasikornbank to offer home loans to customers who buy second-hand houses or
condominiums through the company. Customers will be offered 3.25-per-cent
interest in the first year, then MLR minus 0.5 per cent for the rest of the loan
period. The company also offers a maximum loan of 90 per cent of the property's
price and a maximum payment period of 30 years.

Creating business alliances between property developers and banks not only
enhances their opportunities to accelerate their sales volumes, but also enables
them to check the credibility of all customers before transferring ownership.
This prevents many non-performing loans.

Another interesting strategy is letting customers open accounts at certain banks
to create comprehensive financial packages. This increases purchasing power for
customers through aggressive interest rates.

Property reporter

The Nation

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 Nation Multimedia Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              419 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                  June 7, 2010

Flood Insurance and RHS Left Hanging by Congress

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16 Vol. 34 No. 36

LENGTH: 464  words


WASHINGTON-It may be a great time to purchase a home, but Congress isn't making
it easy for families seeking to buy in rural areas or a flood plain.

Not only did lawmakers depart Capitol Hill for the Memorial Day recess without
passing an extension for the National Flood Insurance Program, but the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's authority to renew or issue new flood insurance
policies expired on May 31.

Congress also dropped the ball with regard to the Rural Housing Service
single-family program. RHS exhausted its $13.1 billion of loan authority for
fiscal 2010 on May 17-with about five months to go.

Legislative provisions to extend the flood insurance program and restart the
rural lending program are contained in separate but controversial bills.

Congress returns this week to resume consideration of both bills, which are
being hotly debated due to a divide between lawmakers over reducing deficits and
stimulus spending.

Meanwhile, the Obama administration and regulators are making it easier for
lenders to deal with these interruptions. The Agriculture Department recently
provided RHS lenders with $2.5 billion in conditional loan commitments.

Agriculture secretary Tom Vilsack informed Rep. Ruben Hinojosa, D-Texas, about
the additional commitments in late May. The Texas lawmaker, who chairs the
Congressional Rural Housing Caucus, said the conditional commitments would be
available until they are exhausted.

"The decision to increase the commitment authority even conditionally will
provide the guarantees needed to assist rural families, local housing markets,
create jobs and general new tax revenues," Hinojosa said.

During a previous lapse in the flood insurance program in April, the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corp., Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac issued guidance assuring
lenders they could close loans in flood-prone areas. (To obtain approval the
homebuyer had to complete a flood insurance application and pay the premiums at
the closing table.)

Once Congress re-authorizes the flood insurance program, FEMA will approve the
pending applications.

During the three-week NFIP hiatus in April, Realtors found that some lenders
were willing to make loans based on the agencies' guidance, but others were not.
The Federal Housing Administration issued similar guidance. "FHA will continue
to insure single-family mortgages on homes where flood insurance is normally
required but was not secured during the lapse in flood insurance coverage
authority," FHA said in a notice to lenders.

Despite these efforts to mitigate the impact, the National Association of
Realtors is urging Congress to act quickly to fix the flood insurance and RHS
problems. "Until Congress returns and extends these programs, worthy homebuyers
will be left without access to mortgages," said NAR.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              420 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                     Marin Independent Journal (Marin, CA)

                          February 25, 2004 Wednesday

Greenspan backs mortgage limit

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 713 words


Associated Press

WASHINGTON - Mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac could pose a threat to
the country's financial system if their ability to take on new debt is not
restrained, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said yesterday.

Greenspan lent his influential voice to calls for reforms in the operations of
the two government-chartered companies that dominate the multitrillion-dollar
mortgage industry.

Speaking to the Senate Banking Committee yesterday, Greenspan said he supports
creation of a tough new government regulatory agency to supervise the two
corporations. He said the new regulator should have similar powers to federal
banking regulators, including the authority to set minimum capital standards.

Fannie and Freddie, both Fortune 500 companies, have grown into two of the
biggest financial companies in the world. They stand behind $4 trillion in home
mortgages, or more than three-fourths of the single-family mortgages in the
United States.

Greenspan stressed that this portfolio does not represent a risk currently to
the financial system, but he warned that it could down the road if the explosive
growth in debt held by the government-sponsored enterprises is not restrained.

"To fend off possible future systemic difficulties, which we assess as likely if
GSE expansion continues unabated, preventive actions are required sooner rather
than later," Greenspan told the committee.

Committee chairman Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., told Greenspan that he was
making creation of a new regulator for the two institutions and the Federal Home
Loan Bank System a top priority this year.

Shelby is supporting legislation to replace the current Office of Federal
Housing Enterprise Oversight, which critics say lacks the power to properly
regulate institutions of the size of Fannie Mac and Freddie Mac, with a new
independent regulatory agency.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have been under increased scrutiny since an
accounting crisis at Freddie Mac came to light last spring. Freddie Mac
acknowledged that it understated earnings by $5 billion for 2000 through 2002.
It later admitted inflating 2001 profits by nearly $1 billion.

In statements yesterday, the two agencies took issue with Greenspan's
recommendations.

Jayne Shontell, a Fannie Mae senior vice president, said the company appreciated
that Greenspan had made it clear "that his concerns are not about some imminent
problem" but about what course should be taken. However, she said, "We, of
course, disagree with most of his conclusions."

Freddie Mac President Chairman Dick Syron said that "the United States remains
the only nation where a 30-year, prepayable mortgage is broadly available and
this is in large measure because of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae."

Greenspan said the problem facing Congress was the fact that investors widely
believe that if either Freddie or Fannie, as they are popularly known, got into
financial trouble, the government would bail them out.

Greenspan said this perceived guarantee allows the corporations to raise money
at lower interest rates than their competitors.

The two companies say their lower cost of funds is passed on as a benefit to
home buyers in the form of lower mortgage rates, but Greenspan pointed to a Fed
study that this subsidy had lowered mortgage costs on average by a tiny 0.07
percent with most of the billions of dollars in savings going instead to the
corporations and their shareholders.

Greenspan said the perceived government backing for Fannie and Freddie had given
the institutions a competitive advantage that has meant they "essentially
elbowed out a number of competitors" and allowed the institutions to grow
substantially.

In addition to capping debt growth, Greenspan suggested the two companies should
be more focused on their core responsibilities - buying home mortgages from
local lenders and repackaging them as mortgage-backed securities that can be
traded rather than branching them out into other types of loan activities.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have strong political support in Congress and
previous overhaul efforts have gone nowhere. However, analysts said that with
the support of Greenspan and Shelby, the latest efforts might succeed.

Copyright and permissions

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

    Copyright 2004 Marin Independent Journal, a MediaNews Group publication


                              421 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                          September 7, 2011 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Buyers of high-priced homes in a bind;
Falling loan limits will push more into jumbos

BYLINE: Julie Schmit, USA TODAY

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 470 words


Time is short  for some buyers and owners of more expensive homes to get the
best terms on mortgage loans.

Starting Oct. 1, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will cut the size of loans they buy
from lenders. That will force many future borrowers into more expensive and
harder-to-get jumbo loans.

The Freddie and Fannie limits, which are generally $417,000 for single-family
homes nationwide, were raised in 2008 in some high-cost housing markets to
stimulate the economy. In many areas, the limits rose to $729,750 and next month
they'll fall  to $625,500. Limits will drop more sharply in some areas and less
in others.

Major lenders, including Bank of America, Wells Fargo and JPMorgan Chase, have
stopped taking new applications for affected loans so that those in process
close by the deadline.

Meanwhile, borrowers with offers on homes -- who need loans at the current
limits -- are "panicked to close loans" by the deadline, says Pamela Liebman,
CEO of the Corcoran Group, a residential real estate brokerage company in New
York City.

Some lenders are "buried" given the rush to close deals before the changes and
the mini-refinance boom driven by low rates, says Dean Rizzi of Guarantee
Mortgage in San Francisco. He has 10 home buyers who need loans to close before
the deadline.

With jumbos, borrowers could see a 4.5% interest rate, for example, go to about
5%. Down payments of 20% will be the norm, says Quicken Loans economist Robert
Walters.

Bank of America says it will close its deals in time. It stopped taking new
applications for loans affected by the changes in mid-July, spokesman Terry
Francisco says. Borrowers starting the loan process now are probably "out of
luck" if they want loan terms based on current limits, says LendingTree
economist Cameron Findlay.

The changes  will affect 2% of the nation's homes, but more in some areas, the
National Association of Home Builders estimates.

Liebman expects 10% of New York City's market to be affected -- largely  the
$800,000 to $1 million  starter home market. The new loan requirements will
"pull a lot of buyers out of the market," she says.

Some buyers may lack needed down payments and others may have to consider less
costly homes, says Beth Peerce, president of the California Association of
Realtors.

Lobbying efforts to get Congress to extend the higher limits "are not looking
great," Peerce says.

List

Changing loan limits

U.S. counties with the greatest shares of homes affected by changing limits on
loans that can be purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac: San Francisco  12%
Marin, Calif.  12% Monterey, Calif.  11% San Juan, Wash.  11% San Mateo, Calif.
10% Monroe, Fla.  10% Summit, Utah  10% Nantucket, Mass.  10% New York, N.Y.  9%
Teton, Wyo.  8% Arlington, Va.  8% Falls Church City, Va.  8% Dukes, Mass.  8%
Source: Zillow Mortgage Marketplace

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              422 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 6, 2013 Tuesday

Obama heads to Phoenix to talk housing

LENGTH: 698  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Bernie Sanders, U.S Government has issued the following
news release:

With the nation's real estate market on a winning streak, President Obama is
heading to Phoenix on Tuesday to make a major speech on homeownership where he
will lay out his plan for keeping the U.S. housing market humming.

Obama chose Phoenix -- the epicenter of the U.S. housing bust that wiped out $7
trillion in homeowner equity -- to make the next speech in his ongoing summer
road tour in which he has been spotlighting the progress the U.S. economy has
made under his watch, while hammering Republicans for not working with him to
help bolster a still lackluster economy.

The speech on Tuesday is a bookend to the remarks he made in Phoenix shortly
after taking office in 2009 as the real estate market crumbled. And Obama will
follow up his housing speech on Wednesday with an online interview on the real
estate website Zillow where he will expand on his ideas for keeping the housing
market on a winning streak.

"We are still not where we need to be, and there is still ample room to grow
when it comes to providing more homeowners the assurances and capability to
refinance their homes and to further stabilize and grow the housing market
across the country," White House spokesman Jay Carney told reporters Monday.

Phoenix has made huge strides since the housing market bottomed out there in
September 2011. The median single-family-home price reached $185,000 this May,
up 25.9% up from last year, according to an analysis by Mike Orr, a researcher
at Arizona State University's W.P. Carey School of Business.

While housing prices are up and foreclosures are down significantly, as they are
through much of the country, Orr warned that Obama will return to a city where
first time buyers and moderate income earners are having a difficult time
competing with institutional investors who took advantage of depressed prices.

"The biggest problem for the first-time buyer that is trying to buy something in
the $125,000 to $150,000 range is that they are competing against offers that
are all cash, and it's very tempting for the seller to take those because they
are very low risk," Orr said.

Obama is expected to repeat his call for Congress to take action to make it
easier for homeowners who are underwater on their mortgages to refinance their
loans at lower interest rates and move to make it easier for home buyers to get
loans and will amplify his call for greater simplification of lending terms.

But in perhaps a new development, Obama is also expected to use his speech to
lay out his principles for winding down the government-backed mortgage giants
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which own or guarantee about half of the nation's
mortgages

Fannie and Freddie collapsed in 2008 before being bailed out with almost $200
billion in taxpayer funds, and efforts to alter their status seem likely to face
a swell of lobbying by banks and mortgage industry.

But two senior administration officials, who spoke on the condition they not be
identified in order to preview the president's speech, said Obama was pleased by
bipartisan efforts in the Senate to phase out the government-backed enterprises.

The Senate banking committee chairman Tim Johnson, D-S.D., and ranking member
Sen. Mike Crapo, R-Idaho, announced last month that they had reached an
agreement on legislation to address the finances of the Federal Housing
Authority as a first step in broader housing finance reform.

And in June, a bipartisan group in the banking committee -- led by Sen. Mark
Warner, D-Va., and Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tenn. -- introduced plans to bring an end
to Fannie and Freddie and replace them with an agency modeled after the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corp.

Obama believes that there is a place for the government to play a "limited and
targeted role for a catastrophic guarantee" in insuring mortgages, one
administration official said.

But the president, who the officials suggested is warmer to the Johnson-Crapo
plan, wants to see the legislation create greater assistance for first-time home
buyers and do more to preserve affordable rental housing.

For further information please visit: http://www.sanders.senate.gov

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              423 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 20, 2015 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Agency Sets Goals for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to Encourage Affordable Housing

BYLINE: By DIONNE SEARCEY

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Personal Tech; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 668 words


The federal agency that regulates the mortgage finance companies Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac on Wednesday set goals for the next two years to nudge them to
provide mortgages to more low-income borrowers and to landlords who offer low
rents to poor people.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency is required by a 2008 law that took effect
after the collapse of the housing market to set annual targets for mortgages
bought by Fannie and Freddie, the government-run institutions that back most
home loans.

The goals act as directives for Fannie and Freddie to focus more of their
business on affordable housing. The companies buy loans from private lenders,
package them into mortgage-backed securities and provide a credit guarantee to
investors to ensure timely payment.

Some advocates of housing for the poor expressed disappointment that the goals
were not more ambitious. But the agency hailed the rules as an important lever
for helping more poor families buy homes and for improving access to mortgages
for landlords who rent out affordable apartments to low-income tenants in
poverty-stricken neighborhoods.

''These goals establish a solid foundation for affordable and sustainable
homeownership and rental opportunities in this country,'' Melvin L. Watt, the
agency's director, said in a news release.

The housing market is improving, but still lags the boom years before the market
collapsed. Many potential buyers still complain that they have trouble getting
mortgages, that few homes are on the market and that rents are soaring.

The agency set separate targets for single-family housing including categories
for mortgages for low-income families, very low-income families and families in
low-income areas, and for refinancing mortgages. The goals for mortgages for
owners of multifamily property also include separate targets for low- and very
low-income families.

The agency said 24 percent of mortgages should be bought by Freddie or Fannie
for homes for low-income borrowers, or those with incomes no greater than 80
percent of an area's median income. That goal is one percentage point higher
than the goal for 2014.

The National Community Reinvestment Coalition, which advocates affordable
housing, said that the new target fell short of expectations.

''With demand up and the economy stronger, to say 24 percent is to create a
standard that isn't as helpful as what is needed,'' said John Taylor, president
of the organization, who called the new goals ''a lost opportunity.''

The agency also set a goal of 6 percent of mortgages for borrowers considered
very low income, who have incomes no greater than 50 percent of the median
income of the area. That is slightly less ambitious than last year's goal of 7
percent.

For multifamily units, the agency wants the lenders to back mortgages for
300,000 units a year through 2017 for low-income units and 60,000 a year for
very low-income units.

For mortgages for small apartment complexes, the goals are 48,000 total
low-income units for the next two years, less than half of the 105,000 total
units originally proposed. The higher goals would have risked ''crowding out''
smaller lenders, the agency said, acknowledging that the final goals are modest
but are intended to keep Fannie and Freddie active in this market.

The agency said that Fannie and Freddie had not fallen short of similar housing
goals in the past, but that it could take action to ensure the goals are met if
problems arise.

During the housing crisis, the federal government placed Fannie and Freddie in
conservatorship, and they received a taxpayer bailout to avoid bankruptcies.
They now pay their profits to the Treasury.

The agency said it had received 144 comment letters from advocacy groups and
others on its proposed goals. A ''significant number'' of those letters
questioned whether Fannie and Freddie should still be under conservatorship or
were tied to unrelated matters.

''Those comments are beyond the scope of this rule-making,'' the agency said.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/20/business/low-income-housing
-goals-set-for-fannie-mae-and-freddie-mac.html

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A recent protest in Manhattan over the lack of affordable
housing for the homeless. Some advocates found the new goals wanting.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL APPLETON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company


                              424 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 17, 1988, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. to Raise Loan Rates

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 45, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 199 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


The Veterans Administration said today that it was raising its maximum interest
rate for federally backed V.A. home mortgages by half a percentage point, to
10.5 percent.

A V.A. spokeswoman, Pam Siciliano, said the agency was making the change, which
will take effect Monday, to reflect recent increases in interest rates in
financial markets.

The change is the fifth in 1988. The low for the year was 9.5 percent on Feb. 1.
The rate rose to 10 percent on April 4 and to 10.5 percent on May 23. On Nov. 1,
it was cut to 10 percent. Meanwhile, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
or Freddie Mac, said today that the national average for 30-year conventional
mortgages - those without Government guarantees - rose to 10.71 percent this
week from 10.46 percent last week. It matched the highest rate for the year so
far, in the week ended Aug. 19.

The V.A. said that, effective Monday, a variety of other mortgage rates will
also rise by half a percentage point. Graduated payment mortgages will increase
to 10.75 percent, home improvement loans will rise to 12 percent and loans for
mobile homes will increase to 13 percent.

The V.A. rates apply to new loans, not existing ones.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                              425 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                August 20, 2012

Wells' Home Loans Dominance Worries Government Officials

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8 Vol. 36 No. 46

LENGTH: 939  words


Wells Fargo's grip on the U.S. mortgage market has tripped alarms among
regulators and lawmakers concerned about the bank's control over one of every
three new loans.

The concentration has drawn warnings from the inspector general for Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac, the head of the Ginnie Mae, Fitch and congressmen.

"A concentration of issuers creates an oligopoly," said Bill Frey, head of
Greenwich Financial Services. The result will be "higher mortgage costs for
generations as well as slower economic growth."

As recently as the 1990s, a company with 7% market share would have been
considered a large player, according to David Stevens, CEO of the Mortgage
Bankers Association.

Wells, now led by CEO John Stumpf, controlled 15% of the market in 2007 before
the financial crisis hobbled rivals such as Bank of America and Citigroup.

"The nation benefits from a broadly distributed mortgage finance system," said
Stevens. "If the market is too concentrated on one company, and if they were to
change their strategy around mortgage originations or got into financial trouble
and had to leave the market altogether, you could have market disruptions."

Officials aren't suggesting that Wells did anything improper, or that the bank
is putting its own soundness at risk. Instead, as they seek to avoid another
financial crisis, regulators' focus is on what might happen if Wells' enthusiasm
wanes for housing, which made up almost a fifth of the U.S. economy in more
prosperous years. Last month, the bank said it will stop funding loans
originated and sold by independent mortgage brokers.

"The home lending business is a key part of Wells Fargo's strategic vision for
the future," Vickee Adams, a bank spokeswoman, said in an email. "We have always
taken a longer-term view of the home lending business and we have succeeded by
lending responsibly."

Adams said the lender should be judged by its share of the retail channel, 16.3%
in the first quarter, rather than the entire business, which also involves
buying loans. In January, sales managers in the San Francisco Bay Area urged
retail loan officers to reach for 40% of the new-home purchase market, according
to two attendees who asked that their names not be used because they weren't
authorized to speak publicly.

Edward J. DeMarco, acting director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, has
said he's concerned about concentration and urged officials in a May speech to
consider changes. Freddie-with Fannie, the recipients of nearly $190 billion in
government aid-bought 82% of the single-family loans it purchased in 2011 from
10 companies, filings show, with 40% from Wells and JPMorgan.

Fannie and Freddie rely on Wells and other large servicers to collect payments
for the loans they guarantee. That makes them vulnerable to the business
practices and financial health of a few large banks, said Steve A. Linick, the
FHFA's IG. The top 10 serviced 75% of single-family mortgages guaranteed by
Fannie, according to company filings. "A limited number of servicers poses a
safety and soundness risk," Linick said in an interview.

Corinne Russell, a spokeswoman for the FHFA, declined to make DeMarco available
for an interview.

Amy Bonitatibus, a spokeswoman at JPMorgan, declined to comment. Spokespeople
for the Fed and the OCC, which regulate banks, also declined to comment.

Aside from the impact on Fannie and Freddie, lawmakers and consumer advocates
say the lack of options for mortgage credit is causing borrowers to pay more
than they should. "To the extent there is a lack of competition, that's costing
homeowners money," Rep. John Campbell, a California Republican, said in an
interview.

Fed officials have driven down rates to make it cheaper for consumers and
businesses to borrow. Further efforts to reduce rates may fall short because,
despite the profits, lenders have been slow to add capacity, Morgan Stanley
analysts led by Vipul Jain wrote in an Aug. 3 report. Even at current rates,
Campbell said, the housing recovery-which he considers central to a U.S.
economic revival-has been sluggish.

While the home sales would have been worse without Wells, it's not sustainable,
Campbell said. U.S. officials including DeMarco haven't taken large-scale steps
to reduce Fannie and Freddie's reliance on a few companies, and Campbell said he
hasn't taken up the issue with the government mortgage companies.

Wells' leading market share isn't likely to draw the ire of antitrust monitors,
at least not yet, according to Makan Delrahim, an attorney at Brownstein, Hyatt,
Farber, Schreck LLP and a former attorney at the Justice Department's antitrust
division. The U.S. doesn't track explicit market share thresholds, meaning a
company can control 90% market share if it gets there by offering better
products or services and not by unduly taking advantage of its market position,
he said.

Wells' own health probably isn't at risk, either, according to analysts. It has
at least a decade-long track record of posting annual profits and its history of
avoiding some of the industry's worst underwriting practices.

Bank executives also pride themselves on the diversity of their revenue sources.
CFO Timothy J. Sloan has also said its "debatable" whether Wells belongs on
regulatory lists of the largest global banks required to hold extra capital
because their failure could threaten the financial system. Still, the growth in
mortgages has started to challenge thresholds long cited by former chairman and
CEO Richard Kovacevich, who said a diversified bank would have no business
that's more than 10% of revenue over an economic cycle. Mortgage banking was
13.6% in the second quarter.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              426 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           November 29, 2003 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Fannie, Freddie Boost Loan Limit Size

BYLINE: Al Yoon, Bloomberg News

SECTION: Real Estate; F04

LENGTH: 158 words


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac raised the limit on the size of single-family home
mortgages they buy from banks by 3.4 percent to $333,700, increasing the pool of
loans they are eligible to purchase or guarantee.

The new loan ceiling, up from $322,700, matches the increase in the U.S. average
home price in October from a year earlier, Washington-based Fannie Mae said.

The boost for conforming loans is half that of last year as house price
appreciation slowed, said Kevin Jackson, a mortgage bond analyst at RBC Dain
Rauscher Inc. in Chicago.

The rate on a 30-year fixed-rate loan for more than $322,700 was 6.25 percent
Wednesday, or 0.375 percentage points more than a mortgage conforming to Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac limits, according to lender Washington Mutual Inc.'s Web
site.

The lower rates available on conforming loans means 95,000 home buyers in 2004
could save as much as $21,900 over the life of a 30-year mortgage, Fannie Mae
said.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post


                              427 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Single-Family Mortgages: Treasury Proposals Ease Interest-Calculating
Obligations

                          November 5, 2003, Wednesday

By Susanna Duff Barnett



The Treasury Department yesterday liberalized its position on interest
calculations for single-family mortgage revenue bonds when it issued proposed
regulations that favor issuers and appear to aid transactions currently under
audit.

The proposed rules mean that issuers of single-family tax-exempt mortgage bonds
would not have to include the portion of interest payments used to pay mortgage
guarantee fees when calculating the effective rate of interest on the mortgage
loans.

These are the first regulations issued under the Tax Reform Act of 1986 that
address mortgage revenue bonds. The proposed rules also would change the
existing regulations on pooled mortgage insurance.

The proposed rules mark a shift in the agency's interpretation of current
regulations, which was outlined in a technical advice memorandum written by the
Internal Revenue Service in December. The memo, made public in April, stated an
unidentified issuer of single-family mortgage bonds must include the portion of
interest payments used to pay mortgage guarantee fees to Ginnie Mae when
calculating the effective rate of interest on the mortgage loans.

Based on that ruling, issuers would have to recalculate their mortgage yield to
see if they have violated arbitrage restrictions. Under Section 143(g) of the
IRS tax code, the effective rate of mortgage interest cannot exceed the bond
yield by more than 1.125 percentage points.

For example, an issuer could have been in trouble under the TAM if it paid 6% on
a tax-exempt bond issue and charged 7.13% for a mortgage based on those
proceeds, but used six basis points of the interest rates on the mortgage to pay
for the guarantee to Ginnie Mae or other mortgage insurers such as the Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac.

Under the TAM, the effective rate would have been 7.13%, which would exceed the
allowed spread of 1.125 percentage points. But under the proposed rules, the
effective rate would be 7.124% -- just under the allowable spread.

The proposed rule would be retroactive. It would also apply to the eight
single-family mortgage bond issues that were under audit as of last April by the
IRS' tax-exempt bond enforcement division. The agency opened the audits more
than two years ago, including one directly addressed by the TAM. Mark Scott,
director of the IRS' tax-exempt bond division, could not be reached for comment
for whether the eight are still under audit.

The Treasury will accept comments on the proposed regulations until Jan. 7 and
will hold a public hearing on Jan. 28.

Frederic Ballard Jr., a partner with Ballard Spahr Andrews & Ingersoll LLP here,
said the TAM was a reasonable interpretation of existing regulations, but was
not good policy.

"To change the result in the TAM, Treasury also had to change the regulations,"
Ballard said. "The new rule makes good policy because it treats the mortgage-
guarantee fees essentially the same as it would treat premiums for bond
insurance. The preamble to the regulations says all these forms of credit
enhancement should be treated equivalently."

Mitch Bragin, a tax partner with Kutak Rock LLP here, said that the proposed
rule would not have a great impact on issuers in today's market due to low
interest rates that are being offered by conventional mortgage rates.

"Eventually it will be helpful, especially for local housing agencies that don't
have a lot of capital," Bragin said.

Bruce Serchuk, an attorney advisor with the Treasury's office of tax policy who
co-authored the proposed regulations, also wrote the TAM while working in his
former position as a senior technical reviewer in the IRS' chief counsel office.

Serchuk said that when he wrote the TAM he relied on the current regulation,
which was written in 1981. In doing so he discovered that issuers still could
narrow the spread on the yield of the bonds and the effective rate on interest
on the mortgages by acquiring a qualified guarantee on the bonds, which would
increase the bond yield. The net effect is the same, Serchuk said.

"We didn't think under these circumstances we should be asking them to change
the forms of their transactions," Serchuk said.

He said he hopes the proposed rule is a first step in updating the mortgage
revenue bond regulations and added that this is an unusual set of circumstances
that caused a change in position. "This is not something that we would expect to
happen with any degree of regularity," Serchuk said.

Copyright 2003 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.bondbuyer.com

SECTION: WASHINGTON ; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 760 words

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2003 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              428 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               November 10, 1986

REMICs' Secondary Effect to Be Dramatic

SECTION: Pg. 25A

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


The Tax Reform Act of 1986 will "dramatically" change the secondary mortgage
markets by the introduction of the real estate mortgage investment conduit
(REMIC) for the issuance of multiclass mortgage-backed securities, according to
an analyst here.

REMICs provide easier access to the capital markets because they are simpler and
more efficient issuing vehicles than those for collateralized mortgage
obligations, said Jerry M. Dell'Isola, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers
Inc.

Tax reform minimizes tax considerations for issuing multiclass issues, he said,
which will cause issuers to "quickly adopt" the REMIC structure for their
secondary market deals.

The issuance of multiclass passthroughs could quickly supplant that of single
class securities, Mr. Dell'Isola noted.

The tax act, he pointed out, allows both the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
and the Federal National Mortgage Association to issue multiclass securities
through REMICs, and both the agencies, as well as the Government National
Mortgage Association, can guarantee the securities.

The new tax laws allow a five year transition period during which multiple class
MBSs can be issued through other structures, but after that, only through
REMICs.

The Shearson analyst said that REMIC securities will appeal to a larger group of
investors than CMOs do now because the tax laws remove certain restrictions that
prevent savings institutions and foreigners from purchasing CMOs or residual
interests in them through owner trusts.

Multiple class securities are generally more desirable than single class
securities, pointed out Mr. Dell'Isola, because the multiclass securities allow
better management of prepayment risk in the underlying pool of mortgages.

By lowering the overall tax rate, the tax reform package will raise the after
tax cost of homeownership, he said, possibly resulting in prepayments on
single-family mortgage passthrough securities becoming more sensitive to falling
interest rates.

Higher effective interest costs improve the relative advantage of 15-year versus
30-year mortgages and will further expand the market for the shorter maturity
securities, according to the Shearson analyst.

He also said that tax reform will trigger a short-term increase in prepayment
rates for passthroughs on multifamily mortgages because investors who can no
longer deduct losses on the properties will sell them.

Mr. Dell'Isola said that the new tax laws will eliminate favorable installment
sales tax treatment on the gains from home sales, which would make CMOs less
attractive to home builders participating in builder bond programs.  As a
result, they will issue fewer CMOs, he said.

The analyst pointed out that the tax reform act will not change the way savings
institutions conduct their day-to-day business, but it will weaken their
incentives for investing in mortgage securities.

However, the tax laws expand the pool of qualified assets to include both
regular and residual interests in REMICs, which would probably entice those
thrifts that have refrained from purchasing CMOs and residuals because of the
uncertain tax consequences into entering the market through the purchase of
interests in REMICs.

The introduction of REMICs will cause lenders to originate fewer adjustable-rate
mortgages, the analyst said, and mortgage bankers will "eagerly pursue"
fixed-rate mortgages to use in REMICs because they are easily securitized.

Thrifts and other portfolio lenders that cannot obtain ARMs will originate FRMs
instead, he said, and issue REMICs and hold the shorter maturity tranches.

The simpler and more efficient structure of REMICs will allow many smaller
mortgage lenders to access the capital markets, according to the Shearson
analyst.

Because REMICs enable mortgage lenders to obtain funds in the capital markets
more cheaply than existing methods, Mr. Dell'Isola pointed out, they open the
capital markets to more lenders, which in turn will cause the yield on mortgage
securities and the rates on primary mortgages to fall, despite the demand for
mortgage credit through home equity loans and high loan-to-value ratio loans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              429 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             August 17, 2012 Friday

GSEs' Future Now Hinges on Mortgage Guarantee Fees

BYLINE: Jeff Horwitz

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 177 No. F332

LENGTH: 1151  words


Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's recent financial results have significantly
exceeded even the government's most optimistic projections, making the fees they
charge lenders suddenly relevant to determining their future.

As recently as October, the Federal Housing Finance Agency estimated the
government-sponsored enterprises' ongoing government bailout would exceed $202
billion by mid-2012 in the best-case scenario. At worst, the hole would total
around $250 billion. And under all circumstances, they would still be getting
deeper in debt.

The last three quarters have been far kinder to the GSEs than that. Because of
the stabilization in house prices, neither Fannie nor Freddie has had to borrow
significant money from the Treasury since the beginning of the year, leaving the
total tab for their bailout at around $190 million.

Now that they've stabilized, what fees their conservator charges could well
determine their fate.

The housing giants earn such guarantee fees from lenders in exchange for
assuming the credit risk on conforming loans, with the ultimate cost being
passed through to borrowers. The FHFA, as the GSEs' conservator, determines the
rates.

Should the FHFA raise fees only slightly, that would keep mortgage rates down
and make the GSEs permanent wards. Raising them high enough could eventually
resurrect a private securitization market and shrink Fannie and Freddie. Should
the regulator take a middle route of moderate increases, it could turn the GSEs
into a serious income generator - assuming there's not another crash.

"The fee mechanism is the easiest lever to throw regarding GSE reform," says Tim
Rood of the Collingwood Group, a consulting firm focusing on federal housing
finance. "The FHFA has proved to be the only political or regulatory body that's
willing to act."

The primary reason why Fannie and Freddie have stabilized is that the housing
market has improved, which halted losses and allowed the two GSEs to release
more than $2.6 billion in reserves over the last two quarters. But the cessation
of bleeding is a reminder of something else: the extremely simple business of
selling government guarantees on loans is highly lucrative, at least on a
short-term basis.

"It's a powerful thing, how much the government guarantee is worth," says Dave
Stephens, the chief operating officer and chief financial officer at UCM, a
Denver firm that hedges mortgage servicing.

To be sure, income from fees won't be able to pay down the GSEs' debts if fees
remain at or near their current rates. Even during the current refinance boom,
gross fee revenue is on track to pay off for only $12 billion of the $19 billion
in interest owed to the government this year. Guarantee income still lags behind
interest income from the GSEs' portfolios of loans and securities.

"Even if all future legacy"\xA6losses have been reserved for and the
post-conservatorship vintages realize zero credit losses, the guarantee business
does not generate enough income relative to senior preferred dividends that must
be paid to the Treasury," wrote Barclays analyst James Ma of the Fannie and
Freddie results.

FHFA Director Ed DeMarco has been similarly blunt about the GSEs' prospects of
paying down their debts.

"It ought to be clear to everyone at this point, given [Freddie Mac and Fannie
Mae's] losses since being placed into conservatorship and the terms of the
Treasury's financial support agreements, that [Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae] will
not be able to earn their way back to a condition that allows them to emerge
from conservatorship," he said last September.

This could readily change, however, with an adjustment of the GSEs' fee
schedule. When Congress approved a 10 basis-point fee hike in April to cover the
cost of a payroll tax cut extension, the Congressional Budget Office estimated
that it would generate an additional $3 billion to $4 billion a year. The FHFA
is expected to announce another hike shortly, with Fannie and Freddie keeping
the proceeds. And this will come on top the higher "delivery fees" Freddie Mac
is already charging; in the second quarter its total average fees on single
family loans rose to 24 basis points, up from less than 19 a year earlier.

These hikes lend themselves to simple math, with fee revenues on new production
rising in line with the increases. In the second quarter Fannie earned $2
billion, an effective average of 27 basis points, in fees on its current
single-family portfolio. New production produced an average of 40 basis points
in fees, however.

"The FHFA is in a position of tremendous power," says Rob Zimmer, a principal of
consulting firm TVDC and a lobbyist for Community Mortgage Lenders of America.
"The GSEs will repay the taxpayers unless Washington goes out of its way to
ensure they don't."

Exercising its power could be politically dicey for the FHFA, Rood notes.

"If the fees go up incrementally to a point that is so distasteful to policy
makers and raises the cost of housing, then there could be a political
backlash," he says.

The FHFA, which did not respond to a request for comment before press time, has
so far telegraphed its intent to raise fees gradually. Fee increases aren't
intended to make money, it has said, so much as to eventually reduce Fannie's
and Freddie's central position in the market. In the agency's June annual report
to Congress, the GSEs' regulator described intentionally diminishing their
advantages as "the next chapter" of conservatorship, setting the stage for
Congress to redefine their role or eliminate them.

"The final chapter"\xA6 remains the province of lawmakers," the FHFA report
says.

Whether lawmakers visit that province even after the election is an open
question. Collingwood's Rood argues that the future of the GSEs "will be taken
more earnestly" once November passes. Others remain skeptical that the next
Congress will be more eager to address the subject.

"There's no upside for Republicans in taking a vote on anything other than
liquidation, and that vote's never going to come," says Zimmer. "No Republican's
going to be thanked for building a better hybrid mousetrap."

That would leave the FHFA responsible for guessing how high it would have to
raise prices to restart the private market, Zimmer argues.

UCM's Stephens estimates that investors would buy vanilla housing securities
without a government guarantee for a premium of about 50-75 basis points above
where fees have traditionally been set, though such a spread is obviously
hypothetical.

Others say the question of where the private market would price conforming loan
securities is still premature. Because discussions on how to revive
securitization and the definition of "qualified residential mortgage" are still
underway, it's impossible for private sector securitizers to know the terms on
which they could enter the market. Until then, Rood says, fee hikes amount to
"showing a little leg to the private market."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              430 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 26, 2015 Thursday

Reps. Carney, Delaney, & Himes File Housing Finance Reform Legislation to
Protect 30-Year Mortgage & Taxpayers

LENGTH: 1722  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of House of Representative John Carney, U.S Government has issued the
following news release:

Representatives John Carney (DE-At Large), John K. Delaney (MD-6), and Jim Himes
(CT-4) have introduced legislation designed to protect the fixed-rate 30-year
mortgage - a key instrument to ensure home affordability for the middle class -
and shield American taxpayers from future bailouts by reforming the housing
finance system. The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act combines the
private sector's superior ability to price risk with the federal government's
unique ability to provide capacity.

Original cosponsors of The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act are: Rep.
Denny Heck (WA-10), Rep. Gregory Meeks (NY-5), Rep. Patrick Murphy (FL-18), Rep.
Jared Polis (CO-2), Rep. Mike Quigley (IL-5), Congressman David Scott (GA-13),
Rep. Kyrsten Sinema (AZ-9), and Rep. Peter Welch (VT-At Large).

"This proposal seeks to preserve housing affordability while protecting
taxpayers from another bailout," said Congressman Carney. "It finds the middle
ground between public sector and private sector involvement in the housing
sector. If we to want to preserve the dream of home ownership and make sure
taxpayers aren't on the hook for another bailout -- the status quo has to
change. Our bill is the right policy, and it's also an approach that appeals to
both sides of the aisle. As Congress works to reform our housing finance system,
I'm optimistic that a proposal like ours -- that combines private sector pricing
with the government's ability to expand access to credit - can cut through the
partisan divide."


"Without access to quality affordable housing, there's no American Dream for
millions of middle class families," said Congressman Delaney. "I'm proud to work
with Congressman Himes and CongressmanCarney on legislation that keeps the
fixed-rate thirty-year mortgage alive and preserves a government guarantee while
introducing greater fiscal responsibility and stability to the housing finance
system. The financial crisis and the bailout of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac made
it clear that we need reform to protect taxpayers. The Partnership to Strengthen
Homeownership takes the best ideas from both parties to create a 21st century
housing finance system that combines the strengths of the private sector and the
public sector. Housing finance reform is too important for us to ignore and I
look forward to working with my colleagues in both parties in moving this
legislation forward."

"This bill ensures that new homeowners will continue to have access to the
affordable, predictable financing options they need, while safeguarding
taxpayers and our economy from future downturns," saidCongressman Himes. "Our
legislation brings together the market's efficiency in pricing risk with
government's unique ability to provide scale to create a safer, more liquid
housing market that preserves access to affordable housing for American
families."

This legislation, first introduced last Congress, establishes an insurance
program through Ginnie Mae which maintains the full faith and credit of the
federal government, but protects taxpayer investment by requiring adequate
private sector capital and accurate pricing of government reinsurance. All
government guaranteed single-family and multi-family mortgage-backed securities
will be supported by a minimum of 5% private sector capital, which will stand in
a first loss position. The remaining 95% of the risk will be shared between
Ginnie Mae and a private reinsurer on a pari passu basis. Fees paid to Ginnie
Mae for providing these securities will be allocated to affordable housing
programs. The bill winds down Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and allows them to be
sold and recapitalized.

The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership

Private Capital and Privately Priced Government Guarantee

Ginnie Mae will establish a mortgage insurance program where at least 5% of the
"first loss" is held by private entities and the remaining 95% of the risk is
shared on a pari passu basis between the government and private reinsurer.

Ginnie will design and study two types of programs, then implement one , or both
programs, if they further an effective, efficient secondary mortgage market and
maintain the risk sharing principles outlined above.

Program 1: Reinsurance Bid Program

Aggregators and issuers will be permitted to deliver qualified mortgage pools to
Ginnie.  The price Ginnie charges for the guarantee will be ascertained through
an insurance bidding process described below.
    Ginnie will secure forward reinsurance contracts on a periodic basis (30-90
days), with the assistance of a reinsurance broker appointed annually in a
competitive process.
    The bids will seek coverage for two levels of risk on each securitization -
the 5% "first loss" and the remaining 95% "second loss."
    From these bids, Ginnie will contract with a series of carriers for each
risk and aggregate the policies.
    For the first loss, Ginnie will seek bids for 100% of its expected exposure.

    For the second loss, Ginnie will seek bids for 100% of its aggregate
exposure but will offer retrocessional reinsurance for up to 90% of the second
loss cover.
    Ginnie's guarantee fee quote will cover a forward period (Quote Period) as
determined by Ginnie.
    Prices passed onto originators may vary based on quality of product, and
other factors as determined by Ginnie, so long as the overall pricing equals  a
weighted-average bid in a given period.

Program 2: Bond Guarantor Program

Ginnie will reinsure first loss holders of risk through an insurance system
where insurers/guarantors will hold mortgage credit risk on an aggregate, loan
by loan, or security basis.
    In addition to security level coverage, insurers/guarantors are authorized
to issue loan level coverage to lenders as long as the coverage is for 100%, or
if less than 100% loan level coverage, the servicer is responsible for any
losses the guarantor did not cover
    Ginnie will reinsure bond guarantor and/or issuers by entering into
contracts with private sector reinsurers sharing risk on a 90/10 pari passu
basis
    To the extent Ginnie Mae will be reinsuring insolvency of a bond guarantor
and/or insurers, it will be required to enter into risk-sharing contracts with
private reinsurers to assess the risk of default of any entity.

Under either program, each MBS meeting the outlined private sector capital
requirements will carry the full faith and credit of the United States
Government, but with private sector directed pricing.

Banks, life insurance companies, Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs),
insurance companies and other Ginnie approved market participants will  be
eligible to participate in the insurance and risk sharing transactions with
Ginnie Mae

All market participants will be overseen by Ginnie Mae and Ginnie will have
authority to establish necessary capital levels and stress tests

Small Lender Access

During the transition Fannie and Freddie may remain as aggregators of mortgage
loans for small lenders that do not have the sufficient volume to pool and
create these new securities with their mortgage loans on their own, so long as
adequate private sector alternatives do not exist.

    The Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) will be authorized to aggregate and pool
mortgages for small lenders

Issuing Platform

The platform will allow for standardized securities thus creating a single
security and creating a deeper and more liquid TBA market which will reduce the
cost of mortgage credit for consumers.

Standardized Mortgages, Servicing, and Capital Requirements

Transition Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) regulation to Ginnie Mae with
oversight over the secondary mortgage market

Mortgages eligible for the full faith guaranty must meet minimum underwriting
standards

Ginnie will maintain the power to stress test all market particpants and define
adequate capital standards.

Winding Down Fannie and Freddie

Fannie and Freddie will be wound down over a five year period.  Their government
guarantee and charter will be removed and they will repay the government with
interest for the government's investment in the institutions.  The repayment
must take into account both the injection of capital and overall exposure to the
government.

During the transition, Fannie and Freddie may act as an aggregator for small
lenders to retain small lender access to the new Ginnie Platform.

The transition will continue until competitive access for small lenders is
established and Ginnie has achieved an adequate return to taxpayers and
established a competitive private housing finance market.

The assets of Fannie and Freddie will be returned to the private sector and may
operate within the new mortgage system as issuers and/or aggregators

Affordable Housing

Ginnie Mae will charge a fee for the insurance that they provide for these
securities.

The fees charged will be 10 basis points of the total principal balance of these
mortgages.

The money acquired will be allocated to strengthen affordable housing programs
facilitated by the federal government. The funds received will be allocated to
the Housing Trust Fund (75%), the Capital Management Fund (15%) and the Market
Access Fund (10%).

Ginnie will be under a duty to serve all markets

Multifamily Housing

Fannie and Freddie's multifamily business will be spun out as separate entities.
Ginnie will be required to create and implement a workable multifamily guarantee
that utilizes private sector pricing consistent with the single family model.

The current multifamily businesses of Fannie and Freddie will continue to
function within the new multifamily housing market as purely private
organizations with an explicit government guarantee provided by Ginnie Mae and a
private sector reinsurer.

Well-functioning TBA Market

Investors will receive timely principle and interest payments through Ginnie
Mae.

This model will also ensure that one standardized security is delivered to the
TBA Market. This will increase liquidity and limit disruptions to the secondary
mortgage market, which will ultimately benefit consumers.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              431 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 July 19, 2010

GSEs' Credit Squeeze Pushing Loans to FHA;
Just 11% of agency loans at 620-700 FICO

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 34 No. 41

LENGTH: 544  words


The tightening of credit standards over the past few years is making it tougher
for many residential borrowers with average credit scores to get financing to
purchase a house.

Only 11% of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac loans go to borrowers with 620-700 FICO
credit scores and only 22% of the loans they buy from lenders provide purchase
financing for homebuyers.

The Federal Housing Administration has become a haven for most homebuyers,
particularly first-timers.

In the first quarter of this year, Fannie and Freddie combined purchased 184,500
single-family loans that financed homebuyers. FHA insured 245,600 such
mortgages.

But even FHA lenders have tightened their requirements due to shaky house
prices, high default rates and loan buybacks.

The credit scores on FHA single-family loans have risen steadily over the past
few years. The average FICO score hit 689 as of September 30 (the end of fiscal
year 2009), up from 628 in FY 2007.

Lenders originated a record $328.1 billion in FHA-insured loans in FY 2009 with
44% of the loans having FICO scores above 680. Only 13% of FHA borrowers had
FICO scores below 620, which is generally considered subprime.

This year, 58% of FHA loans have FICO scores above 680, according to FHA
consultant Brian Chappelle.

He noted that loans for borrowers with 620-680 credit scores have been good
business for FHA and he is concerned about a drop in lending to these borrowers.
"We need those loans to help with the housing recovery," he said. "If FHA is not
doing a significant number of loans to credit worthy borrowers with FICOs below
680, no one is."

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which were placed into conservatorships in September
2008, have tightened their credit standards and imposed extra fees (known as
loan level price adjustments) on loans.

Treasury secretary Timothy Geithner recently told a congressional panel that
Fannie and Freddie are being managed much more conservatively now.

"At our insistence, they have put in place much more conservative underwriting
standards. They are charging more for their guarantees to remedy some of the
mistakes they made earlier," he testified.

The first quarter financial reports released by the government-sponsored
enterprises shows the average weighted credit score of Fannie loans was 758 and
751 for Freddie. In 2008, these GSEs had an average credit score of 728.

That may not seem like a large increase in credit scores. But in scramble to
higher quality, Fannie and Freddie loans to borrowers with FICO scores between
from 620 to 700 has fallen to 11% in the first quarter from 25% in same quarter
in 2008

Federal Housing Finance Agency deputy director Chris Dickerson pointed out the
GSEs are being funded by the U.S. Treasury and the conservator has a mandate to
minimize losses.

"Most taxpayers would not be upset to know that credit standards have been
tightened," said the deputy director for enterprise regulation.

It is not that Fannie and Freddie don't offer loans to borrowers with 620-700
credit scores, he said. But the GSE loan level price adjustments in that FICO
range "make it more attractive to go to FHA."

The GSEs also require larger downpayments than FHA but Fannie and Freddie
require private mortgage insurance on any loan where the downpayment is less
than 20%.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              432 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                          November 11, 2009 Wednesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

Home loan program improves lives of veterans Veterans Benefits o A simple way to
honor veterans today is to ensure they're aware of benefits rewarding their
sacrifices. OTHER VIEWS

BYLINE: By Nathan Long

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: 0


Todd Henderson closed this summer on a three-bedroom, 2,000-square-foot ranch on
the outskirts of Columbia, Mo. After three years of renting, the former U.S. Air
Force member and longtime Air National Guardsman used his Veterans Affairs
benefits to capitalize on a buyer's market.

"It just seemed like the perfect time to take the plunge," said Henderson, who
moved to the bucolic college town in 2006 to take a job with the University of
Missouri Police Department.

Thousands of veterans reached a similar conclusion this year. The VA Loan
Guaranty Program backed more than $68 billion in single-family loans for the
fiscal year ending Sept. 30, an 80 percent increase from last year.

Falling home prices and a watertight credit market have brought new attention to
this long-cherished home loan program. But millions of American veterans still
are missing out.

Nathan Long is CEO of VA Mortgage Center.com (website:vamortgagecenter.com), the
nation's largest dedicated VA purchase lender. Founded in 2003, the
Missouri-based company has worked with more than 500,000 military families and
serviced more than $1 billion in VA loans in 2009. Fewer than 10 percent of the
nation's 24 million veterans have taken advantage of their VA home loan
entitlement. Many simply assume they don't qualify for benefits. Others aren't
sure how to apply.

Despite the recent surge in interest, mortgage industry and military experts
alike continue to push for greater awareness of the VA Loan Guaranty Program. A
2004 agency survey found 20 percent of veterans weren't aware the program even
existed.

In fact, most veterans and active duty military members meet the VA's basic
eligibility requirements.

Congress established the Loan Guaranty Program in 1944 to boost homeownership
and economic growth as soldiers returned from war. In the 65 years since, the
Department of Veterans Affairs has guaranteed more than 18 million home
mortgages worth an estimated $911 billion.

The VA insures about a quarter of an eligible veteran's mortgage, a guarantee
designed to spur lending to a deserving demographic that often faces unique
financial challenges. More than 80 percent of VA loan borrowers could not have
qualified for a conventional loan.

VA loans are one of the last remaining avenues to purchase a home with no down
payment, repeatedly cited by veterans as a signature benefit. They typically
feature higher debt-to-income ratios, seller-financed closing costs and no
private monthly mortgage insurance.

These flexible loans possess their own unique challenges, too. Military families
in California, Virginia and other states are struggling to purchase foreclosed
homes, squeezed out of the market by a combination of the VA's strict property
and purchase requirements and a crush of cash buyers.

Some real estate agents remain wary of a loan product they remember as fraught
with delays and complexity.

Problems persist, as with any bureaucratic engine, but a more streamlined,
straightforward process better defines the VA loan program of today.

The struggle in many corners of the country is simply spreading the word. VA
loans continue to make a huge difference in the lives of those who have served
our country.

A simple way to honor our veterans today is to ensure they're aware of the
benefits created to reward their sacrifice.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COMMENTARY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              433 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 30, 1995

Multifamily Continues Slow '95 Recovery

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 179 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Despite a decline in single-family housing starts and permits during the first
quarter of 1995, multifamily housing construction continued its slow recovery.

Multifamily housing starts in the first quarter of 1995 were up 40% from a year
earlier. By contrast, new home sales were down 13% from a year earlier and
existing home sales were down 12%.

However, the pace of new multifamily housing starts was down slightly from the
fourth quarter of last year.  The overall rental vacancy rate, at 7.4%, remained
virtually unchanged from a year ago, according to the Housing Market Conditions
report published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

As a result of the slowdown in home sales, both the Federal Housing
Administration and the private mortgage insurance industry saw a decline in
activity during the first quarter.

FHA endorsements were down a whopping 69% from the first quarter of 1994;
Veterans Affairs home loan guarantees were down 60%.

Total private mortgage insurance certificates were down 40% from the first
quarter of last year.

LOAD-DATE: June 07, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1995 Faulkner & Gray


                              434 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1988, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Mortgage Rise by V.A.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 45, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 149 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


The Veterans Administration said today that it was raising its maximum interest
rate for federally backed V.A. home mortgages by half a percentage point, to
10.5 percent.

A V.A. spokeswoman, Pam Siciliano, said the agency was making the change, which
will take effect on Monday, to reflect recent increases in interest rates in
financial markets.

In the last 16 months, the V.A. rate has fluctuated between 8.5 percent and 10.5
percent. It has changed three times this year, with the last change coming on
April 4, when the rate was increased to 10 percent from 9.5 percent. On Feb. 1,
the rate had been lowered a full percentage point, to 9.5 percent from 10.5
percent.

The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation said today that the national average
for 30-year conventional mortgages - those without Government guarantees - rose
to 10.52 percent this week from 10.40 percent last week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                              435 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           February 24, 2004 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Jury Review Opens Rigas Trial

SECTION: Financial; E02

LENGTH: 1329 words


Adelphia Communications founder John J. Rigas and two of his sons, accused of
looting and bankrupting the fifth-largest cable-television operator, began their
securities fraud trial with jury selection. Prosecutors allege that John Rigas
and his sons Timothy and Michael hid $2.3 billion in debt from investors and
turned Adelphia into a "personal piggy bank" from 1999 to 2002. U.S. District
Judge Leonard B. Sand is overseeing courtroom interviews of potential jurors; 24
jurors were questioned, and 19 were qualified to be selected for the 12-member
panel or as an alternate. Opening arguments are scheduled for March 1.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac must begin following a government formula in setting
limits on the size of single-family home mortgages they buy from banks, said
their regulator, the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, which
called the current informal procedure inadequate. The mortgage buyers in
November raised the limit on the size of single-family home mortgages they buy
from banks by 3.4 percent, to $333,700, increasing the pool of loans they are
eligible to purchase or guarantee.

US Airways cut 58 flights from its Saturday schedule at Pittsburgh International
Airport. The airline has agreed to maintain service levels there through
September while negotiations continue on reducing airport debt. A spokesman said
that the cutbacks were consistent with a verbal agreement to maintain about
2,600 flights a week out of Pittsburgh, plus or minus 12.5 percent. US Airways
is maintaining service levels on other days of the week, he said.

Citigroup agreed to buy Koram Bank for $2.73 billion in cash, the biggest
acquisition by an overseas investor in South Korea. The purchase will boost the
U.S. bank's assets fivefold in the country.

KPMG named Joseph Mauriello, 59, deputy chairman, replacing Jeff Stein, who
retired last month in the wake of Senate hearings into the firm's role in
marketing allegedly abusive tax shelters. Eugene D. O'Kelly, who remains
chairman and chief executive, also said the firm is creating an Office of the
Chairman, consisting of the deputy chairman and the heads of its various
practice areas, to strengthen its management structure.

Syngenta and Monsanto agreed to settle patent disputes over bioengineered
herbicide-resistant crops for undisclosed terms. The companies said they agreed
to license each other's technology for genetically modified crops that are
resistant to insects and weed killers.

Internet purchases in the fourth quarter jumped 25 percent from the year-earlier
period, to a record $17.2 billion, rising four times as fast as all retail
sales, the Commerce Department said. It said Internet purchases accounted for a
record 1.9 percent of all U.S. retail sales in the quarter.

The Internal Revenue Service has begun an audit of Intel's 2001 and 2002 tax
returns, the chipmaker said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing. The
review started last month, the company said. Intel spokesman Chuck Mulloy said
such audits are not unusual.

Emergency call centers must be able to track 911 phone calls made over the
Internet, the head of the Federal Communications Commission said. FCC Chairman
Michael K. Powell said the commission will deal with the issue as it develops
rules for new technology that converts phone calls to data and sends them across
high-speed Internet connections.

ImClone Systems said its Erbitux colon-cancer medicine, which won U.S.
regulatory approval Feb. 12, will cost patients about $10,000 a month. Most
patients will receive the drug for four months, the company said. It will begin
shipping Erbitux today and will sell the drug with partner Bristol-Myers Squibb.

T-bill rates rose. The discount rate on three-month Treasury bills auctioned
yesterday rose to 0.930 percent from 0.915 the previous week. Rates on six-month
bills rose to 0.995 percent from 0.975 percent. The actual return to investors
is 0.947 percent for three-month bills, with a $10,000 bill selling for
$9,976.50, and 1.017 percent for a six-month bill selling for $9,949.70.
Separately, the Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year Treasury
bills, a popular index for changing adjustable-rate mortgages, fell to 1.23
percent from 1.24 percent last week.

The maker of DVD-duplication software that was ruled in violation of copyright
law has pledged to keep selling it -- but without a built-in tool for
descrambling movies. In order for the DVD Copy Plus and DVD X Copy programs to
work, users will now need to obtain a separate descrambler that is widely
available on the Internet, said Robert Moore, founder and president of 321
Studios.

Aurora Foods said its reorganization plan was approved by a federal bankruptcy
court in Delaware. It calls for Aurora, maker of Duncan Hines baking mixes and
other brands, to merge with Pinnacle Foods by March 31. Aurora's headquarters
and a product development center, both in St. Louis, will close and 170 workers
will be laid off, but four plants in Pennsylvania, Tennessee and Illinois will
continue to operate. Aurora said its corporate functions will move to Pinnacle
headquarters in Mountain Lakes and Cherry Hill, N.J., and all vendors, trade
creditors and senior lenders will be paid in full.

Reader's Digest Association said it got a letter from the Federal Trade
Commission inquiring whether it complies with the national do-not-call registry.
The letter follows consumer complaints to the commission and doesn't make
specific assertions of wrongdoing, the magazine said.

Wet Seal, a retailer of clothing for young women, said in a lawsuit that
competitor Bebe Stores improperly hired the former president of Wet Seal's Arden
B. division as chief executive. The lawsuit claims Greg Scott, who resigned as
president of Arden B. last month, violated his employment agreement and that
Bebe may have misappropriated confidential information.

Europe's top antitrust official has not ruled out a settlement with Microsoft to
settle charges the company uses Windows to dominate new markets for
operating-system software and music and video players. European Competition
Commissioner Mario Monti said that he has set a date to end negotiations with
the software giant, but refused to make it public.

T. Rowe Price Group, a Baltimore-based manager of $190 billion in assets, closed
two mutual funds that pulled in $1.5 billion in new investments last year,
saying more inflows would impair its ability to manage the funds. The T. Rowe
Price High Yield Fund and T. Rowe Price Small-Cap Stock Fund were shut to new
investors Friday.

General Motors may be forced to recall 4.5 million light trucks after federal
officials upgraded a probe of tailgate failures and added several models to the
investigation. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said on its
Web site that GM has 61,025 warranty claims related to a failure in cables that
hold up tailgates in trucks from the 1999 to 2003 model years. The automaker
said it is cooperating with NHTSA, doesn't know what caused the problem and has
reports of 113 injuries linked to the tailgate condition.

Lowe's earnings climbed 27.6 percent, to a record $407 million, in its fourth
quarter ended Jan. 30.

Netflix, the biggest mail-order service for renting digital video discs, said
its first-quarter loss will be $8.1 million, larger than previously expected.
California-based Netflix had previously forecast a first-quarter loss of no more
than $3.7 million.

Dominion Resources wrote down its valuation of an Australian pipeline business
it is selling. The Richmond energy supplier said it will charge $44 million
after taxes against its fourth-quarter earnings, increasing its loss for the
period to $174 million.

Campbell Soup said net income rose 2 percent, to $235 million, in its fiscal
second quarter compared with a year earlier.

Compiled from reports by the Associated Press, Bloomberg News, Dow Jones News
Service and Washington Post staff writers.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post


                              436 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                            October 27, 2009 Tuesday

New FHA Risk Post Goes to GSE Alum

BYLINE: National Mortgage News

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 8 Vol. 174 No. 195

LENGTH: 85  words


Bob Ryan, a veteran of Freddie Mac, started Monday as the Federal Housing
Administration's first senior risk officer. Ryan worked at Freddie for nearly 26
years, most recently as vice president of portfolio management and pricing in
the single-family credit guarantee division.

FHA Commissioner David Stevens had pledged last month to install an experienced
risk manager. The agency warned then that a forthcoming audit would show its
capital reserve ratio falling below the congressionally mandated minimum of 2%.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              437 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 20, 2015 Friday

Himes, Delaney and Carney File Housing Finance Reform Legislation to Protect
30-Year Mortgage and Taxpayers

LENGTH: 1732  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the House of Representative Jim Himes, U.S Government has issued the
following news release:

Representatives Jim Himes (CT-4), John K. Delaney (MD-6) and John Carney (DE-At
Large) have introduced legislation designed to protect the fixed-rate 30-year
mortgage - a key instrument to ensure home affordability for the middle class -
and shield American taxpayers from future bailouts by reforming the housing
finance system. The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act combines the
private sector's superior ability to price risk with the federal government's
unique ability to provide capacity.

Original cosponsors of The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership Act are: Rep.
Denny Heck (WA-10), Rep. Gregory Meeks (NY-5), Rep. Patrick Murphy (FL-18), Rep.
Jared Polis (CO-2), Rep. Mike Quigley (IL-5), Congressman David Scott (GA-13),
Rep. Kyrsten Sinema (AZ-9), and Rep. Peter Welch (VT - At Large).

"This bill ensures that new homeowners will continue to have access to the
affordable, predictable financing options they need, while safeguarding
taxpayers and our economy from future downturns," said Congressman Himes. "Our
legislation brings together the market's efficiency in pricing risk with
government's unique ability to provide scale to create a safer, more liquid
housing market that preserves access to affordable housing for American
families."

"Without access to quality affordable housing, there's no American Dream for
millions of middle class families," said Congressman Delaney. "I'm proud to work
with Congressman Himes and Congressman Carney on legislation that keeps the
fixed-rate thirty-year mortgage alive and preserves a government guarantee while
introducing greater fiscal responsibility and stability to the housing finance
system. The financial crisis and the bailout of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac made
it clear that we need reform to protect taxpayers. The Partnership to Strengthen
Homeownership takes the best ideas from both parties to create a 21st century
housing finance system that combines the strengths of the private sector and the
public sector. Housing finance reform is too important for us to ignore and I
look forward to working with my colleagues in both parties in moving this
legislation forward."

"This proposal seeks to preserve housing affordability while protecting
taxpayers from another bailout," said Congressman Carney. "It finds the middle
ground between public sector and private sector involvement in the housing
sector. If we to want to preserve the dream of home ownership and make sure
taxpayers aren't on the hook for another bailout -- the status quo has to
change. Our bill is the right policy, and it's also an approach that appeals to
both sides of the aisle. As Congress works to reform our housing finance system,
I'm optimistic that a proposal like ours -- that combines private sector pricing
with the government's ability to expand access to credit - can cut through the
partisan divide."

The Delaney-Carney-Himes legislation, first introduced last Congress,
establishes an insurance program through Ginnie Mae which maintains the full
faith and credit of the federal government, but protects taxpayer investment by
requiring adequate private sector capital and accurate pricing of government
reinsurance. All government guaranteed single-family and multi-family
mortgage-backed securities will be supported by a minimum of 5% private sector
capital, which will stand in a first loss position. The remaining 95% of the
risk will be shared between Ginnie Mae and a private reinsurer on a pari passu
basis. Fees paid to Ginnie Mae for providing these securities will be allocated
to affordable housing programs. The bill winds down Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
and allows them to be sold and recapitalized.

The Partnership to Strengthen Homeownership

Private Capital and Privately Priced Government Guarantee

Ginnie Mae will establish a mortgage insurance program where at least 5% of the
"first loss" is held by private entities and the remaining 95% of the risk is
shared on a pari passu basis between the government and private reinsurer.

Ginnie will design and study two types of programs, then implement one , or both
programs, if they further an effective, efficient secondary mortgage market and
maintain the risk sharing principles outlined above.

Program 1: Reinsurance Bid Program

Aggregators and issuers will be permitted to deliver qualified mortgage pools to
Ginnie.  The price Ginnie charges for the guarantee will be ascertained through
an insurance bidding process described below.
    Ginnie will secure forward reinsurance contracts on a periodic basis (30-90
days), with the assistance of a reinsurance broker appointed annually in a
competitive process.
    The bids will seek coverage for two levels of risk on each securitization -
the 5% "first loss" and the remaining 95% "second loss."
    From these bids, Ginnie will contract with a series of carriers for each
risk and aggregate the policies.
    For the first loss, Ginnie will seek bids for 100% of its expected exposure.

    For the second loss, Ginnie will seek bids for 100% of its aggregate
exposure but will offer retrocessional reinsurance for up to 90% of the second
loss cover.
    Ginnie's guarantee fee quote will cover a forward period (Quote Period) as
determined by Ginnie.
    Prices passed onto originators may vary based on quality of product, and
other factors as determined by Ginnie, so long as the overall pricing equals  a
weighted-average bid in a given period.

Program 2: Bond Guarantor Program

Ginnie will reinsure first loss holders of risk through an insurance system
where insurers/guarantors will hold mortgage credit risk on an aggregate, loan
by loan, or security basis.
    In addition to security level coverage, insurers/guarantors are authorized
to issue loan level coverage to lenders as long as the coverage is for 100%, or
if less than 100% loan level coverage, the servicer is responsible for any
losses the guarantor did not cover.
    Ginnie will reinsure bond guarantor and/or issuers by entering into
contracts with private sector reinsurers sharing risk on a 90/10 pari passu
basis.
    To the extent Ginnie Mae will be reinsuring insolvency of a bond guarantor
and/or insurers, it will be required to enter into risk-sharing contracts with
private reinsurers to assess the risk of default of any entity.

Under either program, each MBS meeting the outlined private sector capital
requirements will carry the full faith and credit of the United States
Government, but with private sector directed pricing.

Banks, life insurance companies, Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs),
insurance companies and other Ginnie approved market participants will  be
eligible to participate in the insurance and risk sharing transactions with
Ginnie Mae.

All market participants will be overseen by Ginnie Mae and Ginnie will have
authority to establish necessary capital levels and stress tests.

Small Lender Access

During the transition Fannie and Freddie may remain as aggregators of mortgage
loans for small lenders that do not have the sufficient volume to pool and
create these new securities with their mortgage loans on their own, so long as
adequate private sector alternatives do not exist.

The Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) will be authorized to aggregate and pool
mortgages for small lenders.

Issuing Platform

The platform will allow for standardized securities thus creating a single
security and creating a deeper and more liquid TBA market which will reduce the
cost of mortgage credit for consumers.

Standardized Mortgages, Servicing, and Capital Requirements

Transition Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) regulation to Ginnie Mae with
oversight over the secondary mortgage market.

Mortgages eligible for the full faith guaranty must meet minimum underwriting
standards.

Ginnie will maintain the power to stress test all market particpants and define
adequate capital standards.

Winding Down Fannie and Freddie

Fannie and Freddie will be wound down over a five year period.  Their government
guarantee and charter will be removed and they will repay the government with
interest for the government's investment in the institutions.  The repayment
must take into account both the injection of capital and overall exposure to the
government.

During the transition, Fannie and Freddie may act as an aggregator for small
lenders to retain small lender access to the new Ginnie Platform.

The transition will continue until competitive access for small lenders is
established and Ginnie has achieved an adequate return to taxpayers and
established a competitive private housing finance market.

The assets of Fannie and Freddie will be returned to the private sector and may
operate within the new mortgage system as issuers and/or aggregators.

Affordable Housing

Ginnie Mae will charge a fee for the insurance that they provide for these
securities.

The fees charged will be 10 basis points of the total principal balance of these
mortgages.

The money acquired will be allocated to strengthen affordable housing programs
facilitated by the federal government. The funds received will be allocated to
the Housing Trust Fund (75%), the Capital Management Fund (15%) and the Market
Access Fund (10%).

Ginnie will be under a duty to serve all markets.

Multifamily Housing

Fannie and Freddie's multifamily business will be spun out as separate entities.
Ginnie will be required to create and implement a workable multifamily guarantee
that utilizes private sector pricing consistent with the single family model.

The current multifamily businesses of Fannie and Freddie will continue to
function within the new multifamily housing market as purely private
organizations with an explicit government guarantee provided by Ginnie Mae and a
private sector reinsurer.

Well-functioning TBA Market

Investors will receive timely principle and interest payments through Ginnie
Mae.

This model will also ensure that one standardized security is delivered to the
TBA Market. This will increase liquidity and limit disruptions to the secondary
mortgage market, which will ultimately benefit consumers.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              438 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                January 4, 1999

D'Amato's Departure Seen as the End of an Era for Congress

BYLINE: BY BRIAN COLLINS

SECTION: OUTLOOK '99; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1250 words

DATELINE: Washington


It may be hard to believe that the loss of one man could have such impact on an
institution, but the loss of Senator Alfonse D'Amato, R. N.Y., could signal an
end to the pro-housing attitude that have been a hallmark of Congress for
decades.

This change means housing and mortgage lending lobbyists are going to find
themselves in the same line as bankers and other special interests.

When Republicans won control of the Congress in 1994, their revolution had
little impact on the Senate Banking Committee under chairman D'Amato's reign.

Sen. D'Amato bucked the Republican leadership when the insurgents wanted to
abolish the Department of Housing and Urban Development and he protected Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac from user fees.

Last year, Sen. D'Amato joined moderates and Democrats as Congress approved an
increase th e Federal Housing Administration single family loan limit, over the
objections of Republican congressional leaders.

With Sen. D'Amato's defeat in the November elections and with Sen. Phil Gramm,
R. Texas, in line to be the new banking committee chairman, housing advocates
will no longer enjoy favorable treatment.

In addition, the banking panel is taking a decidedly conservative turn with the
Republican additions of Sen. Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania and newly elected
Senators Jim Bunning of Kentucky and Michael Crapo of Idaho.

"The senior members of the committee as well as the new members of the committee
are more free-market neutral and therefore housing will have to fend for itself
like all other sectors of the economy," said Jim Butera of the Washington
lobbying firm of Butera & Andrews.

"I think we are seeing a very big change here," he added.

In another sign that the important of housing issues is fading, Senator Connie
Mack, R., Fla., has decided not to chair the housing subcommittee this year.

But other Republican senators on the banking panel are not actually competing to
take his place.

"It is not a real popular slot," said Conrad Egan of the National Housing
Conference.  Nevertheless, Mr. Egan counseled against taking a "gloom and doom
scenario" righ away.

"We got to see what is in the President's budget, who takes the housing
subcommittee, and where Gramm really comes down on the Community Reinvestment
Act and financial services reform." Mr. Egan said.

The Republican Senator from Texas single handedly killed the financial services
modernization bill (H.R. 10) last year that would have allowed affiliations
between insurance companies, securities firms and banks.  His main beef is that
H.R. 10 expands CRA and CRA has become a weapon for professional protest groups
to "extract bribes and kick-backs" from banks.

"I want to end this scandal.  I want to stop this extortion," Sen. Gramm
exclaimed from the Senate floor.

Besides CRA, Sen. Gramm also opposed the restrictions on unitary thrift holding
companies and a small package of Federal Home Loan Banks reforms contained in
the bill.

As a result, the thrift trade group America's Community Bankers expects Sen.
Gramm will crafted a very different financial services modernization bill than
Sen. D'Amato and one that does not restrict the sale or chartering of unitary
thrift companies to commercial firms.

"We see a new landscape," said ACB director Robert Davis.  The new Republican
senators are "fairly conservative with a pro-competitive and market-oriented
philosophies," he said.  House Banking Committee chairman Jim Leach, R. Iowa,
who pushed H.R. 10 through the House last year, is expected to propose
restrictions in thrift charters again.  And the Iowa lawmaker supports FHLB
reforms that would allow small banks with less than $ 500 million in assets
easier access to FHLB advances that could be collateralized by agricultural and
small business loans.

Unless Congress passes H.R. 10, rural banks will lose much of their agricultural
customer base and their liquidity problems in servicing small businesses will
grow, Rep.  Leach warned in a recent speech to Illinois Bankers Association.  It
appears that chairman Gramm and Leach will have some differences to work out.

With shifting support for housing programs as a back drop, it appears that
mortgage lenders will face a major fight over the HUD appropriations bill.

This year is starting off with the Office of Management and Budget proposing
severe cuts in the FHA multifamily insurance program, over the objections of HUD
officials, lenders and apartment owners.

OMB is also proposing to increase the Government National Mortgage Association
guarantee fee by 3 basis points to 9 basis points.

As a possible alternative, President Bill Clinton's budget may propose to
privatize Ginnie Mae, by selling the secondary market agency to the private
sector.

A sale could raise $ 2.5 billion, OMB estimates, and it could created another
government sponsored enterprise to compete with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Meanwhile, the legislative and regulatory agenda this year could focus a lot of
attention on the government sponsored enterprises.

House Banking Committee chairman Leach has been threatening to introduce
legislation that would curb the arbitrage activities of the housing GSEs --
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the FHLB System.

HUD has not tipped its hand, but as a mission supervisor, HUD has been mulling
the idea of restricting their non-mortgage investments of Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac.

It recently has been reported that the FHLB System has become the largest issuer
of U.S. government-backed debt, even surpassing the U.S. Treasury.

This report could give Federal Housing Finance Board chairman Bruce Morrison the
ammunition he needs to issue a regulatory proposal to limit the arbitrage
activities of the FHLBs and their purchases of short-term, money market
instruments.

This will be the year that the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight
finally issues its risk-based capital rules for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

These capital standards, if stringent, could slow the housing GSEs advance into
subprime mortgage market and the growth of their mortgage investment portfolios.

Fannie Mae is raising concerns about the risk-based capital rule and
accompanying stress test and once the proposal is open for public inspection
everyone will be able to comment.

The coming year also will answer some questions about whether HUD can
effectively implement two important cost saving programs and whether financial
asset securitization investment trusts (FASITs) can become an important
securitization vehicle for the mortgage industry.  The Internal Revenue Service
plans to issue long-awaited guidance on FASITs early this year and it could stir
more interest in the structure -- particular if the IRS clarifies several
onerous provisions in the 1996 FASIT legislation.

"If it is clarified, I would expect we would start getting phone calls" from
dealers, said Bob Patelunas, vice president for structured transactions at
Freddie Mac.  But so far there has not been any interest in doing FASITs, he
said.

Meanwhile, HUD is keen on implementing a new property disposition and management
plan that hopefully will improve recoveries on the Federal Housing
Administration's inventory of single family foreclosed properties.

HUD also wants to get its multifamily debt restructuring program off the ground
to control rising costs of section 8 rent subsidies.  Some 3,000 FHA-insured
multifamily properties are expected to be restructured over the next three
years.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: :Picture 1, Phil Gramm; Picture 2, Alfonse D'Amato

                         Copyright 1999 Faulkner & Gray


                              439 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Where Are the Housing Programs of Yesteryear?

                          February 19, 1992, Wednesday

Warren Lasko


The current recession is the first in at least half a century in which the
federal government has not promoted housing development as a way to stimulate
jobs and economic recovery.

This is paradoxical. Today, more than in any of the previous eight recessions,
the means are available, the costs are minimal, and the potential for dramatic
improvements in the housing sector are palpable.

The government's current inaction contrasts with these past housing initiatives:

During the Great Depression, the Federal Housing Administration was created as a
way to stimulate jobs through housing. And in 1944, the Veterans Administration
Home Loan Guarantee Program was created to aid veterans and in anticipation of
giving the postwar economy a boost. 'Decent Home for Every Family'

The Housing Act of 1949 was passed with the stated goal of "a decent home and
suitable living environment for every American family." That legislation was
part of a comprehensive program to stimulate the economy during the recession of
1948-49, in this case through low-rent public housing and a federal urban
renewal and slum clearance program.

During the 1953-54 recession, the Housing Act of 1954 enlarged the concept of
urban redevelopment and established the authority of the Federal National
Mortgage Association to purchase loans.

The Emergency Housing Act of 1958, passed in response to the recession of
1957-58, expanded Fannie Mae's activity to include purchases of deeply
discounted mortgages on subsidized rental housing. Help from the FHA

During the 1960-61 recession, the Housing Act of 1961 liberalized FHA mortgages
by reducing down payments and increasing the maximum term for mortgages on new
homes.

To combat the 1970 recession, the Emergency Home Finance Act created the Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and increased Fannie Mae's authority to include
conventional mortgages.

During the 1974-75 recession, the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
substantially expanded the FHA programs for both single-family and multifamily
housing, created the Community Development Block Grant program, and established
a major new low-income rental housing program.

In 1980, on the occasion of another recession, housing activity was addressed
through thrift industry legislation to increase allowable loan to-value ratios
and expanded geographic lending areas.

And in response to the 1981-1982 recession, the qualifying standards of the
Federal Housing Administration were liberalized, while a number of restrictions
in the VA loan guarantee program were lifted. In addition, the Government
National Mortgage Association, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac introduced a variety
of new securities programs and new adjustable-rate mortgage loans. The Current
Picture

That brings us to today, and the first major economic reversal in nearly a
decade.

Housing by almost any measure is in a deep slump - sales are low, values are
depressed, and new housing starts are at their lowest levels in a decade.

But significant potential exists for spurring housing demand and in turn
creating hundreds of thousands of jobs.

Measures to boost the housing sector make sense economically as well as
politically. One out of every 10 American jobs is in housing or related
industries - from carpentry to carpeting, from masonry to mortgage banking.

And unemployment in these sectors is far above the national average.
Opportunities for Action

What possibilities are at hand? Consider these:

* Direct adequate federal resources to the neediest people in our society - the
homeless. To be sure, this is more than a housing issue. But any formula for
helping Americans living in cars, in alleyways, and on sidewalks and park
benches has to include funds for shelter.

* Restore historically successful programs to assist poor and moderate-income
people to repair and rehabilitate their properties, especially in older urban
neighborhoods.

* Increase funding for construction and the rehabilitation of rental housing for
low and moderate-income people, especially housing for poor families with
children.

* Restore tax fairness in the treatment of passive losses and capital gains for
housing and other real estate.

* Roll back the excessive increases in FHA cash requirements and mortgage
insurance premiums. It is estimated that 100,000 young families are unable to
buy their first homes because of last year's increases to the cost of an FHA
mortgage.

For both political and economic reasons, measures to stimulate the economy must
address middle-class concerns. That's where the mass market is and that's where
political muscle is.

Over three-fourths of all middle-class people own homes or want to. At the same
time, home ownership rates among young people are at the lowest levels in
decades, though surveys show their desire to own is undiminished.

There's little doubt that without the aid of the Federal Housing Administration
as a first step of home ownership, home purchases are stalling across the board.
So measures to loosen the straitjacket imposed on FHA by last year's legislation
would almost certainly unleash demand for housing at all levels of the market.
Where to Find Funding

Where would the money come from to fulfill this agenda?

First of all, several measures would require no funding. They are based on loans
or loan guarantees that in the past have proven workable at no cost or minimal
cost.

And removing some of the burdensome new restrictions on the Federal Housing
Administration wouldn't cost the government anything and might even bring
additional revenue into the agency.

Where dollars are needed, why not shift them out of defense and redirect them to
serve domestic needs?

Is it not more in our vital national interest today to improve the lives of our
citizens rather than to support hundreds of thousands of personnel abroad and to
build half-billion-dollar airplanes that are no longer essential?

Mr. Lasko is executive vice president of the Mortgage Bankers Association of
America.

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1012 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1992 American Banker, Inc.


                              440 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Orange County Register (California)

                           September 19, 2010 Sunday

State default notices rise again

BYLINE: marilyn, Register

SECTION: REALESTATE; Pg. F

LENGTH: 419 words



HIGHLIGHT: August represents the fourth straight month in which the number of
foreclosure filings has increased.


California notices of default filings, the first step in the foreclosure
process, climbed for the fourth month in a row in August, up by16.6 percent from
July and 16 percent from August 2009, ForeclosureRadar reports.

The number of homes in the state that went back to lenders rose20.27 percent
from July and 0.8 percent from August 2009. Foreclosure sale cancellations fell
11.25 percent. The inventory of bank-owned homes went up 3.63 percent from last
month and 8.28 percent year over year.

Here are highlights of what's happening in other Western states, according to
ForeclosureRadar.

Arizona: Notices of trustee sale dropped12.2 percent in August.

The inventory of bank-owned homes continued to climb, up 4.79 percent since July
month and 60.48 percent year over year.

Nevada: Sales to investors at foreclosure auctions increased by26.6 percent.

Lenders took a record 324 days from the filing of a default notice to
foreclosing at auction.

Oregon: Properties scheduled for foreclosure auctions rose by17.1 percent, with
new notices of trustee sale significantly outpacing the number of foreclosures
that were canceled or sold.

While notice of trustee sale filings went up by 9.3 percent, notices of default
climbed by 10.7 percent.

Washington: Foreclosure activity slows in several categories, with notices of
trustee sale down 15.8 percent, foreclosure sales down10.8 percent and
foreclosure cancellations down 21.8 percent.

Bank-owned inventories climbed 9.4 percent.

Loan guarantees questioned

The regulator for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac last week questioned whether a new
U.S. housing finance system should have an explicit government guarantee for
home mortgages.

"Replacing the enterprises' 'implicit' guarantee with an explicit one does not
resolve all the shortcomings and inherent conflicts in that model, and it may
produce its own problems," said Edward DeMarco, acting director of the Federal
Housing Finance Agency. "It is reasonable to question whether all conventional
mortgages warrant a government guarantee."

He made the comments in prepared testimony to be delivered to the House
Financial Services Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Reuters reported.

DeMarco said the premise for an explicit guarantee is the private markets'
inability to price the risk of mortgage default at "reasonable" levels on its
own, but he added "we might ask" whether the government could do it better, the
news agency said.

"If the government backstop is underpriced, taxpayers eventually may foot the
bill again," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE:  Story

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 Orange County Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              441 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            September 3, 2007 Monday
                                Regional Edition

Rescuing Mortgage Holders;
A tempered government approach is best.

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 616 words


LIKE MOST other politicians, President Bush basically ignored the subprime
crisis while it was incubating. Last week, though, he unveiled a proposed fix --
and not a moment too soon. A month from now, $50 billion worth of adjustable
rate mortgages will "reset" from the low interest rates at which they originated
in October 2005 to much higher rates that will be due for the next 28 years.
Hundreds of thousands of people are about to be hit with 30 to 40 percent
increases in their monthly payments. Since house prices are falling and
October's resets are just the first of many, a long wave of foreclosures seems
inevitable.

The U.S. economy is going to take a hit, though no one can say when or how big.
Government's challenge is to limit the damage -- especially to low- and
moderate-income borrowers -- without protecting lenders and investors from the
consequences of their own bad business decisions. In this respect, with his
plan, Mr. Bush wisely resists calls from some Democrats to let Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac buy up "jumbo" loans in expensive markets or loosen current limits
on the size of their portfolios. That form of relief is too indiscriminate; it
would prop up the price of houses generally, including the many that were bought
by speculators. Single-family housing is already heavily favored by government
-- through the mortgage interest deduction, the implicit federal guarantee to
Fannie and Freddie and other policies. Lower prices are tough on current owners.
But they benefit people who could not afford to buy previously.

The president's proposal appropriately focuses government resources where they
are likely to do the most good: on subprime borrowers who are behind on their
payments but have the means to handle modified loans at reasonable terms. In
this, he agrees with leading Democrats, who never claimed that everyone can or
should be saved. Democrats have, however, correctly argued that, given the huge
costs of foreclosure -- to borrowers, lenders, middlemen and bond buyers -- it
would be in everyone's interest to renegotiate where possible.

To qualify for a new government-backed Federal Housing Administration loan under
Mr. Bush's proposal, homeowners must have a history of on-time payments before
their reset, a steady job and at least 3 percent equity in the house. They also
must pay a risk-based mortgage insurance premium. The plan will help an
additional 80,000 borrowers refinance into FHA loans in 2008, on top of 160,000
already expected to do so. These people probably should have been in the FHA
program in the first place but may have been steered away from it by subprime
lenders.

Other borrowers may be able to renegotiate with private lenders, if they get
modest federal help. The president suggests protecting low-income borrowers who
succeed in modifying their loans from the federal income taxes that would
normally apply to loan reductions, a proposal that Democrats should find
supportable since it already enjoys some bipartisan backing in both houses.

At the moment, however, there are few places borrowers can go for technical and
legal help. According to the Center for Responsible Lending, a Washington-based
nonprofit, a fifth of all subprime mortgages made in California since 2005 are
headed for foreclosure. Yet the state gets only $3 million in federal aid to
counsel borrowers. That state, and others, should dip into their own resources
for more aid. In addition, the Senate recently approved $100 million, and Joint
Economic Committee Chairman Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) has advocated tripling
that. If it helps lenders and borrowers come to mutually agreeable new
arrangements, these federal dollars would be well spent.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              442 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 29, 2013

FHA, to Spur Housing, Won't Bump Up Its Insurance Fees

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 37 No. 31

LENGTH: 655  words


White House and administration officials are looking for ways to accelerate the
economic recovery and the most obvious avenue is through the housing sector.

"Housing is at the center of what we can to do to accelerate the economic and
jobs recovery," said housing secretary Shaun Donovan. Over 170,000 construction
jobs have been created in the past six months, mostly due to housing.

The Department of Housing and Urban Development secretary wants to increase
access to credit to spur home sales and refinance more borrowers with high
interest rates or underwater mortgages.

In speaking to members of the Mortgage Bankers Association last week, the HUD
secretary made it clear that the Federal Housing Administration is done raising
its insurance premiums on forward single-family loans. Further increases would
"only increase the cost of FHA mortgages for new borrowers or threaten the
housing recovery we are seeing," he said.

Donovan also said the administration wants to expand the Home Affordable
Refinance Program to reach more Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac borrowers. And they
are also trying to find solutions for borrowers who are currently locked out of
refinancing because their loans are in private-label securities.

In the Senate, Democratic members want to pass a bill that would expand the HARP
program. Co-sponsored by Sens. Robert Menendez, D-Calif., and Barbara Boxer,
D-Calif., the bill would increase competition between servicers and lower
refinancing costs for Fannie and Freddie borrowers with high LTV and underwater
mortgages.

But this bill is going nowhere fast.

At a recent hearing, Sen. David Vitter, R-La., urged the committee chairman to
hold a markup of the Menendez-Boxer bill along with a bill that would prohibit
Congress from raising Fannie and Freddie guarantee fees to offset other
government spending.

Supporters of the Jumpstart GSE Reform bill claim it will pave the way for
Congress to tackle housing finance reform.

But without assurances from Vitter and other Republicans that they will support
the HARP bill once it goes to the Senate floor, both bills will likely remain
bottled up in the committee.

Federal Housing Finance Agency acting director Edward DeMarco recently told the
banking committee that his agency has made changes to increase the number of
HARP refinancings by another or new lender/servicer that doesn't own or control
the servicing.

"I believe we have addressed the issue" raised by Menendez. "In fact, the
evidence has shown we are getting a good bit of cross-servicer participation in
the HARP program," Demarco said.

NMN asked FHFA officials for evidence that HARP refinances by new servicers has
increased. But they declined to provide cross-servicer data.

One of the changes the FHFA made to the HARP program is to reduce repurchase
risk. After a borrower makes 12 timely payments, the GSEs cannot force the
lender to buy back the HARP loan or cover any losses. On other Fannie and
Freddie loans, borrowers have to make 36 timely payments before the lender is
off the hook.

The GSE regulator has made "some strides" in reducing cross-servicer barriers,
Menendez said in a statement provided to NMN. But the New Jersey senator wants
to go a step further and eliminate the 12 timely payments requirement. That
would expand "cross-servicer competition to all eligible HARP loans," the
senator said.

"These borrowers have already proven their commitment and ability to repay their
loans having weathered the difficulties of a weak economy through sacrifice and
dedication and have earned the option of refinancing into today's low rates. My
legislation will make sure they get that relief," he said.

FHA officials declined to comment on Menendez's new proposal.

They simply point out that the FHFA recently extended the HARP program until
2015 to reach more borrowers. And this summer, the FHFA is launching a public
relations campaign to make more homeowners aware of the HARP program.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              443 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                             August 20, 2010 Friday
                                   L1 Edition

Ban on private transfer fees could cost homeowners

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 810 words


WASHINGTON -- A federal agency is moving to prohibit controversial "private
transfer fees" on all mortgages funded by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. But its
proposed ban may extend to transfer fees routinely collected by community
associations across the country -- potentially forcing some of them to raise
assessments on thousands of unsuspecting homeowners.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees the two mortgage giants in
conservatorship, issued proposed "guidance" Aug. 12 that would prohibit Fannie
and Freddie plus the federal home loan banks from investing in mortgages
carrying private transfer fee covenants.

Private transfer fees are starkly different from those imposed by local
government authorities to raise revenue for public services when properties
change hands. In a private transfer fee arrangement, a developer or property
owner records a long-term covenant requiring payments to trustees or other
private parties every time a resale occurs.

The best-known and most controversial version of this plan is being promoted by
Freehold Capital Partners of New York. The Freehold program, which the company
says has attracted the participation of "thousands" of development projects
worth "hundreds of billions of dollars" around the country, imposes a 1 percent
fee that must be paid by the home seller out of the settlement proceeds every
time the house is resold during the next 99 years. The money flows from the
closing to a trustee, who distributes shares of it to private investors and
others, including the developer in some cases.

Freehold's activities have raised widespread opposition -- 18 state legislatures
have either restricted or banned the use of private transfer fees in varying
forms. The proposal from the FHFA seeks to cut off federally related funding or
guarantees for the underlying conventional mortgages that support private
transfer fee programs such as Freehold.

Though under conservatorship, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac still account for a
large share of new conventional mortgages. Along with the Federal Housing
Administration, which had earlier indicated opposition to private transfer fee
plans, the three entities are responsible for upward of 95 percent of mortgage
market volume, according to industry estimates.

Edward J. DeMarco, acting director of the FHFA, said the proposed ban -- pending
a 60-day public comment period -- is necessary because the fees "may impede the
marketability and the valuation of properties," may raise homeownership costs
and "contribute to reduced transparency for consumers because the fees are not
disclosed by sellers and are difficult to discover through customary title
searches."

The wording of the ban, however, appears to reach well beyond Freehold-type fees
to include mortgages where covenants require payments to homeowners
associations, affordable housing groups or other community or nonprofit
organizations, upon each resale of the property.

Many new housing development projects come with not-for-profit homeowners
associations that collect assessments from owners to fund community improvements
and property management. Some also receive covenanted transfer fee payments to
fund part of their work. Still others impose long-term transfer fees designed to
benefit specific charities.

But the FHFA's proposal explicitly includes a broad spectrum of such programs in
the ban. It says "even where such fees are payable to a homeowners association,"
they are "likely to be unrelated to the value rendered and at times may apply
even if the property's value has significantly diminished since the time the
covenant was imposed."

Andrew Fortin, vice president of government affairs for the 30,000-member
Community Associations Institute, which represents homeowners and association
managers nationwide, said that banning investments in mortgages on properties
with transfer fees payable to associations "is potentially a big problem." Among
other negatives, it could force associations to increase annual assessments on
individual homeowners.

Fortin said his group "shares the concerns of FHFA about programs that create
neo-feudal arrangements" with outside investors, but believes the agency needs
to better distinguish between profit-motivated transfer fees and those that
benefit public interest and nonprofit organizations.

Meanwhile, a spokesman for Freehold Capital Partners deplored the FHFA's
proposal. Arguing that private transfer fees provide crucial financial support
for developers and their customers, Bryan J. Cohen, the company's executive vice
president and general counsel, said "this is precisely the wrong time to
eliminate a program that halts foreclosures, helps restart failed projects,
creates jobs and reduces upfront costs to American homebuyers."

* Write to Ken Harney at

P.O. Box 15281, Chevy Chase, MD 20815 or via e-mail at kenharney@earthlink.net

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              444 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                          September 13, 2008 Saturday

Bailout of Freddie and Fannie becomes boon for homebuyers

BYLINE: By Lesley Mitchell The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: LOCAL

LENGTH: 556 words


Dustin and Destry Merritt had been expecting to finance their new home in
Clinton with a 30-year home loan at about 6.25 percent. But that was before the
dramatic takeover Sunday of mortgage finance companies Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac.

On Monday, mortgage rates fell sharply as the market reacted to the news about
the two companies, which own or guarantee half of the nation's mortgages. The
Merritts locked in at 5.5 percent.

"We were pretty happy with 6.25 percent, but 5.5 percent - that means we'll be
paying $90 less per month," Dustin Merritt said.

The federal government's takeover of the two mortgage giants has pushed rates on
30-year fixed-rate home loans nationally down to an average of 5.93 percent this
week, down from 6.35 percent last week, Freddie Mac reported in its weekly
survey of rates. That's the lowest level in five months, and it marks the first
time since May that rates, which peaked at 6.63 percent in July, have fallen
below 6 percent.

"It's a huge drop in just a couple of days," said mortgage lender Glen Ogden,
past president of the Utah Mortgage Lenders Association.

After plummeting Monday, rates drifted up slightly by the end of the week. But
Ogden said they are still below last week's levels.

Last week, he said, he was locking people in at an annual percentage rate of
around 6.375. On Friday, he was able to lock in borrowers at 6 percent.

Lending standards haven't changed and are still tight, of course, but lower
rates can make it easier for borrowers to qualify for a loan by lowering their
monthly payment.

What happens with rates now?

Salt Lake City economist Jeff Thredgold, a consultant to Zions Bank, said he
wouldn't be surprised if home loan rates went down a bit from current levels,
but he doesn't think they are going to plummet.

"I don't see rates going below 5 1/2 percent," said Thredgold.

Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Economy.com, said that he believes
home-loan rates could keep falling and settle at around 5.5 percent for a
30-year mortgage.

He believes the drop in rates should provide a boost to the nation's battered
housing market, marked by bloated inventories of homes for sale and falling
prices.

''This is the most significant positive benefit of the government takeover of
Fannie and Freddie,'' Zandi said. ''I think it is important that rates have
fallen below the key 6 percent benchmark and hopefully rates will move lower in
coming weeks.''

---

* THE ASSOCIATED PRESS contributed to this report.

Mortgage giant takeover effect

* 30-year loans averaged 5.93 percent this week, down from 6.35 percent last
week.

* 15-year loans averaged 5.54 percent, down from 5.9 percent.

* Five-year adjustable-rate loans averaged 5.87 percent this week, down from
5.97 percent.

* One-year, adjustable-rate loans actually increased to 5.21 percent from 5.15
percent.

Source: Freddie Mac What it means for you

* SHOULD I REFINANCE? The basic rule is that you should consider refinancing if
you can get one-half to 1 percent below your current rate. It all depends on
what you have to pay in closing costs and fees and how long you will remain in
the home to recoup the costs associated with refinancing.

* IF I'M BUYING, SHOULD I LOCK IN NOW? It's hard to tell. Some experts are
predicting rates will fall further; others believe rates are going to remain in
the same range and eventually rise.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              445 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                              May 20, 2013 Monday

First it's Sacramento, then local Realtors travel to D.C.

BYLINE: By Rose Meily, for Silicon Valley Community Newspapers

SECTION: COMMUNITIES; Los Gatos; News; Local

LENGTH: 598 words


Just back from meeting their state legislators in Sacramento early in the month,
members of the Silicon Valley Association of Realtors trekked to Washington,
D.C., last week, joining more than 9,000 attendees from across the nation at the
National Association of Realtors midyear legislative meetings and trade expo.

Realtors meet with regulators, lawmakers and industry leaders to address
critical real estate issues affecting individuals, communities and the nation.

"Realtors are leading advocates for home ownership and private property rights,
and want to ensure that their point of view on important housing and investment
issues is heard at all levels of government," said Gary Thomas, the national
group's president. "Coming to Washington this week gives Realtors an important
opportunity to meet with their members of Congress and advocate policies that
are crucial to the real estate industry and Realtors' businesses, communities
and clients."

During the week, attendees met with legislators on Capitol Hill to urge action
toward preserving the mission and purpose of the Federal Housing
Administration's single-family mortgage program, encouraging the return of
private capital to mortgage markets, restructuring government-sponsored
enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to guarantee affordable mortgage
financing is available to creditworthy consumers in all types of markets, and
maintaining current tax policies for home ownership and real estate investment.

Realtors also participated in sessions with a number of government officials and
industry experts, including representatives from the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, Fannie Mae, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal
Reserve Board and Freddie Mac.

"We need to ensure that any policy decisions our elected officials are making
today or in the future continue to support, and not hurt, housing markets,
America's 75 million current homeowners and those who aspire to one day own a
home of their own," said Thomas.

"The National Association of Realtors Midyear Legislative Meetings & Trade Expo
was an enormous gathering of Realtors from every state in the country. Realtors
from around the country come to Washington each year to remind our country's
elected officials that home ownership has value for all families," said Carolyn
Miller, president of the Silicon Valley Association of Realtors.

Miller added that many social benefits are derived from home ownership. "Owning
a home brings family pride, a better family life and community involvement. Home
ownership expands your borrowing and buying power. We're here to personally
explain to our representatives and senators that home ownership needs to be
protected because it is a major pillar of our economy," said Miller.

Realtors met with Anna Eshoo, U.S. representative for California's 18th
Congressional District, which includes parts of San Mateo, Santa Clara and Santa
Cruz counties, including Los Gatos and Monte Sereno; Jackie Speier, U.S.
representative for California's 14th Congressional District, which consists of
portions of San Mateo County and San Francisco; and Mike Honda, U.S.
representative for California's 17th Congressional District, which encompasses
western San Jose and Silicon Valley.

Members of the local trade association with Miller in Washington included
president-elect Dave Tonna, NAR director John Tripp, past president Suzanne
Yost, board director Dave Barca, Jeff Barnett, Carole Feldstein and Barbara
Williams.

Information is presented by the Silicon Valley Association of Realtors
atsilvar.org . Contactrmeily@silvar.org .

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              446 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday

HOUSEBUILDERS ENJOY BOOST

BYLINE: BY ROGER BAIRD

LENGTH: 418 words


SHARES in housebuilders jumped as investors bet the Chancellor's plans to boost
the anaemic housing market may be the spark the industry has been searching for
since the 2007 crisis.

Taylor Wimpey rose 2.25p to 90.85p, Persimmon lifted 38.5p to 1010p, while the
country's largest housebuilder Barratt Developments was up 15.8p to 255.6p,
after George Osborne outlined his Help to Buy scheme. This is the Government's
latest attempt to get past the high deposits and subdued bank lending that has
hamstrung the industry.

Osborne's Help to Buy scheme is made up of two parts. The first continues on
from an existing programme called FirstBuy and allows buyers to put down a 5pc
deposit on a new home, with the Government putting up another 20pc in a shared
equity scheme. This loan is interest-free for the first five years, and will be
repaid once the home is sold.

The Government will commit £3.5bn to this part of the plan. The second part of
Help to Buy is a mortgage guarantee the government will offer to lenders, on new
or old homes, for families who are creditworthy but cannot afford a big deposit.

Critics warned this part of the Help to Buy scheme mirrors America's
government-backed mortgage brokers Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which at their
height underwrote one in five US mortgages before being nationalised during the
financial crisis in 2008.

The Chartered Institute of Housing said Osborne's move might lead to a return to
high loan-to-value mortgages that could lead to simply stoking house prices'.

The Government will commit £12bn to this plan, which it says will support £130bn
of new mortgages. This scheme will begin in 2014 and run for three years.

Barratt Developments chief executive Mare Clare said: This is a major boost for
homebuyers and house builders. Over the last five years high deposits and
limited availability of finance have combined to lock many people out of the
housing market.'

However, the housing market has seen a stream of initiatives over the last six
years that have failed to boost both housing transactions and home building.
Last year the housing industry built 105,000 homes compared with over 150,000 in
2007.

The housing market is important to the UK economy because home sales spurs a
range of retail spending, especially of big ticket items like sofas and fridges.

Richard Threlfall, head of building at accountants KPMG, said: It's a bold move,
perhaps a desperate one, but one that will be undeniably welcomed by the
beleaguered construction industry.'

© Daily Mail

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2013 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              447 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Asset Securitization Report

                                 December 2014

Freddie Mac Purchases Additional Mortgage Reinsurance

BYLINE: Allison Bisbey

SECTION: NEWS Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 218  words


Freddie Mac has purchased additional reinsurance for the mortgages that it
guarantees via its Agency Credit Insurance Structures (ACIS) program.

The new policies, underwritten by a panel of insurers and reinsurers, cover a
combined maximum of approximately $155 million of losses for a portion of the
credit risk associated with a pool of single-family loans acquired by Freddie
Mac in the third quarter of 2013.

"This transaction is backed by a mix of new and returning participants," said
Kevin Palmer, vice president of Freddie Mac's single-family strategic credit
costing and structuring, said in a statement Wednesday. "These policies further
demonstrate Freddie Mac's business strategy to expand risk sharing with private
firms to reduce taxpayers' exposure to mortgage losses." He did not name the
participants.

The transaction offloads a portion of the remaining credit risk associated with
the same pools of mortgages covered by the company's flagship Structured Agency
Credit Risk (STACR) program.

Since mid-2013, when Freddie's regulator, the Federal Housing Finance Agency,
introduced a risk-sharing requirement, the GSE has completed nine STACR
offerings and four ACIS transactions since mid-2013, transferring the risk on
more than $205 billion of unpaid principal balance of single-family mortgages.

URL: http://www.structuredfinancenews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: STRUCTUREDFINANCENEWS_NEWS


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              448 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                   New Orleans CityBusiness (New Orleans, LA)

                          September 28, 2005 Wednesday

Freddie Mac gives hurricane victims two-month break from payments

BYLINE: CityBusiness Staff Report

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 451 words


Single family mortgage borrowers whose lives were disrupted by Hurricane Rita
may defer their October and November payments if their mortgages are owned by
Freddie Mac, the company announced today.

In addition to suspending the next two months of mortgage payments, Freddie Mac
said it was extending to victims of Hurricane Rita the same special mortgage
servicing relief policies it announced to ease the financial pressures on
borrowers with Freddie Mac-owned mortgages after Hurricane Katrina.

The temporary suspension applies to Freddie Mac-owned single-family loans in
federally declared disaster areas where FEMA's Individual Assistance programs
are being made available. None of these temporary measures will affect Freddie
Mac's guarantee on its Mortgage Participation Certificates."We are determined to
go the extra mile to help Texas and Louisiana borrowers cope with this year's
unusually destructive storms in the Gulf of Mexico," said Freddie Mac Chairman
and CEO Richard F. Syron.

"Protecting investors while helping borrowers overcome unexpected shocks like
hurricanes Rita and Katrina is part of Freddie Mac's mission to keep America's
housing finance system affordable, stable and liquid."

After November servicers have the discretion to continue suspending or reducing
payments on Freddie Mac-owned mortgages for a total of 12 months on a
case-by-case basis, depending upon each borrower's specific circumstances.
Servicers must make their determinations before the mortgage's December payment
due date. A servicer is the company to which borrowers send their monthly
mortgage payments.

For those borrowers who may have already made their October mortgage payments,
Freddie Mac is giving its servicers the discretion to automatically return
payments withdrawn through an automated clearinghouse but not yet reported to
Freddie Mac. Borrowers who made their October payments through other means have
the option to contact their servicers to request their payment's return. In
either case, borrowers will still be required to work with their servicer to
reinstate their mortgage once the temporary suspension period ends.

Freddie Mac today also instructed its servicers:

*not to report to credit bureaus any reversed and suspended payments on Freddie
Mac-owned loans as a result of Hurricane Rita during the suspension period;

* to suspend all late fees, collection and foreclosure activities in the
federally declared major disaster areas during the suspension period; and

* extend to all National Guard members on state duty involved in Hurricane Rita
recovery operations mortgage relief comparable to the relief available under the
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Financing

                      Copyright 2005 Dolan Media Newswires
                                All Rights Reserved


                              449 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           October 17, 2013 Thursday

US builder confidence dips amid budget impasse

SECTION: BUSINESS; General

LENGTH: 616 words


U.S. homebuilders are feeling less confident in the housing market, reflecting
their uncertainty over the budget impasse in Washington.

The National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo builder sentiment index
released Wednesday fell to 55 in October. That's down from a reading of 57 in
September. September's reading was revised one point lower from its initial
estimate.

Measures of current sales conditions for single-family homes, builders' outlook
over the next six months and traffic by prospective buyers all declined in
October.

The partial government shutdown, which began on Oct. 1, has made it harder for
some buyers to close on their mortgages, raising concerns that a prolonged
shutdown could undercut the strength of the housing recovery. The survey was
conducted from Oct. 1 through Oct. 11.

Still, builders remain optimistic that the recovery will endure. Any reading
above 50 indicates more builders view sales conditions as good, rather than
poor.

"Once this government impasse is resolved, we expect builder and consumer
optimism will bounce back," said David Crowe, the NAHB's chief economist.

The association estimates that builders broke ground on single-family homes in
September at a seasonally adjusted annual rate between 620,000 and 630,000 homes
last month, in line with the August pace of 628,000. Official estimates from the
U.S. Census haven't been released because of the government shutdown.

"Single-family starts dipped in July but rebounded in August, and we expect
continued strength in September," Crowe said.

Builders' confidence in the market for newly built homes has improved steadily
since national measures of home sales and prices began to recover early last
year.

But some builders reported a slowdown in sales this summer as mortgage interest
rates began to tick up in May, stoking worries that rising rates could hinder
the housing recovery.

Rates began to increase after Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke signaled the
central bank might reduce its $85-billion-a-month in bond purchases. The bond
buys are intended to keep longer-term interest rates low, including mortgage
rates.

But the Fed held off last month, and since then mortgage rates have moved lower.

Last week, the average rate on a 30-year loan edged up to 4.23 percent from 4.22
percent a week earlier, according to mortgage buyer Freddie Mac. Those are both
the lowest averages since July.

Now, the partial government shutdown and uncertainty over a possible U.S. debt
default are weighing most on builders' confidence.

Furloughs at the Federal Housing Administration are slowing the agency's
processing of loan guarantees for some low- to moderate-income borrowers and
first-time homebuyers. About 30 percent of U.S. home mortgages are insured by
the FHA. And some lenders are having a hard time getting confirmation of
applicants' income tax returns and Social Security data because of government
agency closures, delaying some mortgage closings.

In addition to the uncertainty over the federal government's budget battle, the
survey also highlighted concerns over the cost and availability of construction
labor.

The latest survey, which is based on 261 respondents, a measure of current sales
conditions for single-family homes fell two points to 58, while a gauge of
traffic by prospective buyers dipped two points to 44. Builders' outlook for
single-family home sales over the next six months also slid two points to 62.

Though new homes represent only a fraction of the housing market, they have an
outsize impact on the economy. Each home built creates an average of three jobs
for a year and generates about $90,000 in tax revenue, according to data from
the homebuilders association.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              450 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                January 9, 2012

One for the Team

BYLINE: Editorial Staff

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 4 Vol. 36 No. 15

LENGTH: 369  words


The mortgage industry has taken one for the team in the way the payroll tax
reduction extension has been funded, at least partially, by an increase in
government housing agency guarantee fees.

No doubt there was some kind of link made that, since the industry started the
recession, it is only fair it should be made to pony up financing for the
recovery (the payroll tax reduction being a stimulus measure).

So we have a 10 basis point increase in the g-fee, with the anticipation of
another hike after April 1.

However, that's the wrong way to look at the situation. This extra tax on
mortgages will only serve to keep a depressed industry down.

Housing led the industry into recession, and it can lead the economy into a more
robust recovery.

So, Congress should not demand even more of an increase in g-fees. Taking one
for the team should be a one-off situation.

The payroll tax reduction extension, which was put into place for only two
months, should be extended for the full year (it is highly stimulative to the
economy), but any money needed to offset the loss in tax revenue can come from
someplace else.

The provision that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac should charge the same g-fee to
its seller-servicers is problematic, as well.

The agencies have long discounted g-fees to their best customers.

There's nothing wrong with that, as that is how private firms customarily work.
The GSEs have operated for decades as public-private hybrids.

Charging the same fee to everyone smacks of a stronger government grip on the
agencies.

Meanwhile, the mortgage industry stays in the doldrums despite extravagantly low
interest rates and widely retrenched housing prices. It could use more lift in
helping it regain its former vivacity.

The government has moved to make refinancings easier, but what about the
purchase market? A revival of the single-family housing tax credit would get a
lot of fence-sitters off the rail and into purchase mortgages.

Nobody is in favor of new spending these days, but the fact is that a "normal"
mortgage market (not the overheated one of the early 2000s) would generate a lot
of stimulus to related industries, and that ought to translate into extra
revenue for the feds as it did during the 1990s.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              451 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                              July 1, 2013 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Help to Buy 'could be hazard to economy';
Leading housebuilder tells ministers to put time limit on scheme to avoid risk

BYLINE: Louise Armitstead

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 488 words


THE boss of Taylor Wimpey, one of Britain's biggest housebuilders, has warned
that the Government's Help to Buy scheme could be a "genuine hazard" to the
economy unless a time limit is imposed on the scheme immediately.

Pete Redfern said experts were "quite right to worry" about the distorting
impact the Chancellor's flagship policy could have on the housing market, and
has called for tighter management of the scheme.

In an interview with The Daily Telegraph today, Mr Redfern argues that Help to
Buy has assisted the housing market "over a bump" but that it should not be left
in place indefinitely.

He said fears of a fresh housing bubble were overblown, but he said: "Where I
would agree with the concerns is if successive governments find it too difficult
politically to exit [Help to Buy] - that's where there is a genuine hazard."

He added: "I think there needs to be thought given now to a sensibly managed
withdrawal - even if the timing isn't firm, at least what the methodology is,
because as we get closer to that date, it will start to figure more highly in
the minds of banks and individual home-buyers. Everybody needs a sense of
confi-dence about what the plan is."

George Osborne announced Help to Buy, through which the Government provides
lenders with a guarantee of up to 20pc of the price of property, in the Budget
in April.

The £130bn scheme has given a boost to housebuilders, buyers and prices. Last
month, house prices rose across more than a third of Britain, the biggest
upswing in six years, according to a survey published today by Hometrack. In
June, house prices rose 0.4pc, matching the May rise, which was the biggest
since June 2007, the survey found.

This week, Taylor Wimpey is forecast to show bumper results in its first-half
trading update.

In May, Sir Mervyn King, then Governor of the Bank of England, warned that Help
to Buy could make the house market dependent on the state. "We do not want what
the United States have, which is a government-guaranteed mortgage market (which)
they are desperately trying to find a way out of," he said.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) said there was "a risk" that the scheme
could boost house prices and not supply.

Albert Edwards, an analyst at Societe Generale, last month said the policy was
"an unusually misguided piece of government interference in the housing market".
Mr Redfern agreed. "We should not get ourselves where the US has got itself with
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac where government support is built in. The point of
principle is that there has to be an exit route," he said.

Mr Redfern said ministers should set a time limit for the scheme and not allow
it to drift on for 20 years.

"I think [Sir Mervyn and the IMF] are right to be nervous about dependence but I
think that can be managed if you project a four-year profile where you gradually
reduce that support. You get over a bump and back to normality."

Interview: B5

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              452 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                              July 6, 2008 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

HOUSING MARKET CONTINUES TO STRUGGLE: From boom to bust;
SENATE TO REVISIT MORTGAGE RELIEF

BYLINE: MARILYN GEEWAX; Cox Washington Bureau

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 741 words


Washington --- When the Senate returns Monday from its July Fourth recess, it
will try again to pass a stalled package of mortgage relief and reform.

"We should be able to get it done," said U.S. Sen. Johnny Isakson, the Georgia
Republican who authored a provision for tax credits to stimulate home purchases.
"Overall, it's a good piece of legislation."

Supporters say the landmark legislation would help end the foreclosure crisis,
stabilize the battered housing industry and help prevent future mortgage
meltdowns. It would:

* Overhaul regulation of mortgage finance giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

* Modernize the Federal Housing Administration.

* Offer a $300 billion FHA insurance program to help struggling borrowers
refinance home loans headed for default.

* Provide government grants and tax credits to help homeowners.

On June 24, the Senate voted 83-9 in favor of ending debate and moving to the
final vote, suggesting the bill has broad bipartisan support.

But disputes over amendments unrelated to housing have delayed the vote. Senate
Democratic leaders promise to strip out those contentious amendments.

U.S. Sen. John Ensign (R-Nev.) is the key player in this dispute. He has been
using procedural tools to try to attach an $8.2 billion provision to extend
renewable-energy tax breaks.

But he has not offered any revenue-raising offsets.

House Democrats will not approve tax cuts unless they are offset either with tax
increases or spending cuts to keep the budget deficit in check.

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) said passing the legislation with the
energy tax breaks would be pointless. "Why would we want to send something to
the House and have them send it back to us?" Reid said.

The House passed its version of housing legislation in May. If the Senate acts
too, negotiators from the House and Senate would have to iron out differences
between their two versions to produce a final package.

During those House-Senate negotiations, a number of provisions could be cut or
tweaked. For example, the Senate bill would raise the size of single-family
mortgage loans that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac can acquire or guarantee to
$625,000. The limit had been $417,000, but this year Congress temporarily
increased that limit to $730,000 to make it easier for more people to buy
houses.

Unless Congress acts again, the limit will revert to $417,000 at the end of the
year.

But House Democrats from areas with expensive housing want to keep the new
$730,000 limit. They say that in pricey places such as Boston, New York and San
Francisco, middle-class families often have to pay more than $625,000 for a
typical home, so the Senate's figure is too low for them.

Isakson said that even though only a few areas in Georgia have very high home
prices, a raised loan limit would help strengthen the housing market. "It helps
get liquidity back in the mortgage market," he said.

The National Association of Home Builders and the National Association of
Realtors are pushing hard to keep Isakson's tax credit in the final legislation.
The House bill offers a $7,500 credit for first-time buyers of principal
residences. The Senate version calls for an $8,000 credit.

Mary Trupo, public issues director for the Realtors, said that in Sun Belt
states that still attract young, new residents, the first-time buyer tax credit
could stimulate sales.

"It will get people thinking," she said. "When they look at the housing
inventory, the low interest rates, and now maybe a tax credit too, they will
think: 'I shouldn't wait any longer to buy.' "

The legislation also would boost low-income tax credits and mortgage revenue
bonds, and offer an additional deduction for homeowners who do not itemize their
deductions.

The Bush administration has threatened to veto the legislation, primarily
because it would give more than $3.9 billion in grants for states to
rehabilitate foreclosed properties to prepare them for sale to stabilize
neighborhoods. House-Senate negotiators are likely to strip out that provision
to help clear the way to final passage.

Jerry Howard, chief executive of the home builders' group, said there are "some
real serious hurdles," but he believes Congress will complete the bill before
the August recess. "We're seeing 5,000 foreclosures a day," which is worrying
lawmakers facing voters in November.

"This is an election year," he said. "So I would bet that this legislation would
happen because they can't shirk their responsibility."

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: U.S. Sen. John Ensign (R-Nev.) wants to attach an $8.2 billion
provision to extend renewable-energy tax breaks to the housing bill./ImageData*
ImageData*
Photo: RICH PEDRONCELLI / Associated PressLandmark legislation to address the
nation's housing crisis has stalled in the Senate amid disputes over amendments
unrelated to housing. The House passed its version of the legislation in
May./ImageData*

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                              453 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 18, 2015 Monday

Fannie, Freddie single mortgage-backed security takes shape in new FHFA update

LENGTH: 1148  words

DATELINE: Washington, DC


American Land Title Association has issued the following news release:

The Federal Housing Finance Agency on Friday reported on the progress made on
the proposed single mortgage-backed security that would be issued by Fannie Mae
or Freddie Mac.

Developing the Single Security is a key goal of FHFA's 2014 Strategic Plan for
the Conservatorships of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Finalizing the structure of the Single Security is a 2015 scorecard item for
both companies and for Common Securitization Solutions, the joint venture
between Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac that is advancing the work on this project.

The Single Security project is intended to improve the overall liquidity of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac mortgage-backed securities, and lower costs for
borrowers and taxpayers.

Last year, FHFA issued a Request for Input on all aspects of a proposed
structure for the Single Security.

"While the Single Security remains a multi-year initiative, we believe this
Update represents another significant milestone we have reached in defining the
structure and processes necessary to transition successfully to a Single
Security," said FHFA Director Melvin Watt. "Our objective is to continue to make
progress on building a new securitization infrastructure for Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac that is adaptable for use by other secondary market participants in
the future. FHFA therefore invites additional feedback on the decisions about
the Single Security structure described in this Update," Watt said.

The entire updated report can be read here.

"FHFA's Update should give everyone a sense of how the Single Security will be
developed and the solid progress that has been made over the past year. We
strongly believe in the Single Security's potential for expanding liquidity in
the TBA market, lowering housing finance costs, and making the housing finance
system more competitive and resilient," said Dave Lowman, executive vice
president, Single-Family Business, Freddie Mac. "Freddie Mac is committed to
expanding homeownership opportunities by working with FHFA, Fannie Mae, Common
Securitization Solutions and other stakeholders to address the milestones ahead
in bringing a Single Security to the market."

Likewise Fannie Mae called the update an important milestone.

"Fannie Mae continues to work closely with FHFA and Freddie Mac to develop the
Single Security, with the goal of increasing liquidity in the housing finance
market and creating a stronger system," said Andrew Bon Salle, Executive Vice
President, Single- Family Business, Fannie Mae. "Today's Single Security Update
is an important milestone, providing additional details on the features of the
Single Security and the strong progress made to date by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac
and Common Securitization Solutions on implementation planning. We will continue
to work with FHFA, Freddie Mac, and CSS to ensure we transition to the Single
Security in a safe and sound manner."

The full update details a number of changes to the Single Security structure
recommended by respondents to the RFI and discusses FHFA's decisions regarding
those recommendations. FHFA's decisions generally confirm the structure set
forth in the RFI.

In addition, the update provides additional details about the Single Security
structure in response to stakeholder feedback.

Based on the report, the FHFA's determinations on the Single Security structure
are as follows:

Security Issuer and Guarantee Structure. Each Enterprise will issue and
guarantee first-level Single Securities backed by mortgage loans that the
Enterprise has acquired. The Enterprises will not cross-guarantee each other's
first-level securities. The Federal Home Loan Banks will not be an eligible
issuer of Single Securities.

    Common Features. The key features of the new Single Security will be the
same as those of the current Fannie Mae Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS),
including a payment delay of 55 days.

    Loan Products in Scope. First-level Single Securities will finance
fixed-rate mortgage loans now eligible for financing through the
"To-Be-Announced" (TBA) market.

    Multiple-Lender Pools. Lenders will continue to be able to contribute
mortgage loans to multiple-lender pools.

    Re-Securitizations. Each Enterprise will be able to issue second-level
Single Securities (re-securitizations) backed by first- or second-level
securities issued by either Enterprise. In order for a legacy Freddie Mac
Participation Certificate to be re-securitized, the investor would have to first
exchange the PC for a Single Security issued by Freddie Mac, so that the payment
date of all of the securities in the collateral pool backing the
re-securitization would be the same. To clarify the counterparty risk posed by
commingled re-securitizations, this Update provides an analysis of the
counterparty risk exposure of investors under the Enterprises' current
securitization programs and the Single Security.

    Disclosures. The loan- and security-level disclosures for Single Securities
will closely resemble those of Freddie Mac PCs. This Update provides details
about these disclosures.

    Alignment of Enterprise Programs, Policies, and Practices. Current
Enterprise policies and practices related to the removal of mortgage loans from
securities (buyouts) are substantially aligned today and will be generally
similar and aligned for purposes of the Single Security. This Update provides a
summary of these policies and practices. FHFA and the Enterprises will carefully
assess the potential effect on prepayment speeds of any potential changes in
Enterprise programs, policies, and practices developed or considered in the
future. Maintaining the current high degree of similarity between the prepayment
speeds of the Enterprises' securities is an important objective for FHFA.

    Legacy Fannie Mae MBS and Freddie Mac PCs. Freddie Mac will offer investors
the option to exchange legacy PCs for comparable Single Securities backed by the
same mortgage loans and will compensate investors for the cost of the change in
the payment delay. This Update provides a description of the exchange program
for legacy PCs. Fannie Mae will not offer an exchange option for legacy MBS
because FHFA expects investors to treat them as fungible (interchangeable) with
Single Securities.

"FHFA and the Enterprises will continue careful, deliberative engagement with
industry and other stakeholders as the Single Security structure is refined and
as an implementation schedule is developed," the update says. "That process will
provide ongoing opportunity for stakeholder input and dialogue and will allow
FHFA and the Enterprises to modify the Single Security structure and
implementation schedule as appropriate to mitigate any risk of market
disruption."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              454 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           September 6, 2016 Tuesday

Fees Meant to Shield GSEs from Risk Are Hurting Homebuyers

BYLINE: Tom Salomone

SECTION: LAW & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 171

LENGTH: 852  words


There's a conversation happening right now within the housing industry about how
best to manage risk inside the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac. It's a good one to have.

But while we work to solve these complex problems, homebuyers are paying a steep
price at the closing table in the form of unnecessary fees that, for some, put
homeownership out of reach.

How did we get here? It started in 2008, when the Federal Housing Finance Agency
and the GSEs implemented loan level price adjustments, or LLPAs. Loan-level
price adjustments are fees paid by the borrower either as part of upfront
closing costs or over the life of the mortgage. They were intended to help the
GSEs manage risk.

To be clear, NAR believes that FHFA and the GSEs should continue taking
responsible steps to manage their risk exposure. However, we also believe the
GSEs can do so even after reducing or eliminating LLPAs.

Three significant factors have led us to this conclusion: improved mortgage
credit quality, stricter regulations on risk management within the industry, and
the fact that guarantee fees, or "g-fees," charged to homebuyers have risen
steadily since 2011 to cover Fannie and Freddie's risk exposure.

We are not alone in this belief either.

Earlier this year, the National Association of Realtors - along with 24 other
organizations - sent a letter to FHFA Director Mel Watt on the need to reduce or
eliminate LLPAs.

We didn't find agreement from FHFA. To the contrary, the FHFA released a report
on the fees charged by the GSEs finding "no compelling economic reason to change
the overall level of fees."

This is a politically safe position for Director Watt, but it doesn't make sense
for consumers.

Like NAR, Director Watt has called on Congress to address housing finance
reform, finding the ongoing conservatorship unsustainable. At the same time, the
GSEs have a mandate to provide broad access to mortgage credit. Unfortunately,
their overly burdensome fees are standing in the way of that mission.

It's important to remember that LLPAs aren't the only fees the GSEs charge to
borrowers. Guarantee fees are also in place to help the GSEs manage the risk of
guaranteeing loans.

Those fees have risen sharply since 2009, jumping 164% from 2011 to 2014 and
bringing them to nearly 60 basis points today. What's odd is that these price
increases - ostensibly intended to manage risk - have continued even as the
portfolio of loans guaranteed by the GSEs has grown stronger, exposing the GSEs
to less risk.

The result is that borrowers of conventional mortgages will potentially pay both
LLPAs and g-fees when purchasing a home. This redundancy is unequivocally
pricing qualified borrowers out of the conventional market, undermining the
mission of the GSEs in the process.

There's no mystery as to how we got where we are today. Former FHFA director Ed
DeMarco gambled on a policy to bring back the private label securities market by
directing the GSEs to raise fees. It was not to protect against borrower default
risk but to boost yields and make returns more attractive to other financial
institutions.

This policy to encourage private market participation ignored the dislocation
and distrust among Wall Street bond dealers and investors that continue to drive
the lack of a private label securities market. NAR noted then that the increases
would result in billions of dollars of profits for the GSEs, not a return of the
private label securities market, and that's exactly what we've seen.

That doesn't mean we're stuck here forever. With the new "Duty to Serve"
regulation, FHFA has an opportunity to recognize and rectify the issue. To that
end, both Fannie and Freddie created mortgage products in 2015 that capped fees
for particular borrowers in recognition of this concern, but these programs are
limited in reach and won't do the job on their own.

It doesn't take an expert in risk modeling to recognize that expected losses
over the last few years were widely overstated, leading to loan loss reserve
releases quarter after quarter.

Put simply, the GSEs were charging homeowners for far more risk than they took
on, driving tremendous profit.

This shouldn't surprise anyone. Rigorous underwriting standards are now in
place, ensuring fully documented and high-quality mortgages at the GSEs. Steps
have also been taken to enhance the reliability of mortgage insurers, generally
support industry standards for loan data transparency, and drive fraud and
predatory loan products out of the system.

The GSEs have a duty to serve the public by facilitating the availability of
affordable mortgage credit to all qualified borrowers. That means ensuring
affordable mortgage opportunities, especially for first-time homebuyers and low-
and moderate-income families.

Excessive and unnecessary fees fly in the face of that mission.

We will continue this push, along with other efforts to open the credit box for
responsible home buyers. In the meantime, millions of potential homeowners are
being stymied in pursuing their American Dream.

Tom Salomone is the president of the National Association of Realtors.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_BLOG


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              455 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            nationalmortgagenews.com

                               September 2, 2016

Fees Meant to Shield GSEs from Risk Are Hurting Homebuyers

BYLINE: Tom Salomone

SECTION: VOICES Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 852  words


There's a conversation happening right now within the housing industry about how
best to manage risk inside the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac. It's a good one to have.

But while we work to solve these complex problems, homebuyers are paying a steep
price at the closing table in the form of unnecessary fees that, for some, put
homeownership out of reach.

How did we get here? It started in 2008, when the Federal Housing Finance Agency
and the GSEs implemented loan level price adjustments, or LLPAs. Loan-level
price adjustments are fees paid by the borrower either as part of upfront
closing costs or over the life of the mortgage. They were intended to help the
GSEs manage risk.

To be clear, NAR believes that FHFA and the GSEs should continue taking
responsible steps to manage their risk exposure. However, we also believe the
GSEs can do so even after reducing or eliminating LLPAs.

Three significant factors have led us to this conclusion: improved mortgage
credit quality, stricter regulations on risk management within the industry, and
the fact that guarantee fees, or "g-fees," charged to homebuyers have risen
steadily since 2011 to cover Fannie and Freddie's risk exposure.

We are not alone in this belief either.

Earlier this year, the National Association of Realtors - along with 24 other
organizations - sent a letter to FHFA Director Mel Watt on the need to reduce or
eliminate LLPAs.

We didn't find agreement from FHFA. To the contrary, the FHFA released a report
on the fees charged by the GSEs finding "no compelling economic reason to change
the overall level of fees."

This is a politically safe position for Director Watt, but it doesn't make sense
for consumers.

Like NAR, Director Watt has called on Congress to address housing finance
reform, finding the ongoing conservatorship unsustainable. At the same time, the
GSEs have a mandate to provide broad access to mortgage credit. Unfortunately,
their overly burdensome fees are standing in the way of that mission.

It's important to remember that LLPAs aren't the only fees the GSEs charge to
borrowers. Guarantee fees are also in place to help the GSEs manage the risk of
guaranteeing loans.

Those fees have risen sharply since 2009, jumping 164% from 2011 to 2014 and
bringing them to nearly 60 basis points today. What's odd is that these price
increases - ostensibly intended to manage risk - have continued even as the
portfolio of loans guaranteed by the GSEs has grown stronger, exposing the GSEs
to less risk.

The result is that borrowers of conventional mortgages will potentially pay both
LLPAs and G-fees when purchasing a home. This redundancy is unequivocally
pricing qualified borrowers out of the conventional market, undermining the
mission of the GSEs in the process.

There's no mystery as to how we got where we are today. Former FHFA director Ed
DeMarco gambled on a policy to bring back the private label securities market by
directing the GSEs to raise fees. It was not to protect against borrower default
risk but to boost yields and make returns more attractive to other financial
institutions.

This policy to encourage private market participation ignored the dislocation
and distrust among Wall Street bond dealers and investors that continue to drive
the lack of a private label securities market. NAR noted then that the increases
would result in billions of dollars of profits for the GSEs, not a return of the
private label securities market, and that's exactly what we've seen.

That doesn't mean we're stuck here forever. With the new "Duty to Serve"
regulation, FHFA has an opportunity to recognize and rectify the issue. To that
end, both Fannie and Freddie created mortgage products in 2015 that capped fees
for particular borrowers in recognition of this concern, but these programs are
limited in reach and won't do the job on their own.

It doesn't take an expert in risk modeling to recognize that expected losses
over the last few years were widely overstated, leading to loan loss reserve
releases quarter after quarter.

Put simply, the GSEs were charging homeowners for far more risk than they took
on, driving tremendous profit.

This shouldn't surprise anyone. Rigorous underwriting standards are now in
place, ensuring fully documented and high-quality mortgages at the GSEs. Steps
have also been taken to enhance the reliability of mortgage insurers, generally
support industry standards for loan data transparency, and drive fraud and
predatory loan products out of the system.

The GSEs have a duty to serve the public by facilitating the availability of
affordable mortgage credit to all qualified borrowers. That means ensuring
affordable mortgage opportunities, especially for first-time homebuyers and low-
and moderate-income families.

Excessive and unnecessary fees fly in the face of that mission.

We will continue this push, along with other efforts to open the credit box for
responsible home buyers. In the meantime, millions of potential homeowners are
being stymied in pursuing their American Dream.

Tom Salomone is the president of the National Association of Realtors.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NATIONALMORTGAGE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              456 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             April 9, 2009 Thursday

PIPELINE

BYLINE: Allison Bisbey Colter

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 10 Vol. 174 No. 68

LENGTH: 816  words


Government Issue

Government loans make up a small part of Fannie Mae's business, but it is still
being vigilant about protecting itself against losses in this area.

Such mortgages are generally considered free of credit risk, since they are
guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration, the Department of Veterans
Affairs and other federal agencies. But Fannie sometimes purchases loans
intended for government programs before a guarantee has been issued - and the
agency may then reject the coverage request.

Last week the government-sponsored enterprise told lenders they must notify its
regional offices of such rejections, no matter the reason the agency gives. If
the loan has become delinquent by this time, and Fannie determines that the
lender failed to obtain the guarantee in a timely manner, it may require the
lender to repurchase the loan.

Delinquencies on FHA-insured mortgages are rising as that agency struggles to
cope with a flood of applications from borrowers who can no longer qualify for
other loans.

Though the bulk of FHA and VA loans are securitized by the Government National
Mortgage Association, some find their way into the portfolios of Fannie or
Freddie Mac. As of Dec. 31, government loans accounted for about 14% of Fannie's
$312 billion portfolio of single-family mortgages.

Fannie and Freddie have stepped up requests to buy back all kinds of defective
mortgages. Freddie made its servicers repurchase $1.8 billion of loans last
year, or 165% more than in 2007. Fannie said in its 2008 annual report that it
"significantly increased the number of repurchase and reimbursement requests we
have made due to the higher default rate." (It did not disclose the volume of
such requests.)

Last month Fannie cited several errors that servicers frequently make as it
issued new guidelines for its HomeSaver Advance program, in which a delinquent
borrower receives an unsecured loan for up to $15,000 to cover arrears. Such
errors can put a servicer on the hook to repurchase the unsecured loans, Fannie
said.

In last week's notice on government loans, Fannie said it may also require
lenders to provide periodic reports on the status of all such mortgages they
sell to the GSE.

It also reserved the right to suspend or terminate a lender's authority to
deliver mortgages for which it has not already received the government guarantee
, or the authority to deliver a particular type of government mortgage - or any
type of mortgage, for that matter.

Eye on Refis

Refinancing activity increased modestly last week, even though mortgage rates
edged back up from recent lows.

The Mortgage Bankers Association said Wednesday its index of refi applications
edged up 3.2% last week, while its purchase index, which is seasonally adjusted,
rose 11.1%. The conventional purchase index rose 7.7%, and the government
purchase index, which consists primarily of FHA-insured loans, rose 17.1%.

Refis as a share of mortgage activity decreased 1.2 percentage points, to 77.9%.

The average contract interest rate on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rose 12
basis points, to 4.73%. (The average amount of discount points charged by
lenders was unchanged, at 1.03.)

Since December, application volumes have been elevated but volatile.

In an online poll last week asking American Banker readers how much the industry
will benefit from record low mortgage rates this year, slightly more than a
quarter of the 88 respondents picked "A whole lot - phones are ringing off the
hook." More than half picked "Not much - many applicants don't qualify." Less
than a fifth picked "Don't know - public policy remains too unclear."

Loan Improvement

Major renovations typically push homeowners deeper into debt, but HGTV is
planning a home improvement series in which contestants vie for funds to pay off
their mortgages.

The cable television channel said this week that its "HGTV's $250,000
Challenge," to be hosted by Drew Lachey, will give five families the chance to
snare the big prize by competing in home improvement challenges.

The four-part series, which will debut May 31, teams the families with
construction and design experts, who will help them with weekly contests,
including kitchen and living room makeovers. HGTV did not disclose the
neighborhood's location or the names of the families.

Quotable ...

"I was not comfortable as an audit committee member in signing off on the
financial statements after I became aware of the standards and processes for
valuing the mortgage-backed securities. ... Now if you think about it, the FASB
might be changing the whole thing, and everybody might mark their assets up. Who
wants to be part of that?"

Charles Bowsher, telling Bloomberg News why he resigned last month as the
chairman of the Federal Home Loan BankSystem's Office of Finance. The interview
was published as the Financial Accounting Standards Board was voting to relax
its rules on mark-to-market accounting.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              457 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 4, 2011

GOP May Get a Legislative Crack at the GSEs in 2012

BYLINE: Brian Collins

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 23 Vol. 35 No. 27

LENGTH: 635  words


WASHINGTON-Republicans on the House Financial Services Committee have completed
their first legislative assignment: stamping out the president's foreclosure
prevention program. Now they move to the next project on their "to do" list:
stamping out Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Although campaigns to terminate the Home Affordable Modification Program and
downsize the GSEs may appear futile since House-passed bills are likely to die
in the Senate where Democrats reign supreme, two years from now everything may
change.

In 2012, if the Republicans manage to take the Senate, GSE measures to reduce
Fannie and Freddie's giant mortgage investment portfolios and raise guarantee
fees could be attached to legislation that the president will sign.

Last week, Republican committee members introduced eight separate bills that
began the process of downsizing the GSEs. Over the next few months, the
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and GSEs, chaired by Rep. Scott Garrett, R-N.J.,
will mark up and vote on the bills. "The culmination of our efforts will
formally wind down the GSEs and return our housing finance system back to the
private sector," Garrett said.

The subcommittee chairman told a Mortgage Bankers Association meeting that he
wants to move toward a "mortgage market free of government loan guarantees and
backstops."

Sen. Robert Menendez, D-N.J., noted the mortgage market is fragile with "limited
availability" of financing for homes. "I keep hearing about all of this private
capital that is ready to enter the marketplace. I'm just waiting for it to
appear," he told the MBA members. Rather than privatizing the GSEs, the Senate
Banking Committee member said Congress should reform Fannie and Freddie.

Meanwhile, last week the House voted 252-170 to terminate the HAMP program and
stop the administration from spending more TARP funds on foreclosure prevention
programs. The White House has already threatened to veto the bill (H.R. 839) if
it reaches the president's desk.

This week, the House Financial Services Committee will mark up and vote on the
eight GSE bills. (Two of the bills establish a multiyear schedule for the GSEs
to reduce their mortgage portfolios and raise their loan guarantee fees.)

The bill sponsored by Rep. Jeb Hensarling, R-Texas, would cap Fannie and
Freddie's portfolios at $700 billion one year after enactment. Over the next
four years the portfolios would be reduced to $250 billion.

A measure introduced by Rep. Randy Neugebauer, R-Texas, requires the GSE
regulator to start raising Fannie and Freddie's guarantee fees immediately after
becoming law. Within two years, the guarantee fees should reflect the risks of
potential loan losses and capital costs in the private sector. "Slowly raising
the guarantee fee of Fannie and Freddie to eliminate their subsidies will
finally bring pricing parity between the private market and the GSEs," he said.

This bill also requires "uniform pricing among lenders." Currently, the GSEs can
discount guarantee fees for its largest customers while small banks and mortgage
bankers pay higher fees.

A third bill would reduce the compensation of the GSEs' top executives to levels
paid to high-ranking federal government officials.

Other bills abolish the GSE affordable housing programs and require risk
retention on GSE mortgage-backed securities. Garrett said more GSE bills are
being drafted and observers expect one measure will present a schedule for
reducing GSE loan limits.

The housing subcommittee will begin a parallel attempt to reform the FHA
single-family program. "This effort will focus on legislation to clearly define
FHA's mission and prevent it from simply replacing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as
a source of taxpayer exposure to the mortgage market," said Rep. Spencer Bachus,
R-Ala., House Financial Services Committee chair.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2011 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              458 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 4, 1992

LIMAC, Freddie Mac Join In 'Affordable' Secondary

BYLINE: By WENDY PELLE

SECTION: AFFORDABLE HOUSING; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


Affordable housing development will receive a major boost from a $ 100 million
mortgage purchase program which will result in the creation of a secondary
mortgage market for such loans while freeing up additional funds for investment.

The new program is being offered jointly by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
and the Local Initiatives Managed Assets Corp. (LIMAC), a New York nonprofit
organization and an affiliate of the Local Initiatives Support Corp.

"The program will allow large institutional investors like pension funds and
insurance companies to invest in community development safely and securely and
on a vastly increased scale, providing an important source of new funds for
low-income communities," said John F. Weir of LIMAC.

Freddie Mac securities are rated AAA and offer a market rate of return.

The program also is expected to increase activity by commercial lenders since it
opens up a secondary market for these loans.

Additionally, lenders may receive credit under the Community Reinvestment Act.

The program has been lauded by housing advocates that long have supported the
idea of a secondary market for multifamily housing.

Because of the lack of a secondary market, long-term financing for multifamily
housing has been difficult to obtain.

At the end of 1990, only 9% of all multifamily loans had been securitized as
opposed to 50% of all single-family loans.

Under the program, LIMAC, which is funded by LISC, The Ford Foundation and The
National Community Development Initiative which is made up of a consortium of
philanthropic foundations and the Prudential Life Insurance Co.

LIMAC will purchase multifamily housing loans that are originated by commercial
lenders and targeted at low-income families and neighborhoods.

LIMAC then swaps the mortgages for Freddie Mac participation certificates (PCs)
and sells them to institutional investors.

The proceeds from the sale are then recycled into new community development and
low-income housing projects.

The first purchase under the program involved a $ 5 million pool of loans
originated by Harris Trust and Savings Bank, Chicago.

The pool was exchanged for Freddie Mac PCs and sold to the General Board of
Pensions of the United Methodist Church, Evanston, Ill.

LIMAC is currently working with community development corporations in six other
cities to find similar matches between lenders and institutional investors.

LIMAC purchased eight loans for multifamily buildings in Chicago neighborhoods.

The loans ranged from $ 152,000 to more than $ 1.3 million.

Harris Bank, which will continue servicing the loans, said it would use the
proceeds of the sale to originate new multifamily loans of the same kind.

Lenders, which may include commercial banks, savings institutions and loan
consortia, must be approved for participation in the program by LIMAC and
Freddie Mac.

Loans from Freddie Mac seller/servicers are eligible for the program.

They must meet LIMAC requirements, must be fixed-rate, long-term, either 15-year
or 30-year, preferably fully amortized and must meet the programs affordability
and underwriting criteria.

LIMAC may pool loans from one or more lenders which are exchanged for the
Freddie Mac PCs.

In order to meet approval, lenders must have community development lending
experience, loan portfolio performance, overall financial strength and servicing
capabilities.

LIMAC's responsibilities include selecting lenders, obtaining investment
commitments, underwriting and selecting loans, and guiding lenders through the
delivery process.

Chiefly, LIMAC will be providing credit enhancement for the loans thereby making
it feasible for Freddie Mac to participate.

Capital to back its credit enhancement was provided by NCDI.

The program provides some risk sharing for institutions that participate.

The lender is liable for 20% of any loss on loans made.  LIMAC then provides 80%
coverage for that 20% risk the bank is liable for.

Freddie Mac guarantees 100% payment on the security in case of nonperforming
loans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Diagram, TURNING INVESTOR FUNDS INTO HOUSING

                   Copyright 1992 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              459 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             August 28, 2009 Friday

VIEWPOINT: GSE Loans to Mortgage Market Rescue

BYLINE: Aimee M. Cummo

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 9 Vol. 174 No. F303

LENGTH: 862  words


As the summer draws to a close, the "green shoots" of economic revival still
seem to be mere seedlings, if not a little brown around the edges. The continued
sluggishness in the capital markets has been compounded by the relative
inactivity of warehouse lenders in extending credit for the funding of mortgage
origination. For the most part, warehousing credit continues to be bottlenecked
and, of the lenders still in the business, many remain wary about the proper
valuation of mortgage loan collateral.

One bright spot has been the origination of Ginnie Mae-, Fannie Mae- and Freddie
Mac-eligible mortgages, the issuance of mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by
the government-sponsored enterprises and an increased level of related activity
in the warehouse lending market. Originators have expanded, or in some cases,
shifted, their focus to mortgages that meet the selling and servicing criteria
promulgated by the GSEs as demand for GSE MBS has surged over the past year.

Notably, the issuance of Ginnie Mae-guaranteed MBS, backed primarily by
single-family mortgages, has been consistently trending upward for over a year
and at record levels for the past few months. The volume of Ginnie Mae MBS
issuance in the first six months of 2009 ($207 billion) almost doubled the
issuance in the first six months of 2008 ($107 billion). By way of comparison,
volumes of private-label MBS issuance in the first half of 2009 declined 38.9%
from the first half of 2008.

This trend is primarily attributed to the perceived safety and liquidity of the
securities and the underlying mortgages, all of which can be traced to the
indirect and direct role the federal government plays in these products.

These securities are guaranteed by the applicable GSE as to timely payment of
principal and interest to investors regardless of whether the underlying
borrowers are current on their monthly payments. This guarantee is backed by the
full faith and credit of the U.S. government, with the result that these
securities offer investors credit quality similar to that of U.S. Treasuries.
Additionally, the mortgages underlying Ginnie Mae MBS are required to be insured
or guaranteed through certain federal instrumentalities, such as the Federal
Housing Administration and the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Additionally, federal bailout programs have made the origination and aggregation
of GSE mortgages more attractive to lenders. Both the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York and the Treasury Department have implemented programs to purchase
new-issue GSE MBS on the open market for the purposes of increasing liquidity,
promoting stability in the financial markets and supporting the housing market
by making mortgages moreavailable and affordable. From the inception of the New
York Fed's program in January through the second week of July 2009, over $660
billion had been deployed to purchase GSE MBS.

Finally, recent legislation has increased the availability of GSE mortgages to
homeowners in a time when mortgages are generally difficult to secure. The
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act temporarily raised the maximum FHA and
GSE loan limits to $729,750 for mortgages originated in 2009 in certain
high-cost areas and provided the secretary of HUD and the director of the
Federal Housing Finance Authority with the discretion to set higher FHA and GSE
loan limits in certain sub-areas. In fact, 35.9% of applications made for
mortgages in June 2009 consist of applications for FHA and VA mortgages, the
highest level since late 1990.

Mortgage origination and MBS issuance go hand in hand with warehouse lending,
since it provides borrowers with the pipeline of liquidity with which to
originate and aggregate mortgages over a period of time for securitization at a
later date. The resurgence of origination and securitization of GSE-eligible
mortgages has been facilitated in large part by "gestation repo," a highly
specialized lending structure that is collateralized by these products and has
been utilized in certain market niches for decades.

Though the limited popularity of this kind of facility waned in recent years as
GSE mortgages lost market share to alt-A, subprime mortgages and other
nonconforming loan products, it is now one of the only active segments of the
warehouse lending market. Lenders have taken a shine to these facilities because
the collateral can be easily sold to or securitized by the GSEs and, when
structured properly, protect the lender against the bankruptcy and credit risk
of the borrowing counterparty.

This past year the federal government, through its many agencies and
instrumentalities, has provided the mortgage market with an unprecedented number
of emergency programs and channeled trillions of dollars into the system, all in
an effort to resuscitate the credit markets. Whether or not intentional, the
convergence of these programs with the existing implicit government guarantee
underlying GSE mortgages has resulted in the surge of GSE mortgage origination,
lending and securitization activity we are seeing right now.

Aimee M. Cummo is a partner in the capital markets practice at Sonnenschein Nath
& Rosenthal LLP in New York.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              460 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

                           October 17, 2013 Thursday

U.S. homebuilder confidence retreats amid uncertainty

SECTION: B; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 617 words


U.S. homebuilders are feeling less confident in the housing market, reflecting
their uncertainty over the budget impasse in Washington.

The National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo builder sentiment index
released Wednesday fell to 55 in October. That's down from a reading of 57 in
September. September's reading was revised one point lower from its initial
estimate.

Measures of current sales conditions for single-family homes, builders' outlook
over the next six months and traffic by prospective buyers all declined in
October.

The partial government shutdown, which began on Oct. 1, has made it harder for
some buyers to close on their mortgages, raising concerns that a prolonged
shutdown could undercut the strength of the housing recovery. The survey was
conducted from Oct. 1 through Oct. 11.

Still, builders remain optimistic that the recovery will endure. Any reading
above 50 indicates more builders view sales conditions as good, rather than
poor.

"Once this government impasse is resolved, we expect builder and consumer
optimism will bounce back," said David Crowe, the NAHB's chief economist.

The association estimates that builders broke ground on single-family homes in
September at a seasonally adjusted annual rate between 620,000 and 630,000 homes
last month, in line with the August pace of 628,000. Official estimates from the
U.S. Census haven't been released because of the government shutdown.

"Single-family starts dipped in July but rebounded in August, and we expect
continued strength in September," Crowe said.

Builders' confidence in the market for newly built homes has improved steadily
since national measures of home sales and prices began to recover early last
year.

But some builders reported a slowdown in sales this summer as mortgage interest
rates began to tick up in May, stoking worries that rising rates could hinder
the housing recovery.

Rates began to increase after Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke signalled
the central bank might reduce its $85-billion-a-month in bond purchases. The
bond buys are intended to keep longer-term interest rates low, including
mortgage rates.

But the Fed held off last month, and since then mortgage rates have moved lower.

Last week, the average rate on a 30-year loan edged up to 4.23 per cent from
4.22 per cent a week earlier, according to mortgage buyer Freddie Mac. Those are
both the lowest averages since July.

Now, the partial government shutdown and uncertainty over a possible U.S. debt
default are weighing most on builders' confidence.

Furloughs at the Federal Housing Administration are slowing the agency's
processing of loan guarantees for some low- to moderate-income borrowers and
first-time homebuyers. About 30 per cent of U.S. home mortgages are insured by
the FHA. And some lenders are having a hard time getting confirmation of
applicants' income tax returns and Social Security data because of government
agency closures, delaying some mortgage closings.

In addition to the uncertainty over the federal government's budget battle, the
survey also highlighted concerns over the cost and availability of construction
labour.

The latest survey, which is based on 261 respondents, a measure of current sales
conditions for single-family homes fell two points to 58, while a gauge of
traffic by prospective buyers dipped two points to 44. Builders' outlook for
single-family home sales over the next six months also slid two points to 62.

Though new homes represent only a fraction of the housing market, they have an
outsize impact on the economy. Each home built creates an average of three jobs
for a year and generates about $90,000 in tax revenue, according to data from
the homebuilders association.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2013 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                               Publications Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              461 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                November 3, 2008

Lockhart: Congress Was Too Late to Save the GSEs

BYLINE: Lew Sichelman

SECTION: Pg. 8 Vol. 33 No. 7

LENGTH: 441  words


MIAMI BEACH, FL-Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac might have been able to withstand the
rigors of the marketplace had lawmakers answered earlier pleas to place the
government-sponsored enterprises under a more powerful regulator, the agencies'
new overseer told a group of real estate specialists here last week.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac "would have had enough capital on hand had a strong
regulator been in place," director James Lockhart of the Federal Housing Finance
Agency said at the Urban Land Institute's annual fall meeting.

But Congress would have had to act at least three years ago to save the GSEs,
Mr. Lockhart told the group. And 36 months ago, the housing market was running
on all cylinders and the GSEs were still powerful lobbying forces on Capitol
Hill.

The GSEs were taken into conservatorship in September by the FHFA because they
didn't have enough money on hand to effectively manage the risk they had taken
on. They were being "overwhelmed" by circumstances beyond their control, Mr.
Lockhart said.

He pointed out that the GSEs' former supervisory agency, the Office of Federal
Housing Enterprise Oversight, was intentionally created to be weak. OFHEO, he
said, spent at least half of its 15 years in existence pleading for greater
regulatory authority.

Mr. Lockhart headed OFHEO until it was combined with the Federal Housing Finance
Board and turned into the FHFA under the Housing and Economic Recovery Act that
was signed into law in July. But by that time, he said, it was too late.

The regulator said the need for a better regulatory structure was "obvious" to
him the first time he looked at the agencies. "They were very thinly
capitalized, and they were taking on hard-to-manage risk," he said. "If they
were smaller, maybe they could have made it, but not at their size. They had
over $5 trillion in mortgage assets, and that was just too much."

Mr. Lockhart also said Fannie and Freddie will continue to be allowed to
purchase mortgage-backed securities to hold in their own portfolios, at least
for the time being. But those activities "will be cut over time," he said.

"These companies primarily should be mortgage guarantee companies," he said.
"They don't need $1.5 trillion portfolios to perform their mission in the
marketplace."

In addition, he said that with the $100 billion in federal backing that now
stands firmly behind the two companies, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have
significant balance sheet room to continue to support the multifamily as well as
the single-family housing market.

And he he's looking to the companies to be more innovative. "We really need them
to be looking at other ways to do more," he said.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2008 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              462 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Mortgage Servicing News

                                   June 2014

FHA Catching Up to GSEs with Electronic Appraisal Plan;
The FHA will require lenders to submit full e-appraisals for the mortgages it
insures-a risk management practice Fannie and Freddie adopted two years ago.

BYLINE: Austin Kilgore

SECTION: SPECIAL REPORT: PROPERTY VALUATIONS; Pg. 5 Vol. 18 No. 07

LENGTH: 1527  words


The Federal Housing Administration will require lenders to submit full
electronic appraisals for the mortgages it insures-a risk management practice
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac adopted two years ago.

The agency, part of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, is
developing a Web portal for lenders and their appraisal management companies to
meet the new requirement beginning next year. The project will benefit from the
heavy lifting Fannie and Freddie have already done.

Currently, the FHA reviews the underlying appraisal reports that support
property valuations only in rare circumstances, such as when a loan file is
selected for post-endorsement technical review or as part of the FHA's appraiser
review process. The new policy should help the agency spot dubious property
valuations before it agrees to guarantee a mortgage.

"Right now, the FHA is only getting a few numbers out of the appraisal. With
this, they'll be able to better understand the value of the property and get to
the comps to understand if the value is what it should be," says Bill Rayburn,
CEO of FNC, a collateral valuations technology developer in Oxford, Miss. "That
should help their losses and provide better visibility into the exposure they
have because they'll understand the real LTV of their loans."

When it's deployed in 2015, the FHA's Electronic Appraisal Delivery portal will
be a sister platform to the Uniform Collateral Data Portal, which the
government-sponsored enterprises launched in December 2011 to collect appraisal
reports. The EAD will accept the same Uniform Appraisal Dataset form that
appraisers are already using for both GSE and FHA mortgages. And like the UCDP,
the EAD is being built by Veros, a valuations and analytics technology developer
in Santa Ana, Calif.

"We're building it all off the UAD to make it align as closely as possible to
what lenders are used to using today," Patricia McClung, FHA senior
single-family housing policy advisor, said during at the Mortgage Bankers
Association's annual technology conference.

The UCDP and UAD are the appraisal components of the Uniform Mortgage Data
Program, an umbrella initiative of data standardization and delivery projects
that Fannie and Freddie have undertaken at the direction of their conservator,
the Federal Housing Finance Agency.

"Our goal is to draft off of that work and make it easier for us to work
together," said McClung, who spent more than 20 years as a technology product
developer at Freddie before joining HUD last summer.

The FHA's desire to collect appraisal reports was first revealed in 2012 in the
annual GSE Scorecard, where the FHFA required Fannie and Freddie to "cooperate
with FHA implementation of portal to accept electronic appraisals," and tied the
effort to GSE executives' compensation.

At the time of the 2012 scorecard's release, FHA, GSE and FHFA officials would
not talk about their plans; a HUD spokesperson said the negotiations between the
FHA and FHFA were a "closed-door" matter. And the project only received a
passing mention during an agency technology session at the 2013 MBA technology
conference.

Now it appears the FHA's appraisal delivery plans are finally taking shape.
Following McClung's comments at the MBA conference, the FHA also updated
mortgagees about the project via email.

"When fully implemented, the portal will offer mortgagees a new and easy-to-use
technology system to submit electronic appraisal data to FHA. The portal is one
part of a larger FHA business transformation effort," the FHA told lenders.

Other areas that the FHA has focused on in its technology modernization efforts
include the adoption of electronic signatures on most loan documents earlier
this year; the upcoming adoption of e-signed promissory notes in December; and
development of an electronic case binder to replace paper-based files.

Another target for improvement is the Computerized Home Underwriting Management
System, or CHUMS, which has served as the FHA's insurance endorsement system of
record for more than 30 years. It was recently migrated a new Oracle database
management system and McClung says the FHA plans to replace CHUMS "in pieces and
parts."

"We're not only looking to replace technology, but add capabilities," she told
lenders at the MBA conference. "Our goal is to improve operational efficiencies
not just on our end, but on your end, too."

While Fannie and Freddie use exclusionary lists to keep bad appraisers from
providing property valuations, the FHA maintains a roster of approximately
50,000 appraisers who are approved to evaluate the properties backing mortgages
it insures. It has historically required those appraisers to complete their
reports with GSE-created forms, so when Fannie and Freddie replaced their
appraisal form with the UAD, FHA followed suit.

The UAD is both a set of definitions for the responses that appraisers can use
to complete the valuation report, as well a type of XML file format that was
built using Mortgage Industry Standards Maintenance Organization standards.

But without a portal of its own to accept the files, FHA has "no mechanism to
check, collect or enforce" its requirements, says Veros CEO Darius Bozorgi.

Unlike the PDF-based reports that appraisers previously submitted to lenders and
AMCs, the individual data points in an XML file can be mined for storage in
databases and analysis. And the UAD file has the added benefit of including an
embedded PDF that provides a graphical representation of the report.

"The standardized dataset contains the underlying data points that are rendered
on the screen in the shape of an appraisal form," Rayburn explains.

As part of the EAD implementation, there will be some differences between the
FHA and GSE versions of the UAD form. The FHA's form will add data points for
the CHUMS number that matches the appraisal with its loan, and the appraiser's
user identification number to validate and track that reports are completed by
appraisers on the FHA's roster.

The embedded PDF of the report won't display these data points (eliminating the
need to redesign the form's layout), but they will be included in the file's raw
data. Still, appraisal forms vendors will need to add those points into their
workflows.

When an appraisal is submitted to the GSE portal, it undergoes a number of
automated checks before it's accepted. Certain types of errors produce a
warning, but the appraisal is still accepted. More serious errors prompt
so-called hard stops that prevent delivery. The FHA may set different guidelines
for warnings and hard stops in its delivery portal.

"When you earn a return, you have to take certain risks. The question is what
risks are you going to take?" Rayburn says. "Fannie and Freddie can determine
which rules they're going to let go through and which they're not, and I'd
imagine FHA would have the same flexibility."

The GSEs' appraisal delivery initiative faced a series of setbacks during its
development, resulting in numerous delays, going back to when the earliest
efforts began in 2009.

At first, Fannie and Freddie were each building their own portals with Veros
before the FHFA intervened and halted the separate projects in favor of a joint
effort.

In addition, appraisers would complete valuation reports inconsistently. An
oft-cited example is the "condition" field. Appraisers would fill in anything
from the subjective description "good" to the non sequitur "brick." This
required the GSEs to create the UAD format with standardized answers that can be
compared across appraisals.

The UCDP was also the focus of a recent FHFA Office of Inspector General audit,
which found that the GSEs bought loans despite warnings about their compliance
with appraisal requirements and questions about their appraised value.

The audit identified the potentially problematic loans by reviewing error
messages that resulted in warnings, but didn't stop the appraisals' delivery or
loans' purchase. Such an examination would have been virtually impossible to
conduct prior to GSEs' use of the UCDP.

Fannie and Freddie's joint, five-year contract with Veros is valued at $52
million, according to the audit, and the OIG contends "the Enterprises have had
an extensive (nearly four year) development, testing, and implementation phase
to reach the level of readiness such that the Enterprises should be able to
require lenders to respond to warning messages."

With most of the UCDP's growing pains behind the GSEs, Veros and the rest of the
mortgage industry, it would stand to reason that getting the EAD portal up and
running will be less onerous for FHA. Appraisers have been trained and are now
accustomed to completing valuation reports in the UAD format, and lenders and
AMCs have incorporated appraisal portal delivery into their operations.

"Every software deployment has its own risks and rewards. I don't know if it
will be easier or not, but we've certainly learned some things and there will
probably be some new challenges as we roll this out in the industry," Rayburn
says. "But since UCDP and UAD have already been done, I don't think this is
going to be a heavy burden. It's just going to be another compliance thing."

URL: http://www.mortgageservicingnews.com/

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: MSN


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              463 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 31, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS DIGEST;
TUESDAY, AUGUST 31, 1982;
International

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 747 words


Two Cabinet officers urged President Reagan to apply less severe sanctions
against John Brown P.L.C. of Britain than were applied last week against two
French companies for violating the Soviet pipeline embargo. The two officials,
Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige,
were said to be seeking to contain mounting trade tension with Europe. (Page
A1.) The United States and its European allies are viewed as having reached a
political and legal impasse. (D1.)

Western central banks will lend Mexico $1.85 billion in an effort to keep the
financially troubled, oil-exporting country from going bankrupt. Officials said
the coordinated international bailout effort will set an important precedent.
Details of the loan were made final over the weekend in Basel, Switzerland.
(D5.)

Two key officials in Bonn will urge the full Cabinet to endorse a guarantee of
about $442 million in loans to AEG-Telefunken, according to reports circulating
there. The approval by the two officials, the ministers of economics and
finance, was seen as virtually assuring that the Government will provide the
guarantees. (D4.)

The Economy

New rules requiring banks to disclose more data about problem loans such as
those that led to the collapse of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma City have
been unexpectedly rejected by the Office of Management and Budget. It cited
concern that the rules, issued last week by the Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council, might add to the banks' ''regulatory burden.'' (A1.)

Sales of new single-family houses fell 4.9 percent in July to the third-lowest
rate in at least two decades, the Government reported.  During the month, it
said, the median price of new houses rose to a record $73,600. The July sales
decline came as home loan rates were rising, lenders noted. The decline in those
loan rates since then may cause sales to pick up in August and September, they
said. (D1.)

Companies

Martin Marietta made a $1.8 billion counteroffer for Bendix, which, in an
unwelcome takeover bid last week, had offered $1.5 billion for Martin Marietta.
Both companies have substantial aerospace manufacturing interests. Martin
Marietta said it would offer Bendix stockholders $75 a share, in cash, for the
first 11.9 million shares, or 50.3 percent, of Bendix's shares. (D1.)

Continental Illinois has dismissed a vice president as part of a management
shake-up resulting from the large losses the bank suffered through its ties with
the failed Penn Square Bank of Oklahoma City.  In addition, it said, two other
vice presidents were asked to retire and still other executives were demoted.
(D1.)

Dayco Corporation said it had discharged two managers after an internal
investigation into its production of millions of dollars of goods for
nonexistent Soviet orders. (D4.)

Manville was upheld in the first hearing to arise from its bankruptcy petition.
The judge refused to lift a freeze on thousands of pending lawsuits by victims
of asbestos-related illnesses. (A13.) The Manville case focuses attention on the
potentially vast magnitude of illnesses related to occupation or environment.
(A13.)

The Sarasota Herald-Tribune is to be bought by The New York Times Company under
an accord with Lindsay Newspapers. (D2.)

Criton and PC Industries announced a definitive merger agreement, valued at
possibly $160 million. (D4.)

Markets

Stock prices rode a late rally to their highest closing level in a year. The Dow
Jones industrial average rose 9.83 points, to 893.30.  Volume slowed markedly,
however. (D8.) Interest rates were mixed in light trading. (D11.) The dollar
rose against most major currencies, while gold prices were up $5 an ounce, to
$409, in New York. (D12.) Frozen pork bellies closed sharply higher. (D12.)

Today's Columns

Retail sales have deteriorated despite last July's income tax cut, according to
Walter F. Loeb of Morgan Stanley. Nonetheless, he is optimistic about consumer
spending and looks for a significant jump in sales during October. Talking
Business. (D2.)

Wards Company is so little known that its shares have eased in the strongest
stock market rally ever. Yet the consumer electronics concern has been growing
rapidly in recent years and now owns four retail chains with 100 outlets. Market
Place. (D8.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              464 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                  February 25, 2004 Wednesday FINAL C Edition

Mortgage giants must reform: Greenspan: Debt load of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac
needs to be restrained

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: Martin Crutsinger

SECTION: BusinessBC; Pg. D7

LENGTH: 536 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

WASHINGTON -- Mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac could pose a threat to
America's financial system if their ability to take on new debt is not
restrained, Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan said Tuesday.

Greenspan lent his influential voice to calls for reforms in the operations of
the two government-chartered companies which dominate the multitrillion-dollar
mortgage industry.

Speaking to the Senate banking committee Tuesday, Greenspan said he supports
creation of a tough new government regulatory agency to supervise the two
corporations, saying the new regulator should have similar powers to federal
banking regulators, including the authority to set minimum capital standards.

Fannie and Freddie, both Fortune 500 companies, have grown into two of the
biggest financial companies in the world. They stand behind $4 trillion US in
home mortgages, or more than three-fourths of the single-family mortgages in the
United States.

Greenspan stressed that this portfolio does not represent a risk currently to
the financial system, but he warned that it could down the road if the explosive
growth in debt held by the government sponsored enterprises is not restrained.

"To fend off possible future systemic difficulties, which we assess as likely if
GSE expansion continues unabated, preventive actions are required sooner rather
than later," Greenspan told the committee.

Committee chairman Senator Richard Shelby (R-Ala.) told Greenspan that he was
making creation of a new regulator for the two institutions and the Federal Home
Loan Bank System a top priority this year.

Shelby is supporting legislation to replace the current Office of Federal
Housing Enterprise Oversight, which critics say lacks the power to properly
regulate institutions of the size of Fannie and Freddie, with a new independent
regulatory agency.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have been under increased scrutiny since an
accounting crisis at Freddie Mac came to light last spring. Freddie acknowledged
that it had understated earnings by $5 billion US for 2000 through 2002. It
later admitted inflating 2001 profits by nearly $1 billion.

In statements Tuesday, the two agencies took issue with Greenspan's
recommendations.

Fannie Mae senior vice president Jayne Shontell said the company appreciated
that Greenspan had made it clear "that his concerns are not about some imminent
problem" but about what course should be taken in the future. However, she said,
"We, of course, disagree with most of his conclusions."

Freddie Mac president chairman Dick Syron said "the United States remains the
only nation where a 30-year, prepayable mortgage is broadly available and this
is in large measure because of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae."

Greenspan said the problem facing Congress was the fact that investors widely
believe that if either Freddie or Fannie, as they are popularly known, got into
financial trouble, the government would bail them out, even though the bonds
issued by the corporations say they are not backed by the federal government.

Greenspan said this perceived guarantee allows the two corporations to raise
money at lower interest rates than their financial competitors.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Color Photo: Dennis Brack, Bloomberg News; Federal Reserve Board
Chairman Alan Greenspan tells Senate banking committee on government sponsored
enterprises he is concerned about the debt growth of big mortgage lenders.

TYPE: Business

               Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              465 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Warnings of Losses on FHA Loans Prod Kemp to Call for Higher Fees

                             June 7, 1990, Thursday

By DEBRA COPE

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Spurred by warnings that the government's flagship program for first-time home
buyers could become insolvent, the Bush Administration called on Wednesday for
most borrowers to pay higher fees for FHA mortgages.

The plan is intended to minimize the possibility that the Federal Housing
Administration's mutual mortgage insurance fund could require a taxpayer bailout
by the end of the decade.  $271 Billion Insured

That fund is the FHA's largest that guarantees loans for single-family homes.
The fund insured $271 billion in loans as of last September.

The General Accounting Office said Wednesday its audit of the fund showed a loss
of $1.4 billion in the fiscal year that ended in September 1988, and the
likelihood in the near term of a continued high rate of foreclosures.

As part of a plan to revamp the fund, Jack Kemp, Secretary of housing and urban
development, recommended imposing risk-based mortgage insurance premiums and
ending the financing of most closing costs.

The fund needs to increase its income by $760 million a year to offset growing
losses and rebuild equity. It was not clear how much fee income the proposals
would provide.  Banks More Active

The proposals, made before the housing and urban affairs subcommittee of the
Senate Banking Committee, come as commercial banks are stepping up
government-backed mortgage lending, usually the province of mortgage banking
firms.

Banks may be forced to rethink their mortgage business strategy if increased
costs make FHA loans less attractive.

Banks have become a significant force in FHA lending, said John Dickie, the
agency's chief of mortgage and capital market analysis. In 1989, banks lent 15%
and thrifts 10.5% of the year's $32.6 billion market in FHA-insured home loans.
Mortgage Companies Dominant

Mortgage companies dominated the field, originating 70% of FHA loans last year,
but many of these companies are owned by banks, holding companies, or thrifts.
According to the Mortgage Bankers Association, 31% of its 1,500 members are
affiliated with a financial institution, and these tend to be the larger
mortgage companies.

FHA insured loans made up about 9% of the $352 billion of home loans originated
last year.

The department is proposing to increase the current 3.8% mortgage insurance
premium on principalfor those who make a down payment of less than 10% on a
home. The increase, to as much as 6.6%, would affect 68% of FHA borrowers,
according to the Mortgage Bankers Association. If the buyers cannot not come up
with extra funds, they would pay an extra premium of 0.50% a year on the
principal for up to 15 years.  Change on Closing Costs

Additionally under the proposed FHA changes, borrowers would be permitted to
finance only one-third of their closing costs, instead of 100%.

The proposals will place a heavy burden on the first-time home buyers that the
FHA program was designed to serve, said Joe K. Pickett, chairman, president and
chief executive officer of BancBoston Mortgage Corp., Jacksonville, Fla.

"It looks like those who can least afford it would be those most hurt," said Mr.
Pickett. His firm, a subsidiary of First National Bank of Boston, had an $18.2
million loan portfolio and does 20% to 25% of its single-family volume in FHA
loans.

"If fewer people can qualify for loans, we will probably do less FHA volume," he
said. Many first-time borrowers will not qualify for conventional loans, and
thus will not be able to buy homes, he added.
The American Banker

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 586 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Jack Kemp, photo

                      Copyright 1990 American Banker, Inc.


                              466 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                              May 10, 2016 Tuesday

Freddie Mac Reports First Quarter 2016 Financial Results

LENGTH: 2229 words

DATELINE: New York



 McLean, VA: Freddie Mac (OTCQB: FMCC) today reported a net loss of $354 million
for the first quarter of 2016, compared to net income of $2.2 billion for the
fourth quarter of 2015. The company also reported a comprehensive loss of $200
million for the first quarter of 2016, compared to comprehensive income of $1.6
billion for the fourth quarter of 2015.



 Financial Results Discussion



 Freddie Mac's first quarter 2016 net loss of $354 million and comprehensive
loss of $200 million were a decrease of $2.5 billion and $1.8 billion,
respectively, from the fourth quarter of 2015. The decline in the company's
first quarter 2016 results was primarily driven by two market-related items:








    [#x25cf]



    Net Interest Rate Effect: $1.4 billion (after-tax) estimated fair value loss
for the first quarter of 2016 as interest rates decreased, compared to a $0.3
billion (after-tax) estimated fair value gain for the fourth quarter of 2015 as
interest rates increased. (See Net Interest Rate Effect table for additional
details.)











    S

    Through its use of derivatives, the company continues to manage its
interest-rate risk on an economic basis to a low level as measured by its
models. However, significant GAAP earnings volatility can occur as the
derivative instruments are measured at fair value each period while certain
hedged assets and liabilities are not.











    [#x25cf]



    Spread Change Effect: $0.6 billion (after-tax) estimated loss for the first
quarter of 2016, compared to a $0.3 billion (after-tax) estimated loss for the
fourth quarter of 2015, as spreads on certain mortgage loans and
mortgage-related securities measured at fair value widened more in the first
quarter than in the fourth quarter.









    [#x25cf]



    Net interest income was $3.4 billion for the first quarter of 2016, a
decrease of $182 million from the fourth quarter of 2015.











    S

    The decrease in net interest income primarily reflects lower amortization
income due to lower prepayments.











    S

    Approximately 45 percent of net interest income for the first quarter of
2016 was derived from management and guarantee fees, up from 37 percent in the
first quarter of 2015.




 Variability of Earnings

 Freddie Mac's financial results are subject to significant earnings variability
from period to period. This variability is primarily driven by:








    o



    Interest-Rate Volatility - Freddie Mac holds assets and liabilities that
expose it to interest-rate risk. Through its use of derivatives, the company
manages its exposure to interest-rate risk on an economic basis to a low level
as measured by the company's models. However, the way the company accounts for
its financial assets and liabilities (i.e., some are measured at amortized cost,
while others are measured at fair value), including derivatives, creates
volatility in the company's GAAP earnings when interest rates fluctuate. Based
upon the composition of its financial assets and liabilities, including
derivatives, at March 31, 2016, the company generally recognizes fair value
losses in earnings when interest rates decline. This volatility generally is not
indicative of the underlying economics of its business.











    o



    Spread Volatility - Spread volatility (i.e., credit spreads, liquidity
spreads, risk premiums, etc.), or option-adjusted spreads, is the risk
associated with changes in the excess of interest rates over benchmark rates.
Freddie Mac holds assets and liabilities that expose it to spread volatility,
which may contribute to significant earnings volatility. For financial assets
and liabilities measured at fair value, the company generally recognizes fair
value losses when spreads widen.




 The variability of earnings and the declining capital reserve required under
the terms of the Purchase Agreement (ultimately reaching zero in 2018) increase
the risk of the company having a negative net worth and being required to draw
from Treasury. Freddie Mac currently faces a risk of a draw for a variety of
reasons, including if it were to experience a large decrease in interest rates
coupled with a large widening of spreads. The company continues to assess
certain transactions and activities that may reduce or limit its exposure to
this variability.

 Total Segment Earnings (Loss)

 Freddie Mac has three reportable segments - Single-family Guarantee,
Multifamily, and Investments. The company presents Segment Earnings for its
individual segments by reclassifying certain credit guarantee-related activities
and investment-related activities between various line items on the company's
GAAP consolidated statements of comprehensive income and allocating certain
revenue and expenses, including certain returns on assets and funding costs, and
all administrative expenses to its three reportable segments.

 In addition to analyzing the company's results on a GAAP basis, management
reviews the company's business results on a Total Segment Earnings basis.
Because of the reclassifications and allocations the company makes to present
its segment results, certain operating measures presented on a Total Segment
Earnings basis differ from the amounts for the comparable measures on a GAAP
basis. Each measure of operating results presented on a Total Segment Earnings
basis that differs from the comparable amount on a GAAP basis is a non-GAAP
measure. Management believes these non-GAAP measures are meaningful to the
company, as well as investors, because they help to better understand how the
company generates revenue and better reflect how management assesses segment and
overall company performance.

 Single-family Guarantee Segment

 Providing liquidity to the U.S. housing market while continuing to transfer
credit risk to the private market

 Financial Results






    [#x25cf]



    Single-family Guarantee segment earnings were $810 million for the first
quarter of 2016, an increase of $174 million from the fourth quarter of 2015.









    S

    Management and guarantee fee income remained steady, while the increase in
segment earnings was primarily driven by fewer seriously delinquent
single-family loans being reclassified from held-for-investment to held-for-sale
in the first quarter of 2016.




 Business Highlights






    [#x25cf]



    Core book continued to grow and was 68 percent of the single-family credit
guarantee portfolio at March 31, 2016.









    S

    HARP and other relief refinance loans were an additional 17 percent.









    S

    Legacy book declined to 15 percent.









    [#x25cf]



    Average management and guarantee fees charged on new acquisitions were 46.4
basis points (net of the legislated 10 basis point guarantee fee remitted to
Treasury as part of the Temporary Payroll Tax Cut Continuation Act of 2011) for
the first quarter of 2016, up from 43.7 basis points in the fourth quarter of
2015.









    [#x25cf]



    Sold $0.8 billion in UPB of seriously delinquent single-family loans during
the first quarter of 2016, and $4.3 billion since 2013.









    [#x25cf]



    Completed credit risk transfer transactions during the first quarter of 2016
that, upon initial execution, covered $53.8 billion in principal of the mortgage
loans in the Core book.




 Multifamily Segment

 Providing financing for workforce housing while continuing to transfer credit
risk to the private market

 Financial Results






    [#x25cf]



    Multifamily segment comprehensive income was $150 million for the first
quarter of 2016, an increase of $128 million from the fourth quarter of 2015.









    S

    Net interest income was relatively stable, while the increase in
comprehensive income was primarily driven by lower fair value losses due to less
spread widening on held-for-sale mortgage loans in the first quarter of 2016
compared to the fourth quarter of 2015.









    -

    Derivative gains (losses) for the Multifamily segment are offset by fair
value changes of the loans and investment securities being economically hedged.
As a result, there is no net impact on total comprehensive income for the
Multifamily segment from fair value changes related to interest-rate related
derivatives.




 Business Highlights






    [#x25cf]



    Record new purchase volume of $17.5 billion in the first quarter of 2016, an
increase of $4.3 billion from the fourth quarter of 2015.









    S

    The 2016 Conservatorship Scorecard goal is to maintain the dollar volume of
multifamily new business activity at or below a production cap of $31.0 billion.
Business activity associated with certain targeted loan types is excluded from
the production cap.









    S

    Approximately 69 percent of the $17.5 billion in new business activity for
the first quarter of 2016 counted towards the 2016 production cap, while the
remaining 31 percent was not subject to the cap.









    [#x25cf]



    Held-for-sale loans totaled $23.6 billion at March 31, 2016, up from $19.6
billion at December 31, 2015.









    S

    This balance is expected to decline during the year as the company continues
to securitize loans into K-Deals and other securitization products.









    [#x25cf]



    Executed nine K-Deal transactions that transferred credit risk associated
with $9.8 billion in UPB of loans during the first quarter of 2016.









    S

    In addition, transferred credit risk associated with $1.0 billion of
additional loans through other securitization products, such as small balance
loan securitizations.









    [#x25cf]



    Provided financing for approximately 209,000 rental units in the first
quarter of 2016. Nearly 85 percent of the eligible units financed are affordable
to families earning low to median area incomes.




 Investments Segment

 Enhancing the liquidity of the company's securities in the secondary mortgage
market while reducing less liquid assets using an economically sensible approach


 Financial Results






    [#x25cf]



    Investments segment comprehensive loss was $1.2 billion for the first
quarter of 2016, a shift from comprehensive income of $969 million in the fourth
quarter of 2015.









    S

    Net interest income was relatively unchanged, while the shift to a
comprehensive loss was primarily driven by derivative losses of $3.0 billion as
interest rates declined in the first quarter of 2016, compared to derivative
gains of $1.2 billion in the fourth quarter of 2015.




 Business Highlights






    [#x25cf]



    Continued to actively reduce the balance of the company's mortgage-related
investments portfolio, focusing on reducing the balance of less liquid assets.
Investments segment less liquid assets were $94.8 billion at March 31, 2016,
down $6.0 billion, or 6 percent, from December 31, 2015, due to ongoing
portfolio liquidations and:









    S

    Sales of $0.8 billion of non-agency mortgage-related securities.









    S

    Securitization of $3.5 billion of single-family reperforming loans and
performing modified loans.









    [#x25cf]



    The Investments segment securitization pipeline assets, which represent the
company's performing single-family loans purchased for cash and held until
securitized, were $10.6 billion at March 31, 2016, up $532 million from December
31, 2015.









    [#x25cf]



    Continued to maintain a presence in the agency mortgage-related securities
market. Liquid assets held by the Investments segment were $149.8 billion at
March 31, 2016, up $923 million from December 31, 2015.




 Housing Market Support

 Freddie Mac supports the U.S. housing market by executing its charter mission
to ensure credit availability for new and refinanced mortgages as well as rental
housing and helping struggling homeowners avoid foreclosure. A significant
company-wide focus in 2016 is to responsibly make housing more accessible for
borrowers and renters, especially for low- and moderate-income households and
those in underserved markets.

 Mortgage Funding - Freddie Mac provided approximately $87 billion in liquidity
to the market in the first quarter of 2016, funding:








    o



    More than 313,000 single-family homes, nearly 176,000 of which were
refinance loans.









    o



    Approximately 209,000 multifamily rental units.




 Preventing Foreclosures - Freddie Mac continued to help struggling borrowers
retain their homes or otherwise avoid foreclosure in the first quarter.








    [#x25cf]



    The company completed approximately 19,000 single-family loan workouts.









    [#x25cf]



    The declining trend over the past year in the company's single-family
workouts reflects rising house prices and improving economic conditions.









    [#x25cf]



    When foreclosure is unavoidable, Freddie Mac has helped to further stabilize
communities by focusing its real estate owned home sales on owner-occupants, who
made up nearly two-thirds of its purchasers in the first quarter.





LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              467 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            August 10, 2010 Tuesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

FREDDIE MAC SEEKS $1.8 BILLION IN FEDERAL AID AFTER LOSS

BYLINE: Lorraine Woellert, Bloomberg News

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A-9

LENGTH: 349 words


WASHINGTON -- Freddie Mac, the mortgage company operating under federal
conservatorship, is seeking $1.8 billion in aid from the Treasury Department
after a fourth straight quarterly loss.

The McLean, Va.-based company lost $4.7 billion in the second quarter, compared
with a gain of $768 million in the same period last year, it said Monday in a
filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

"High unemployment and other factors still pose very real challenges from the
housing market, and with that in mind we continue to focus on the quality of the
new businesses we are adding to our book to be responsible stewards of taxpayer
funds," CEO Charles E. Haldeman Jr. said in a news release.

Freddie Mac, the nation's second-biggest source of mortgage funding, and its
larger rival Fannie Mae were seized by the federal government in 2008 and have
been sustained by a promise of unlimited Treasury support. Including Monday's
request from Freddie Mac, the government-sponsored enterprises have drawn $148.3
billion in aid since April 2009.

Fannie Mae reported a $1.2 billion second-quarter loss on Thursday and said it
would seek $1.5 billion in Treasury aid. Freddie Mac said Monday that it
intended to make additional draws in the future.

The Obama administration is soliciting proposals for ways to restructure the
companies, which own or guarantee more than half the $11 trillion residential
debt market.

The second-quarter losses signal a "markedly slower rate of erosion" in their
portfolios, said Jim Vogel, head of agency-debt research at FTN Financial in
Memphis, Tenn. That means the "ruinous losses" on loans made from 2005 to 2008
could be subsiding, he said in an e-mail.

Single-family mortgages issued before the housing market collapse fueled Freddie
Mac's second-quarter loss. Delinquencies on interest-only loans were 18.4
percent, up from 13.3 percent a year ago. Adjustable-rate loan delinquencies
grew to 7 percent from 5.2 percent a year ago.

High unemployment and slow economic growth may drive housing prices lower "in
the near term," Freddie Mac said in its statement Monday.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.


                              468 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                November 9, 1992

Manufactured Home Loans Are 'As Profitable As Mortgages'

BYLINE: By GEORGIA STEELE, NMN Correspondent

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1423 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE


Washington Mutual Saving Bank, the largest lender on both site-built and
manufactured housing in the state, will make 4,500 manufactured home loans this
year.

The bank, said vice president Robert Schoos said, makes both conventional loans
-- which are home/and packages conforming to Fannie Mae standards -- and
nonconventional loans, both of which it holds in portfolio.

Mr. Schoos rates the portfolio's performance "very good."

That corresponds with findings of a national survey of lenders that make
manufactured housing loans.

Nearly 69% said their consumer loans on manufactured housing were as profitable
or more so that their mortgages, while 68% said they matched or bettered the
profitability of auto loans.

The delinquency rate on 292 consumer loan portfolios was 3.2% in 1990, said the
1991 study by Jon Whitney Associates, an Austin, Tex., research firm that was
commissioned by the Manufactured Housing Institute, Arlington, Va., to encourage
lender involvement in that market.

The study said manufactured home loans represent an increasing opportunity for
lenders to profit from participation in a growing market.

But Mr. Schoos sees significant financial issues that need to be addressed
before manufactured housing will achieve parity with site-built housing.

They include Federal legislation that sets loan-to-value limits insured
institutions may accept without mortgage insurance; legislation that establishes
underwriting criteria on purchased portfolios; the reluctance of mortgage
insurance companies to insure manufactured housing loans; and most important,
the way the manufactured housing industry does business.

"I tell the industry all the time that they have a product that is far more
mature than the industry that supports it," Mr. Schoos said.

The quality of today's manufactured home is on par with site-built housing, but
the system of builders, dealerships, and captured credit financing "is rooted in
the personal financing business," he said.

"The industry is used to wheeling and dealing like the auto industry."

Only a few of the 188,251 manufactured homes produced nationwide in 1990 were
sold as single real estate transactions or land/home packages financed with a
mortgage.

Most were financed as personal property at higher interest rates and shorter
loan terms through installment sales contracts.

According to MHI, the leader base for manufactured home loans has declined over
recent years, and private mortgage insurance is virtually non-existent.

Washington Mutual has pioneered innovative lending programs for borrowers such
as construction financing, private mortgage insurance and fair appraisal values.

But for owners to get normal mortgage financing which would reduce the financing
cost for borrowers from about 12% to 7.5%, Mr. Schoos said the industry will
have to change many of its ways of doing business.

Certain practices "are dogs that won't hunt in the housing finance business," he
said.

Questionable practices all are part of problems mortgage insurance companies
have had with the manufactured home industry.

Washington Mutual is a major shelter financing institution, Mr. Schoos said.

"That's our market niche and we've done very well with it.  We are pioneers in
manufactured home lending because we saw many years ago that this particular way
of building was not a flash in the pan and it would grow."

One reason is cost -- $ 20-25 per square foot compared with $ 50-55 for a
site-built home.

Another is the range of styles and sizes available, from a 400-square-foot
vacation cottage with a half-story loft, to quadruple-sectioned luxury homes of
more than 2,500 square feet.

Nationally, the average cost of a new multi-section manufactured home in 1991
was $ 36,900 compared with $ 147,200 for a new single-family site-built home,
including land.

An income over $ 50,000 would be needed to purchase the new site-built home,
whereas just $ 20,000 would be needed to purchase a new manufactured home.

The Census Bureau reports 57% of American families are unable to buy a
median-priced home in their community.

No wonder then that nearly one in every four single-family houses sold today
nationwide is a manufactured home.

Mr. Schoos made his first manufactured home loan at Washington Mutual in 1967.

In those days, they were called mobile homes and treated like trailers or cars
by lenders that used Blue Books to determine their depreciation rate and resale
value.

In 1974, Congress passed the NAtional Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards legislation, which changed the name to manufactured homes and ordered
factory construction standards to be set and enforced by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development.

The law includes standards for durability, wind and fire safety, and energy
efficiency.

Unlike modular homes, which are built in sections, transported to sites and
placed on permanent foundations, or kit homes, which are assembled on-site,
manufactured homes are built on axles and transported to permanent sites where
their axles are removed.

In spite of positive market trends, many barriers still hamper the MH industry.

A recent study by the Freedonia Group, a research firm based in Cincinnati,
predicted that manufactured home production will decline this decade in favor of
modular housing due to barriers to traditional financing sources, Federal
requirements that impede technological innovation, and outdated zoning and
development standards.

The achievement of parity with site-built housing and increased access to
mortgage financing and insurance are key to the industry's growth, the study
notes.

But for those changes to occur, Mr. Schoos said the industry must accept the
same risk standards and lending criteria that govern Federally-insured
institutions and mortgage insurers.

When Washington Mutual implemented a standard Fannie Mae conforming financing
program for manufactured homes it was the first institution to include a
standard, custom construction loan to approach where it was deemed reasonable to
do so.

Government-backed financing for manufactured home loans is available under the
FHA Tile I Manufactured Home Loan Program and the Title II FHA Combination
Manufactured Home and Homesite Loan Program, through the Farmers Home
Administration and the Veterans Administration, which guarantees loans for
purchase of new and existing manufactured homes and homesites.

Manufactured homes treated as personal property are eligible for the Government
National Mortgage Association's secondary market program if they are guaranteed
by the VA or insured under FHA's Title I.

Only manufactured homes treated as real estate -- with homes permanently affixed
to a suitable foundation and homes and lead considered real estate under state
law -- quality for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac secondary market programs.

In California, an exception to the single real estate transaction rule allows
manufactured home permanently sited to be titled real estate even if the land is
not owned by the homeowner.

Some California lenders make loans on these homes if the borrower has a
long-term lease on the land.

This approach allowed purchase of the property, preparation of the site,
purchase of the home and set-up, and completion of all size improvements during
an interim, interest-only financing period that resolved into an amortizing
loan, just like any custom construction on a site-built home.

Washington Mutual had been doing this for years with loans it held in portfolio.
But to sell these loans to Fannie Mae, the bank had to have insurance on loans
over 80% LTV.

So it made standard mortgage life insurance available to borrowers that is paid
monthly through a reserve account.

To address appraisal questions and unique features of manufactured housing.  Mr.
Schoos said, his institution established a manufactured housing evaluation task
force that, "as it develops, will include not only representatives of the
financing industry, but appraisers and representatives from the mortgage
insurance companies as well."

Having amassed experience in manufactured home lending, Washington Mutual offers
a class on Understanding Manufactured Housing sanctioned by Washington state for
Realtors to use in their licensing procedures.

Mr. Schoos said the class explains the construction process, th evolution of the
product, set-up requirements, legal issues regarding securitizing the debt,
certification and titles, and provides trips into the field to see the product.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              469 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2017 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Decade After Meltdown, No Resolution for Fannie and Freddie

BYLINE: By STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON.

Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California,
Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow
@stevendavidoff on Twitter.

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; DEAL PROFESSOR; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1087 words


Fannie Mae, the gigantic government-sponsored mortgage service entity, has
guaranteed $1 billion of debt backed by Invitation Homes, the single-family
rental business owned by the giant private equity firm Blackstone. In making the
guarantee, Fannie is taking a big leap into the growing home rental market, in
which Blackstone is the biggest player. But it's also a sign that the true
comeback kids are not the Super Bowl champion New England Patriots but Fannie
Mae and its cousin, Freddie Mac, both of which were supposed to be left for dead
a decade ago.

Fannie and Freddie, as you may remember, were buffeted by the financial crisis.
In September 2008, the government put the two entities into conservatorship and
provided a $187.5 billion bailout. The choice was based on a careful legal and
economic calculus. The government could not afford to liquidate the entities,
which had trillions of dollars in mortgage assets, without further damage to the
economy. However, the government also decided not to fully nationalize them. The
reasons were political: The government did not want to look as if it owned these
two entities, and nationalizing Fannie and Freddie would also have added
trillions of dollars in debt to the government's balance sheet, blowing up the
national debt ceiling.

Fannie and Freddie were, thus, cast into purgatory. They were put under the
supervision of the government, but the public still owned 20.1 percent of them.

The idea was to gradually run down the entities' debt and come up with a better
idea for developing a healthy and growing mortgage market free of the implicit
government backing they long enjoyed. At the time, Treasury Secretary Henry M.
Paulson Jr. said ''there is a consensus today that these enterprises pose a
systemic risk and they cannot continue in their current form'' and that the
government would make a ''grave error'' if they did not ''permanently address''
issues involving the government-sponsored enterprises, or G.S.E.s.

Fast-forward almost nine years, and the unfortunate reality is that the G.S.E.s
are still the largest suppliers of mortgages today. In 2016, Fannie and Freddie
issued mortgage-backed securities worth $974 billion, up 18 percent from 2015.

And that brings us back to the Blackstone deal, which illustrates Fannie's
mission creep from helping people buy homes to helping people rent them. The
guarantee was disclosed with Blackstone's sale of 25 percent of Invitation Homes
in an initial public offering last week. Fannie is making the guarantee on
collateral of about 50,000 rented single-family homes that Blackstone bought in
foreclosure in the last few years. Never mind that the deal is a big subsidy for
Blackstone and Invitation Homes. The downside -- the government being liable for
at least part $1 billion if there is a default -- is real.

Fannie's take: ''This transaction is a great opportunity to continue to serve
the growing single-family rental market.'' It added that the transaction would
provide it with more information on the rental market itself.

That's an expensive price tag just to learn about a market.

There is no good solution that can satisfy the politics of a national mortgage
market. The government is not willing to fully nationalize Fannie and Freddie
because it is unwilling to acknowledge or accept the truth that the current
mortgage market depends on government support. Private lenders are often
unwilling to extend credit to many borrowers for the 30-year fixed-rate terms
that have become the standard of American homeownership. Without support, there
would be fewer mortgages made, and they would be shorter term and floating-rate,
as they are in other countries.

Privatization of the G.S.E.s raises the same problems. Fannie and Freddie could
be recapitalized and set free in the private markets with strict capital
controls and restrictions, turning them into quasi-utilities, but they would
still have the government's implicit guarantee. A lot of other ideas have
emerged for Fannie and Freddie, including making them share more risk with the
private sector, which was the subject of a bill introduced in Congress in
December. Another proposal is to merge them and have the combined entity extend
mortgage credit while selling off its risks.

But none of these solutions are easy, and they all require a hard acknowledgment
that the government is committed to supporting the mortgage market.

Fannie's and Freddie's only competitor has been the Federal Housing
Administration, which underwrote $245 billion in loans in 2016, up from $59.8
billion in 2007. The F.H.A. has been actively competing to take away Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac business through low down-payment lending. That's hardly a
nongovernmental solution.

With the election of Donald J. Trump there is some sentiment in the markets that
the government will do something with the G.S.E.s. Indeed, the share price of
Fannie hit a high of $5.50 a share shortly after the November election, up from
about 20 cents during the financial crisis. The increase is a bet that the
government will privatize Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and allow the public
holders to keep their shares. That would benefit fund managers like Bruce R.
Berkowitz, a big owner of Fannie Mae preferred stock. Steven T. Mnuchin, the
nominee for Treasury secretary, was on the Sears Holdings board with Mr.
Berkowitz, and the expectation was that he would favor a spinout and
recapitalization.

In his Senate confirmation hearings Mr. Mnuchin demurred. Instead, he stated
that he never endorsed ''recap and release.''

But he added that Fannie and Freddie were among the administration's top 10
priorities.

So that leaves the companies still in limbo.

If the government really wants to preserve the 30-year mortgage market, it
should simply limit these two entities to that loan product, and only that
30-year loan product. Everything else seems not only to preserve the tenuous
position of Fannie and Freddie, but also to risk making them just instruments
for unrestrained housing policy with lots of unintended consequences and risks.

A simple limitation like this would make sense, but don't count on it. Given how
hard it is for the government to even acknowledge what the problem is, expect
the next administration in four to eight years to still be talking about what to
do as Fannie and Freddie continue to be the key players in a
multitrillion-dollar mortgage market, while still being government-owned. At
least until the next crisis or scandal.




URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/07/business/dealbook/decade-after-crisis-no-resol
ution-for-fannie-and-freddie.html

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY HARRY CAMPBELL)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company


                              470 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 1, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Rescue Hindered By Politics

BYLINE: By JOE NOCERA

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; TALKING BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1702 words


Plans. Have I ever been inundated with plans. Deluged with them, actually.

Two weeks ago in this space, I trumpeted an idea to help struggling homeowners
stay in their homes from Daniel Alpert, a founding partner of Westwood Capital,
a small investment bank. He had no personal stake in stemming the rising tide of
foreclosures, but as someone who has spent his career in and around
securitization and structured finance, he felt he had something useful to offer.
Mr. Alpert devised what he called his Freedom Recovery Plan because he wanted to
try to help ease the terrible financial crisis we're in.

In publicizing his plan, however, I opened a spigot I hadn't known existed. It
turns out that Mr. Alpert isn't the only smart guy who has been thinking hard
about how to keep people from getting tossed out of their homes. It is a problem
that is getting worse by the day, with more than 107,000 foreclosures in
September alone, and one of every five mortgages underwater, by some estimates,
meaning the homes are worth less -- often substantially less -- than the
mortgage.

(A quick refresher: the reasons it is important to tackle this problem are, 1.
foreclosures hurt not only individual homeowners but entire neighborhoods and
the American economy; 2. until housing prices stabilize, the financial crisis
won't end, because housing is at the root of it; and 3. keeping people in their
homes is the quickest, most compassionate way to begin stabilizing home prices.)

I heard, for instance, from William R. Hambrecht, the innovative founder of a
firm that takes companies public through Dutch auctions, who believes that
lenders should get equity in homes in return for reworking their mortgages, thus
giving them some potential upside. Thomas Peterffy, the chief executive of the
Interactive Brokers Group, believes the government should simply give every
American homeowner $250 a month for five years to help pay the mortgage on their
primary residence.

James Grosfeld, the former chief executive of Pulte Homes, walked me through his
smart, interesting proposal for the government to buy up pools of mortgages at a
discount and refinance them through Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. If his plan
works -- and his argument is very compelling -- the government could even make a
profit in the process. (The details of all the plans discussed here can be found
on my blog at nytimes.com/executivesuite.)

I found examples of nonprofit organizations, like American Homeowner
Preservation, based in Cincinnati, that use tax-exempt bonds to buy homes and
then lease them back to the former owners. I even discovered that the guy Barney
Frank is planning to rake over the coals at a House Financial Services hearing
he'll be presiding over in a few weeks has a plan.

The guy, William Frey, a broker-dealer in Greenwich, Conn., invested in a pool
of toxic mortgages, along with hundreds of other investors. His big point is
that because the contracts are so ironclad, and the interests of the various
investors are diverse and often in conflict, there is no legal way to modify
mortgages in those pools. He wrote a letter threatening to take action against
any mortgage servicers who took steps to   prevent foreclosures -- thus raising
Mr. Frank's ire.

Turns out that Mr. Frey had sent a letter to Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson
Jr. and the Federal Reserve chairman, Ben Bernanke, seven months ago predicting
that the government would have to take over Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, but
adding that the takeover offered the best way to help homeowners.

Under his plan, which he outlined in the letter, the government would buy
mortgages at face value, and then use Fannie and Freddie to write homeowners
new, more affordable mortgages that reflected the current value of the homes.
The government would have to absorb the difference between the original
mortgages and the new ones.

Mr. Frey acknowledged that it wasn't fair that both borrower and lender were
made whole, while the taxpayer had to take the loss. But he believes that the
securitization contracts make it impossible to solve the problem any other way.
''Theoretically, morally and logically, the investor should absorb the loss,''
he said. ''But how do you get the loss to them? I don't see a way.''

So yes, I'm swimming in plans -- serious, smart, well-meaning plans that deserve
consideration. And yet one plan is still missing. Where, oh, where is the
government's plan?

It has been over a week since the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
chairman, Sheila Bair, testified before the Senate Banking Committee, where she
promised that a plan was on the way. ''Everyone agrees that more needs to be
done for homeowners,'' she said, adding that the F.D.I.C. was in discussions
with the Treasury and the White House about a plan. ''There is a policy process
under way,'' she said. ''We hope to be able to make some announcements soon.''

In fact, Ms. Bair had hoped to be able to make the announcement that morning, in
front of  the committee. But the plan she has devised -- and make no mistake,
she is the driving force within the administration pushing to do something for
homeowners -- has been held up in endless wrangling with the Treasury and the
White House.

According to an article by Vikas Bajaj and Eric Dash in The New York Times on
Wednesday, Ms. Bair's plan would have the government absorbing half the losses
on home mortgages when lenders agreed to lower the borrower's monthly payment
for at least five years. The government would also guarantee mortgages that were
renegotiated at a lower rate, so that the lender would not have to take
additional losses if the homeowner later defaulted. The F.D.I.C. hopes to
guarantee up to three million mortgages, at a cost that is estimated at around
$50 billion.

As I understand it, the money is not the hang-up. Mr. Paulson and Mr. Bernanke
have shown themselves more than willing to use many, many billions of dollars to
keep the financial system afloat. Indeed, The Times estimates that the federal
government has committed an astonishing $1.5 trillion so far in loans,
investments and guarantees to the banking system.

No, the hang-up, apparently, is that aid is going to homeowners, not giant
financial institutions, with the negotiations revolving around who will be
eligible for the program and what will constitute an affordable new mortgage.
Ms. Bair is arguing for a broad definition; the Treasury wants something narrow,
which of course will mean fewer people will get help. This is hardly a surprise.
One of the reasons previous efforts at helping homeowners have had such little
success is precisely because the Treasury has insisted on defining the number of
eligible homeowners as narrowly as possible.

It is also, of course, maddening. When it comes to the nation's financial
institutions, the Treasury is willing to hand billions of dollars to healthy
banks, like JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo, that don't even want the money. (It
did so to disguise the fact that other, weaker banks, like Citigroup, do need
the money.) Yet, inexplicably, it seems to feel that  homeowners have to be
treated  much more severely.

The only legitimate reason for this is the one that my colleague David Leonhardt
has put forth -- that if the government says it is going to help homeowners in
danger of foreclosing, it will create an incentive for a lot more homeowners to
decide that they're in danger of foreclosing. But I would argue that the country
is far better served at this late date by erring on the side of generosity.
Isn't it better to let a few homeowners get relief who might not need it (just
like JPMorgan!) than restricting the eligibility so narrowlythat people in real
trouble will not be able get their mortgages modified? Yet the Treasury
instinctively prefers the latter.

It is also deeply aggravating that the urgency the government showed a month
ago, when the banking system seemed at risk, seems absent now that the issue is
homeowners. It took the Treasury and the Fed all of 36 hours to put forth a plan
for a systemic bailout of the financial system. Yet they still can't agree on a
plan to help homeowners; in fact, I hear that the Treasury is furious at Ms.
Bair for getting out front of it on this issue, which may be another reason it
won't sign off on her plan. More and more, it seems as if Treasury is acting
like the Federal Emergency Management Agency after Hurricane Katrina.

I can't say with any certainty that the F.D.I.C. plan is demonstrably better
than the plans that have been sent to me over the transom these last few weeks.
Like any complicated plan, the devil will be in the details. What I do know is
that the F.D.I.C. has a deeper understanding of the mortgage and foreclosure
problem -- and a greater sense of urgency -- than any other agency of
government.

In July, the F.D.I.C. became the conservator of a failing bank in California,
IndyMac Federal. For the last few months, it has used the bank as a petri dish
to see whether it could make mortgage modifications on a broad scale. Although
the process is still in the early stages,  the answer appears to be yes. So far,
more than 3,500 homeowners have accepted the F.D.I.C.'s offer of mortgage
modification, with thousands more lined up behind them. What's more, many of
those mortgages were ones trapped in securitization pools.

In fact, the F.D.I.C. told me that it had sent out notices to 9,000 homeowners
with securitized mortgages, offering to modify them. ''We can do this on
securitizations,'' said Michael Krimminger, the F.D.I.C.'s special adviser to
the chairman for policy. ''We can do it on a streamlined basis because we are
applying a model.'' The notion that securitization contracts would prevent
mortgages from being modified was ''a red herring.''

If the F.D.I.C. can help IndyMac borrowers, then presumably it can help
borrowers all over the country. So enough with ''the policy process,'' as Ms.
Bair so politely calls it. The time has come for the Treasury to swallow hard,
sign off on the F.D.I.C. plan and let Ms. Bair begin carrying it out as quickly
as possible.

To delay any longer isn't just short-sighted. It's inexcusable.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: William R. Hambrecht, left, who founded a financial services
firm, and Daniel Alpert, the founder of an investment bank, have offered
suggestions to help people keep their homes. (PHOTOGRAPHS LEFT TO RIGHT BY
STEVEN BRAHMS/BLOOMBERG NEWS
MICHELLE V. AGINS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Sheila Bair, the F.D.I.C. commissioner, devised a rescue plan that was held up
in negotiations with the Treasury Department.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS
KLEPONIS/BLOOMBERG NEWS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              471 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Mortgage Servicing News

                                 February 2012

Find Another Way

BYLINE: Editorial Staff

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 4 Vol. 16 No. 2

LENGTH: 378  words


The mortgage and servicing industry has taken one for the team in the way the
payroll tax reduction extension has been funded, at least partially, by an
increase in government housing agency guarantee fees seller-servicers will have
to pay.

No doubt there was some kind of link made that, since the industry started the
recession, it is only fair it should be made to pony up financing for the
recovery (the payroll tax reduction being a stimulus measure).

So we have a 10 basis point increase in the g-fee, with the anticipation of
another hike after April 1.

However, that's the wrong way to look at the situation. This extra tax on
mortgages will only serve to keep a depressed industry down. Housing led the
industry into recession, and it can lead the economy into a more robust
recovery.

So, Congress should not demand even more of an increase in g-fees. Taking one
for the team should be a one-off situation.

The payroll tax reduction extension, which was put into place for only two
months, should be extended for the full year (it is highly stimulative to the
economy), but any money needed to offset the loss in tax revenue can come from
someplace else.

The provision that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac should charge the same g-fee to
its seller-servicers is problematic, as well.

The agencies have long discounted g-fees to their best customers.

There's nothing wrong with that, as that is how private firms customarily work.
The GSEs have operated for decades as public-private hybrids. Charging the same
fee to everyone smacks of a stronger government grip on the agencies.

Meanwhile, the mortgage industry stays in the doldrums despite extravagantly low
interest rates and widely retrenched housing prices. It could use more lift in
helping it regain its former vivacity.

The government has moved to make refinancings easier, but what about the
purchase market? A revival of the single-family housing tax credit would get a
lot of fence-sitters off the rail and into purchase mortgages.

Nobody is in favor of new spending these days, but the fact is that a "normal"
mortgage market (not the overheated one of the early 2000s) would generate a lot
of stimulus to related industries, and that ought to translate into extra
revenue for the feds as it did during the 1990s.

URL: http://www.mortgageservicingnews.com/

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: MSN


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              472 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                           September 13, 2010 Monday

Regulator finds less risk in Fannie, Freddie loans

BYLINE: Lorraine Woellert Bloomberg News

LENGTH: 492 words


Mortgage pools packaged by Wall Street as investments during the housing boom
were more risky and performed worse than those guaranteed by Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, the companies' regulator said. Loans with "higher-risk
characteristics" were more common in private-label securities than in the
mortgage portfolios bought or guaranteed by the government-sponsored
enterprises, said Robert Collender, principal policy analyst for the Federal
Housing Finance Agency, which released a report Monday. "In almost every bucket
of risk, the enterprise loan performed better than the private-label securitized
loans," Collender said in a telephone interview.

"That might speak to a difference of quality control in the private-label
market." Private-label securities, which Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac increasingly
purchased before the U.S. mortgage market collapsed in 2008, had a greater share
of mortgages with adjustable interest rates and borrowers with credit scores
below 660, two indicators of loans more likely to default, the FHFA said.
Mortgages in the pools also were more likely to exceed 80 percent of a
property's value, which "contributed to the unusually poor performance of
loans," the report said. About 10 percent of them were more than 90 days
delinquent by the end of 2009 compared with 5 percent of guaranteed mortgages,
it said. The FHFA examined loans for single-family homes in the period before
the financial crisis that led to the federal government's 2008 takeover of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to document differences between mortgages backed by
the two firms and those financed without their support. "Some people want to say
it was a market failure or a government failure, choose your philosophy,"
Collender said. "What we're trying to do is provide raw factual information."
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which own or guarantee more than half of the $11
trillion U.S. mortgage market, hold about $255 billion in private-label
securities. As home prices rose, the companies increased their investment in the
pools as they aimed to regain market share, capitalize on profit potential and
meet federal mandates for lending to low-income borrowers. The U.S. government
seized Washington-based Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac of McLean, Virginia, in
September 2008 amid mortgage-investment losses that pushed the firms to the
brink of collapse. They have been sustained under FHFA conservatorship since
then by almost $150 billion in U.S. Treasury Department aid delivered under a
promise of unlimited support. The FHFA in July issued 64 subpoenas to firms that
sold mortgage-backed securities to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, trying to
determine whether misrepresentations or omissions might require issuers to
repurchase the loans. Edward DeMarco, FHFA's acting director, is scheduled to
testify Sep. 15 at a House Financial Services subcommittee hearing on the
progress the two companies have made since being placed under conservatorship.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                              473 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

N.C.'s Home Loan Program Has Been Worth the Effort

                           December 12, 1983, Monday

By Gary Paul Kane; Mr. Kane is executive director of the North Carolina Housing
Finance Agency and a member of the board of directors of the Council of State
Housing Agencies.


For us in North Carolina, the benefits derived from structuring and implementing
our new Home Improvement Loan Program have more than outweighed the difficulties
and complications involved in putting the program together.

This program, which combines state and local governments in a unique
public-private partnership involving lending institutions, has earned the North
Carolina Housing Finance Agency a great deal of credibility with local
governments. It gives municipalities a source of funds with which to implement
their own home improvement loan programs, involving a minimum amount of
interference or red tape from a state agency.

It has also caused many private financial institutions to focus on and become
involved in financing the needs of state and local governments.

The concept of North Carolina's Home Improvement Loan Program has the Housing
Finance Agency serving as a central bank, obtaining funds by selling tax-exempt
bonds (in this case, done through a private placement). The agency then
allocates those funds to the cities, which essentially manage their own
programs. Each city chooses the neighborhoods within the city to be served by
the loans and makes the preliminary selection of local applicants. A local
lending institution within each city originates the mortgage loans, which are
reviewed and underwritten by the Housing Finance Agency.

Cities contribute Community Development Block Grant money and general revenue
sharing money to form a small reserve fund behind the bond issue and to further
subsidize the tax-exempt interest rates offered by the agency. Cities themselves
determine the amount of funds they wish to contribute, the interest rates they
wish to offer to prospective borrowers, and the income levels they wish to serve
and subsidize. The income levels cannot exceed the agency's maximum ceiling for
its single family loan program, and all federal requirements must be met.

Holding all the players together for the 18 months required to structure and
implement the program was perhaps the most difficult task. Ten city Community
Development Offices, 10 local lending institutions, a private commercial bank
with which the bonds are placed, a private mortgage insurance company, and the
Housing Finance Agency were all parties to the transaction. The federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Office of Urban Rehabilitation
provided a consultant who helped structure the program and explain the mechanics
of rehabilitation loan programs to city officials.

Seminars were held across the state, and representatives from all cities and
towns were invited to attend. Additional discussions were held with 25 or 30
cities that indicated an interest in pursuing the program. Ultimately, 10 cities
had the willingness and ability to proceed with the pilot round of the new
program, which is providing nearly 300 loans.

Once the cities were in place and an approximate amount of financing determined,
a private placement of agency bonds was negotiated with First Union National
Bank of North Carolina. When it was determined that the bank wanted stronger
guarantees than those provided under the Farmers Home Administration Title 1
Insurance Program, United Guarantee Residential Insurance Co. of Greensboro
structured an insurance program to satisfy the bank's needs.

The Housing Finance Agency had only marginal dealings with cities prior to the
time of this program. As a result the agency's initial invitation to cities to
participate in the program met with more than mild hesitation. But as the
program has worked and the cities have taken charge of their parts of the
program, an exceptionally strong and trusting working relationship between the
agency and cities has developed.

Besides bringing the public and private sectors together, development of the
program also resulted in the structuring of a new private mortgage insurance
program to back home improvement loan programs.

Many other cities have expressed an interest in participating in the next round
of the programs, which we hope to structure by next summer. It will take
additional efforts by our staff and continuous communication with local
governments, but we think the results with be worthwhile.

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 711 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture, This house in North Carolina was improved with a loan from the
state housing finance agency's home improvement program, which is finaced from
bond proceeds.

                      Copyright 1983 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              474 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                 April 6, 2009

OPEN FORUM: Meeting the Financial Challenges

BYLINE: James Lockhart, Director, Federal Housing Finance Agency

SECTION: Pg. 4 Vol. 33 No. 27

LENGTH: 837  words


Excerpts of Mr. Lockhart's comments Before The Women In Housing and Finance
Symposium in Washington recently are presented as our Open Forum. (first Of Two
Parts.)

The biggest challenge we face is the stabilization of the housing market. Both
the public and private sectors have begun to apply concentrated action to this
pressing goal. FHFA has a four-pronged strategy to ensure the housing
government-sponsored enterprises meet this challenge and fulfill their mission
of providing liquidity, stability and affordability to the housing market.
First, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Home Loan Banks must continue to
support the market in a safe and sound manner by providing liquidity and
stability, with a special emphasis on affordable housing. Given the current
predominant role the GSEs play in the nation's mortgage market, it is imperative
that FHFA ensure their continued functioning and safety and soundness.

Second, we are working with our government partners to get mortgage interest
rates down.

Third, we are working with the enterprises to set best practices for the whole
mortgage market.

Fourth, we are actively working on foreclosure prevention to help homeowners in
trouble by providing affordable modifications and refinancing.

From 1997-2003, Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's market share of mortgage
originations gradually grew to almost 55%. From 2004-2006, the private mortgage
market predominated, and Fannie and Freddie's business sank pretty dramatically,
with their market share dropping below 35%. Then as the private market started
to freeze up in 2007, Fannie and Freddie's market share took off, up to 73% in
2008. However, as you will note, that is a larger share of a much smaller
market. The market share of mortgages insured by FHA/VA has risen much more
dramatically, from 3% in 2006 to 20% for 2008, but even more startling, to 35%
in the fourth quarter of 2008.

During the boom times, virtually everyone involved in home mortgage lending -
builders, borrowers, brokers, Realtors, lenders, mortgage insurers, credit
rating agencies, the enterprises, other secondary market investors, and yes, us
regulators - failed to fully appreciate the likelihood of a severe house price
correction. Well, prices did not rise forever. From January of 2000 through July
2006 (peak), the more volatile S&P/Case-Shiller house price index rose by 106%
only to fall by 27% since then. The less volatile FHFA House Price Index, which
reflects Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's books of business, peaked later, and has
since declined 10.9% from its peak.

Not surprisingly, as house prices have fallen, serious delinquencies of 90 days
or more have risen across the board. For subprime mortgages, serious
delinquencies are 23%, and those subprime ARMs are 34% seriously delinquent.
Serious delinquencies are far lower at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac at about 2%,
which is even lower than the prime market at 3.7% or the whole market at 6.3%.

Now turning to the four strategies, let me start with the safe and sound
provision of liquidity, stability and especially affordable housing.

For the first time, the Housing and Economic Recovery Act which was enacted last
July, added affordable housing and mission enforcement to the responsibilities
of the safety and soundness regulator of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. In the
near-term, the enterprises have been charged with meeting the very ambitious
goals set by HUD back in 2004. For 2008, they fell short of these goals, which
were infeasible due to totally unanticipated market conditions. So as we set the
annual housing goals for 2009 based on current market conditions, it seems
likely that the income-based affordable housing goals for 2009 will look more
like the goals HUD set in 2004 and 2005, plus incentives for loan modifications
and refinancings.

Beginning in 2010, HERA requires a wholesale restructuring of the affordable
housing goals with four single-family goals and one multifamily special
affordable housing goal.

HERA also requires, for the first time, that FHFA establish housing goals for
the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks, which have a significant role to play in
affordable housing. HERA allows the Federal Home Loan Banks the ability, until
July 30, 2010, to use subsidy funds from their affordable housing program to
refinance low- and moderate-income households' mortgages.

When I talked to you in December, I explained that HERA gave the Treasury
Department authority to support Freddie and Fannie. Treasury's Senior Preferred
Stock facility, originally $100 billion each but now set at up to $200 billion
each, as part of the president's Homeowner Affordability Plan, provides an
effective guarantee of the enterprises' debt and mortgage-backed securities by
ensuring the Enterprises have a positive net worth.

This facility protects not only present senior and subordinated debt holders and
MBS holders but also any future debt and MBS holders, with no expiration date.
When the draws occur at the end of this month, $60 billion will have been used.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2009 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              475 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Lenders Turn to Incentives to Lure Borrowers

                            May 18, 1994, Wednesday

By WILLIAM PLASENCIA


Mortgage lenders have been beating the bushes for borrowers following the
fizzling out of the refinancing market. Many are churning out incentives left
and right to lure consumers back.

Companies are betting that consumers, wary of the economy and rising interest
rates and weary of the long processing times, will flock to a slew of new loan
products.

American Savings Bank, Stockton, Calif., is playing up to the fears that many
Californians have about the local economy.

The bank only recently launched a mortgage program that provides free insurance
to cover home loan payments for borrowers who lose their jobs.

The Payment Protection Plan covers up to two borrowers a loan for as many as six
monthly mortgage payments. The payments can be no larger than $2,500 a month,
including principal, interest, taxes, and insurance.

The cost of the insurance is picked up by the bank, which pays 1.4% of the first
year's monthly mortgage payments for the insurance, underwritten by Balboa
Insurance Co., Irvine, Calif.

The program, part of a statewide effort to jump start housing sales, is
spearheaded by the American Dream Coalition, a group of more than 50 housing
-industry organizations.

The coalition is headed by Mario Antoci, chairman of American Savings Bank.
"For Californians thinking about buying a first home or moving up, this should
get everyone off the fence," said Mr. Antoci.  Remaining Selective

But the bank is being selective about the business it drums up. American Savings
is offering the plan only on adjustable-rate mortgages.

"It's no secret that ARMs are the product of choice for the industry," said
Stephanie Christie, vice president and marketing manager for the bank.

Ms. Christie said that regardless of the bank's preference, adjustable rate
loans are a good product for consumers and are easier to qualify for.

Seattle's Seafirst Bank is hoping to lure more customers by making it more
convenient to apply for mortgage loans.

The bank is marketing a new toll-free telephone service that allows consumers to
apply for mortgage loans over the phone. Operators will be available during and
after normal banking hours, seven days a week.

For Hal Greene, real estate group manager for Seafirst, the service is a godsend
to both the bank and consumers.

"There's a lot less paperwork for clients to complete, which greatly reduces the
loan-processing time," he said.

Borrowers will be able to apply for most types of home loans through the service
and can get daily rate updates throughout the day.

"We've added new technology to our loan-processing center and made speedy credit
approval a priority," said Dennis Day, manager in charge of residential real
estate.

"Credit approval is now delivered within 48 hours," he said.  Service Guarantee

Seafirst officials are confident that the new services will be a hit with
consumers and are backing it up with a service guarantee to sweeten the deal,
Mr. Day said.

Loans to buy single-family homes, which can normally take up to four to six
weeks, will be ready in 30 days or Seafirst will pay $500 toward closing costs.
Property appraisals, which make up most of the delays in closing, are also
getting more attention by the bank. Seafirst is beefing up its appraisal team by
relying less on outside appraisers and opening 10 offices of their own.

Closing on a home is an intimidating process to most. And one area of concern to
consumers is climbing interest rates.

To ease consumers' woes, one California mortgage company is trying to make
buying a home as easy as shopping for a car.

North American Mortgage, Santa Rosa, Calif., is making available preapproved
loans to qualified borrowers and giving them an optional interest rate lock for
up to 30 days while they shop for a home.

"It's the logical way to go about buying a home," according to Joel Russo,
manager of product development for North American.

Once the borrower locates a home, they can keep the locked rate or switch to the
current rate, whichever is lower, for up to an additional 60 days.

A similar program is offered by Countrywide Credit Industries, Pasadena, Calif.,
Barclays Mortgage Corp., and others.

"With the recent volatility in mortgage interest rates, we think the locking
option will be a feature that many of our clients will want to exercise," said
John L. Dynan, president of Barclays Mortgage, Englewood, Colo.

According to Pete Bonnikson, executive vice president of North American, the
company isn't limiting its marketing to first-time buyers. He's hoping that the
program will help "seasoned buyers to be more opportunistic in their real estate
purchases."

SECTION: MORTGAGES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 782 words

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1994 American Banker, Inc.


                              476 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                            East Anglian Daily Times

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday

'Help to Buy' is welcomed by industry

BYLINE: Jim Keenan

SECTION: ROP

LENGTH: 459 words


THE Suffolk and Essex property industry has welcomed the Help to Buy scheme
announced yesterday as part of the Budget to breathe life into the ailing
housing market and boost the construction trade.



The new scheme for those struggling to find mortgage deposits will include
£3.5billion for shared equity loans, and a Government interest-free loan worth
20% of the value of a new-build house.

Part of the Budget 2013, the Chancellor said it will be available to everyone
who wants to buy a home from next year.

A new mortgage guarantee, sufficient to support £130billion of loans, will help
people who cannot afford a big deposit.

The Government will offer interest-free loans for five years for those wanting
to buy new-build homes.

The loans will be available to those who can find a 5% deposit with the loan
worth up to 20% of the value of a home worth up to £600,000 and repayable when
it is sold.

Paul Winter, chief executive of Ipswich Building Society, said: "We welcome any
initiative that attempts to get the housing market moving and enable more people
to own their own home.

"We hope the new Help to Buy scheme will be open to all lenders and not
restricted to the larger banks and building societies only. We await further
details of the scheme to fully assess its potential."

Chris Philpott, a chartered surveyor and partner at Lacy Scott & Knight in
Stowmarket, said he was pleased that the new scheme was not just applicable to
new-build homes and first-time buyers.

He said: "We would welcome these measures - it's not just first-time buyers, it
may help families succeed through a chain of sales to expand if they wish to. A
lot who bought within the last 10 years are struggling to get up the ladder.

"It is broader (than previous schemes) because it's not restricted to first-time
buyers and to new houses - it's got to help the wider market."

Duncan Jackson, Persimmon Homes Essex managing director, added: "We understand
that Help to Buy is made up of two schemes - 'equity loan', where the Government
will loan home buyers up to 20% of the value of their new build home, and
'mortgage guarantee', where lenders will be incentivised to make more mortgages
available for people with small deposits.

"We believe that these two initiatives complement the schemes currently
available and will help create much-needed movement within all levels of the
housing market."

Dr Wil Gibson of Suffolk ACRE, a charity supporting communities in rural areas,
said: "The difficulty for a rural county like Suffolk is that there aren't many
homes being built in the market towns and villages. My main concern is that we
are hearing about banks not lending - you can have mortgage protection but you
have got to get the banks to be willing to lend in the first place."

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EAD


                    Copyright 2013 Archant Regional Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              477 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Bond Buyer

                              July 19, 2010 Monday

A Leg Up for PACE Programs;
Bill Would End GSE Roadblocks

BYLINE: Peter Schroeder

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1 Vol. 373 No. 33351

LENGTH: 656  words


WASHINGTON - Rep. Mike Thompson, D-Calif., and 29 other members of Congress have
introduced legislation that would prevent Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac from
stifling state programs that allow localities to sell bonds to finance
energy-efficient upgrades made by homeowners.

The legislation follows a suit California attorney general and Democratic
gubernatorial candidate Jerry Brown filed against Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and
the Federal Housing Finance Agency, arguing they are violating state law by
blocking the programs.

The programs, dubbed property assessed clean energy, or PACE, programs, have
come under fire from the mortgage titans and their regulator, the FHFA, which
argue they make the underlying mortgages on participating homes too risky for
the two government-sponsored enterprises.

The FHFA directed the GSEs earlier this month to tighten their underwriting
standards for mortgages tied to PACE programs, warning of "significant safety
and soundness concerns." PACE programs nationwide screeched to a halt after the
news, since Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac own or guarantee roughly half of the
country's single-family mortgages.

But the PACE Assessment Protection Act of 2010 would force Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac to adopt underwriting standards that would accommodate the programs,
and also would prohibit them from discriminating against communities pursuing
PACE programs.

In addition, the bill would prevent the GSEs from requiring homeowners to pay
off money owed on PACE projects before allowing them to finance, refinance, or
transfer their mortgages. The measure has been referred to the House Financial
Services Committee.

"PACE programs are an important part of the push to create a green economy and
reduce our reliance on foreign oil," Thompson said in a statement. "Lending
institutions should not interfere with these great green energy programs."

The GSEs' concern stemmed from how the programs are structured. Under a typical
PACE program, a locality issues bonds to finance a number of energy-efficient
upgrades or retrofits on a home, which the homeowner ultimately pays off via a
special assessment on its property taxes. But that means that in cases of
homeowner default, property taxes, including PACE funds, are paid off before the
underlying mortgage, which the GSEs contend adds risk to their holdings.

FHFA officials also have aired concerns that the programs lack underwriting
standards and do not do enough to ensure homeowners taking on the projects can
actually afford to pay back the funds they received.

But proponents of PACE programs argue that municipalities regularly use these
assessments to finance projects, such as sidewalk improvements and road pavings.

In his suit, Brown asked the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
California to issue an order restraining or enjoining the agencies from refusing
to deal with mortgages tied to PACE projects.

"For well over 100 years, local governments in California have used their
assessment powers to finance improvements that serve a public purpose ... [and]
it is well established that in some instances, privately owned improvements ...
can also serve a valid public purpose," he said in the suit.

The FHFA defended its opposition to PACE programs last week. "Homeowners should
not be placed at risk by programs that alter lien priorities and fail to operate
with sound underwriting guidelines and consumer protections," it said in a
statement.

The PACE programs are slated to receive about $150 million of seed money under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act enacted last year.

At least 21 states and the District of Columbia have given localities the
ability to issue bonds to finance PACE loans, according to the database of state
incentives for renewables and efficiency at North Carolina State University.
Most of those programs were just getting off the ground but have been suspended
or canceled due to the GSEs' resistance.

URL: http://www.bondbuyer.com/

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BB


                        Copyright 2010 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              478 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                  May 24, 1999

Fannie Seeks Ways to Recoup After BAM Inks Freddie Deal

BYLINE: By Paul Muolo

LENGTH: 683 words

Washington-Stung by two large customer defections, Fannie Mae is considering
several ways of gaining back market share from Freddie Mac, including financing
part of a seller/servicer's balance sheet, mortgage banking sources said last
week.

The mortgage officials, who requested their names not be used, cautioned that
both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have considered such options - which would aid
non-depositories - in the past. Details about how this would be done, and
whether it would include elements of warehouse lending - a business dominated by
commercial banks - were not readily known.

One mortgage banker said that Fannie Mae chairman Franklin Raines has issued an
edict to his top managers: go out and win market share.

Over the past two months Fannie Mae has lost two large customers to Freddie Mac:
Norwest Mortgage Corp., Des Moines, Ia., the nation's second largest residential
lender, and BankAmerica Mortgage, Charlotte, N.C., the fourth largest
originator.

Under the NMC deal, Freddie Mac will buy all of Norwest's conventional loans.
The BAM deal, revealed last week, is not an exclusive-sale arrangement but will
result in Freddie buying as much as 70% of its conventional production, a source
said.

The NMC deal allows the company to avoid using Freddie's AU system altogether.
The BAM arrangement allows the Charlotte-based lender to avoid using Freddie AU
on all retail loans but makes third-party loans subject to limited Freddie AU
underwriting. (By avoiding Freddie AU, both lenders save, potentially, millions
in fees over time.)

According to Federal Reserve data compiled by this newspaper, prior to the
Freddie deal, NMC sold 57% of its conventional loans to Fannie Mae.

But the loss of BAM's business will be much more damaging. BAM - the product of
a merger between BankAmerica and NationsBank - sold a majority of its
conventional loans to Fannie Mae, about 84%.

Fannie Mae watchers, including one prominent Wall Street analyst (who also did
not want to be identified), said the Norwest and BAM deals will result in a
market share loss of 7 to 7.5 points to Fannie Mae.

"Before these two deals were discussed, Fannie Mae had a market share of 57%
versus 43% for Freddie," said the analyst. "From what I can tell these two deals
give Freddie market share parity."

However, a Fannie Mae spokesperson said the two deals would not affect the
company's market share. She stressed the company does not discuss any talks it
may be having with business customers.

It is widely known that several top lenders are talking to both Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac about Norwest or BAM-type arrangements. The "carrots" being offered
include no requirement to use either's AU system, lower guarantee fees, more
latitude on loan buy-backs, and various financing arrangements.

Because Countrywide Home Loans Inc., Pasadena, is a non-depository, it would
benefit from any type of financing arrangement that lowers its cost of funds.

Last week Countrywide chairman Angelo Mozilo confirmed that he is talking to
both GSEs but would only say that he thinks the two, "are moving beyond normal
seller/servicer arrangements to create more of an alliance with lenders."

He added that these arrangements will be, "broader rather than narrower, and
will be larger rather than smaller."

Countrywide is not likely to sign an exclusive loan sale deal with either,
company officials have said in the past.

Single Family Housing Starts Plunge

(Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rates)

Apr 981235

May1274

Jun1221

Jul1305

Aug1264

Sep1251

Oct1298

Nov1375

Dec1383

Jan 991393

Feb1380

Mar1398

Apr1244

Single-family housing starts fell by 11% in April to 1.24 million units on a
seasonally adjusted annual rate, according to the U.S. Commerce Department, the
lowest level since last September. Single-family starts peaked at 1.39 million
units in March and the National Association of Home Builders expected a decline
because of seasonal technical

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1999 Faulkner & Gray


                              479 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Deal in Focus: Chicago Closes Complex and Unique Multifamily Sale

                          September 1, 2004, Wednesday

By Yvette Shields

DATELINE: CHICAGO



The city of Chicago closed yesterday on a complex, privately placed $11.3
million multifamily housing revenue bond issue that employed a unique forward
delivery-like structure that allows for the incremental issuance of bonds as
needed over the two-year construction period of a senior citizen housing
development.

The deal -- rated AAA by Standard & Poor's due to Ginnie Mae's guarantee on the
underlying mortgage loan -- was fashioned to avoid the need for a reserve to
cover the negative arbitrage that arises when bonds are issued up front at an
interest rate in the 5 to 6% range and the proceeds are placed in triple-A
investments that earn returns in just the 1% range.

In order to meet Standard & Poor's criteria for a AAA credit, developers
traditionally have had to come up with the cash to cover the negative arbitrage
-- a task that hampers many projects where financing is tight.

"You get clobbered on negative arbitrage especially in this low interest rate
environment," Standard & Poor's analyst Jeffrey Previdi said of the traditional
structure associated with multifamily issues.

The Chicago issue on behalf of developer Pioneer Gardens Senior Housing Limited
Partnership was privately placed with an institutional investor -- who finance
officials working on the deal refused to name -- and the transaction closed
yesterday, according to Mark Laubacher of the Laubacher Co., the financial
adviser on the issue.

The bonds will mature over 42 years and carry an interest rate of 5.36% -- a
rate that's at a slight premium on the triple-A scale.

Under terms of the issue, the unnamed investor has agreed to purchase bonds as
frequently as monthly based on the project's cash-flow needs during a roughly
two-year construction and leasing period. Because there is no need to invest
proceeds that traditionally would be collected at the time of closing, there is
no need for a reserve.

There are no restrictions as to the timing or the size of the incremental sales
over the two years. Proceeds will be used to purchase Ginnie Mae construction
loan certificates. In addition to the Ginnie Mae guarantee, Federal Housing
Administration also insures the mortgage loan.

This unique drawdown structure has been used in the taxable market and
occasionally in the single-family market but rarely, if ever, in the multifamily
sector. It allowed the project to forgo the establishment of a roughly $900,000
reserve to cover the costs of negative arbitrage.

"This structure tackles a problem that constrains issuance," Previdi said "It's
an innovative way to get around the problem of negative arbitrage."

Griffin, Kubik, Stephens & Thompson Inc. and Melvin Securities LLC served as
underwriters and Schiff Hardin & Waite acted as bond counsel.

Laubacher worked for several years on the transaction. He said the developer of
the project, which is associated with the South Park Baptist Church in Chicago,
would have had a difficult time coming up with the funds needed for the reserve
and would have had to seek additional assistance elsewhere.

"There's no way they could have come up with this," Laubacher said. "It is a
church-affiliated not-for-profit project and they don't have a lot of financial
options."

The structure is a rarity in the tax-exempt market because state housing
agencies and developers involved in the single-family market often have more
extensive assets and financial options to cover the negative arbitrage losses.

Laubacher and some other market participants said they believe other developers
and issuers will take a closer look at the structure now that's it's been tested
in the multifamily market. "Anybody doing tax-exempt multifamily bonds can use
this as a model," Laubacher said.

One of the most difficult aspects of putting together such a deal is finding an
investor willing to accommodate the delayed delivery of the bonds, and the
narrow market for such a structure could limit the any widespread adoption in
the multifamily market.

"It's an interesting deal and an innovative structure that may help some people,
but I wonder how much potential growth there is in this innovation," said Kurt
van Kuller, director of municipal research at Merrill Lynch & Co. " I wonder how
many investors there are out there interested in these monthly installments of
bonds." The payoff for investors, he said, is the slightly higher yield.

The $21 million project being financed with the bonds will provide 120
affordable rental-housing units on the south side of Chicago for seniors. The
project falls into a subset of assisted living called supportive living.

Under a state program to promote supportive living, which seeks to keep seniors
still able to live somewhat independently out of nursing homes, the project
qualifies for an exception to Medicaid restrictions on payments for assisted
living housing. The facility will provide two meals daily, housekeeping, laundry
services and other personal care, social activities and counseling.

In addition to selling the bonds for the project, the city is providing a $1.8
million zero-interest loan, and the project qualifies for $.7.1 million of
federal tax credits. The Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago is providing $500,000
in assistance.

Copyright 2004 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.bondbuyer.com

SECTION: MIDWEST; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 895 words

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo, Kurt van Kuller

                      Copyright 2004 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              480 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                               November 11, 2013

The Next Phase of GSE Conservatorship

BYLINE: Edward Demarco

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 4 Vol. 38 No. 9

LENGTH: 1419  words


What seems clear is that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will cease to operate in
their current corporate form at some future date -a date to be set by Congress.
FHFA's conservatorship strategic plan is designed to prepare the companies and
the market for that date, while maintaining market stability and liquidity from
now to then. The strategic plan aims to move forward with a transition to a
post-conservatorship market, thereby making the final transition from the
conservatorships as simple and quick to execute as possible.

To more clearly define this process, FHFA will soon establish multiyear targets
for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to further achieve the three strategic goals of
building for the future, contracting the footprint, and maintaining market
liquidity and borrower assistance. In this next phase of conservatorship, we
intend to build upon the accomplishments of the past two years while
accelerating progress towards achieving each strategic goal.

In particular, we need to consider which enterprise activities are likely to be
part of the future secondary mortgage market. FHFA expects certain assets,
functions, and employees at the two companies will be repositioned in the
private sector by the end of the conservatorships. In the meantime, each company
will need to enhance their core operations that are expected to operate in the
marketplace and to gradually sell or wind down certain operations not expected
to go forward. This is a difficult exercise with an unknown future structure,
but the establishment of the Common Securitization Platform is an example of a
set of Enterprise activities that FHFA believes would be necessary in any future
housing finance system.

We will also continue to look for ways to reduce risk exposure across all
enterprise lines of business, and we will look for ways to attract private
capital back into the mortgage market.

Finally, we must be sure that the Enterprises continue to have the ability to
manage their taxpayer-backed books of business as many of their existing credit
guarantees will live on for many years.

So to provide further context around how this should evolve over the next few
years in each line of business if we do not get a legislative path forward, let
me offer the following initial thoughts. Bear in mind that we still have much
planning ahead of us.

With an uncertain future and a general desire for private capital to re-enter
the market, the enterprises market presence should be reduced gradually over
time. We have three main tools to accomplish this objective.

First, risk-sharing transactions are important for reducing the taxpayers'
long-term risk exposure. We set a 2013 Scorecard target for each enterprise to
achieve $30 billion in risk-sharing transactions using multiple types of
structures. Freddie Mac completed a securities-based transaction earlier this
year that was well received in the market and expects to complete another
shortly. Fannie Mae recently completed a risk sharing transaction with a
mortgage insurer, and just last week completed a securities-based transaction
similar to the Freddie Mac structure. We are planning for the scope and depth of
risk-sharing transactions to continue to expand.

While these transactions and structures are very positive, they do rely on the
underlying infrastructure of the enterprises. Going forward, I expect to see
work done on other types of transactions such as senior/subordinated structures
for certain portions of the enterprises' mortgage guarantees. These alternative
approaches will contribute to our efforts to build for the future by helping to
develop a securitization infrastructure that is less reliant on the enterprises'
traditional GSE securitization model.

Second, guarantee fees on new mortgages average about 50 basis points;
approximately double what they were prior to conservatorship. A key motivation
behind increasing enterprise guarantee fees is to bring their pricing for credit
risk closer to what would be required by private sector providers. While that
level is difficult to evaluate with precision, I believe we are getting closer
to a level that would encourage more private sector participation, and we plan
to continue pursuing gradual guarantee fee increases in the near future.

Third, one of the most direct ways to increase private sector participation and
reduce taxpayer exposure is through a reduction in the maximum size of loans
that the enterprises guarantee. This summer the president specifically endorsed
a gradual reduction in maximum loan size. I understand the potential timing
issues associated with such a change given the other regulatory changes that are
scheduled to take place in the mortgage market. FHFA will follow its practice of
announcing the 2014 conforming loan limits in late November, at which time
further information will be provided on potential reductions in the size of
loans the enterprises will guarantee going forward. We expect to give market
participants at least six months' notice of any change. Any reduction would be
across the board, not just in some parts of the country. And, consistent with
our practice when increasing guarantee fees, any change would be measured and
gradual so as not to disrupt markets.

While these steps are important and necessary to carry out our conservatorship
responsibilities, our efforts also are focused on building towards a future
infrastructure to support the single-family mortgage market. FHFA is looking to
reposition the enterprises activities in ways that would support multiple
housing finance reform options. One of those efforts is tied to the CSP with the
focus on functions that are routinely repeated across the secondary mortgage
market, such as issuing securities, providing disclosures, paying investors, and
disseminating data. These are all functions where standardization could have
clear benefits to market participants. We recently announced the formation of
Common Securitization Solutions as an equally owned subsidiary of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, the signing of a lease for office space for CSS, and the on-going
recruitment for executive leadership of the CSS.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's market share in the multifamily market is smaller
than in the single-family market, and their current activities already involve
credit risk sharing with private capital.

For 2013, FHFA established a goal that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would contract
their multifamily activity by 10 percent from 2012 levels. The market appears to
have absorbed this reduction without major disruption. One of the fundamental
problems with setting the course in the enterprises' multifamily business is
determining what is being repositioned for the future.

Without a clear legislative path forward on what FHFA is repositioning to, we
will continue to take gradual steps to reduce the enterprises' exposure in this
market, while maintaining a market presence. FHFA recently requested public
input on how to achieve that reduction, and we are evaluating those responses.
We are also planning to articulate this goal with a multiyear framework that
provides clarity to policymakers and market participants.

Finally, the retained portfolios of the enterprises have been steadily declining
since 2009. The composition of the enterprises' retained portfolios has also
changed significantly. Prior to conservatorship, the retained portfolios were
dominated by their own mortgage-backed securities and performing whole loans. As
those securities have been paid down, and as the need to work through delinquent
loans increased, the retained portfolios changed from being relatively liquid to
being less liquid.

To address this issue and further reduce risk in the enterprises' retained
portfolios in 2013, we set a target of selling five percent of the less liquid
portion of their retained portfolios, in other words their retained portfolios
excluding agency securities. We have been pleased with the execution thus far on
the 2013 Scorecard goal. Going forward, given that we are not repositioning the
retained portfolio business of the enterprises, we will look for additional ways
to shrink this business line over an appropriate time horizon.

Our current housing finance system has its roots in the Great Depression, and as
a nation we should look at this as an opportunity to build a new housing finance
system not for the next few years, but a restructuring that could last for
decades.

Edward DeMarco is acting director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              481 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            December 5, 2008 Friday
                                 CITY-D Edition

Toll ends fourth quarter with fix-rate plea

BYLINE: By Alan J. Heavens; Inquirer Real Estate Writer

SECTION: BUSINESS; P-com Biz; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 538 words


Home builder Toll Bros. Inc. coupled its fourth-quarter earnings announcement
yesterday with a plea for federal action to push fixed-rate mortgages down to a
buyer-stimulating 4.5 percent.

For the quarter ended Oct. 31, the Horsham builder of luxury homes said its
losses totaled $78.8 million, or 49 cents a share, including $175.9 million
worth of pretax write-downs - a bit better than the year-earlier loss of $81.8
million, or 52 cents a share, on $314.9 million in write-downs.

Excluding write-downs, profit totaled 23 cents a share.

Revenue fell to $698.9 million from $1.17 billion a year earlier, more than $7
million higher than the preliminary results of $691 million that Toll released
Nov. 11.

Chief executive officer Robert I. Toll said he supported an idea being
considered by the government to guarantee mortgage-backed securities, which
would bring rates down to 4.5 percent from the current 5.53 percent.

Toll said he believed the federal government should go further, however, and
sweeten the pot with a $20,000 tax credit per home buyer.

The decision by the Federal Reserve to spend up to $600 billion to buy Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac debt and mortgage-backed securities "was a positive first
step and, combined with increasing affordability resulting from price declines,
will increase consumer demand," Toll told investors and analysts yesterday.
Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae are the government-backed companies that buy and
guarantee home mortgages.

"We've been in this down market for 31/3 years," he said. "We need to overprime
rather than underprime the pump, because when you underprime, you don't get much
water."

Houses are more affordable than they have been in a long time, Toll said, so a
further initiative - lower rates and the $20,000 tax credit that he proposed -
would increase affordability and soak up a lot of inventory.

Toll said that until the economic meltdown of October, "there were preliminary
signs of stability" that led the company to believe fourth-quarter 2008 would be
close to par with the same period of 2007.

"The longer the year went, the worse it got," Toll said.

With ample cash reserves and 14,000 lots ready to build on once the market
turns, Toll is upbeat about his company's future, he said. But, unless the
government acts decisively, the pervading lack of confidence could be
overwhelming.

The company declined yesterday to provide financial guidance for 2009.

Chief financial officer Joel H. Rassman did say that it is estimating delivery
of 2,000 to 3,000 homes in fiscal 2009 at an average delivered price of $600,000
to $625,000 per home.

The average price in fiscal 2008, when it delivered 2,927 homes, was $664,000.

Net signed contracts for the fourth quarter slid 27 percent, to $266.7 million
from $365.3 million, while backlog fell 54 percent, to $1.33 billion from $2.85
billion. The cancellation rate dipped to 30.2 percent from 38.9 percent a year
earlier, but rose from 19.4 percent in the third quarter.

Bruce Toll, chairman of Toll Bros., also is chairman of Philadelphia Media
Holdings L.L.C., owner of The Inquirer, the Philadelphia Daily News and
Philly.com.

Contact real estate writer Alan J. Heavens at 215-854-2472 or
aheavens@phillynews.com.


LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              482 of 998 DOCUMENTS

           St. Louis Daily Record/St. Louis Countian (St. Louis, MO)

                              March 5, 2004 Friday

Real estate regulation call draws mixed reaction from lending institutions and
builders

BYLINE: Mike Nixon

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1043 words


Testimony during last week's hearing before the U.S. Senate Banking Housing and
Urban Affairs Committee drew mixed reaction among residential real estate
lending institutions, builders and financial experts.

Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan sparked strong reaction when he alleged
that the government-sponsored enterprises, commonly known as Freddie Mac and
Fannie Mae, have grown at such a rapid rate that the $4 trillion of home
mortgages that they hold threaten future economic stability for the nation. He
then called on Congress to place new restraints on the two lending institutions,
which hold more than 75 percent of single family mortgages in the United States.

"The Federal Reserve is concerned about the growth and scale of the mortgage
portfolios [held by Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae] and any concentrated interest
rate and prepayment risks of these two institutions," Greenspan said before the
committee last week. Despite recent controversies concerning the two GSEs,
Greenspan said he believes the two institutions have managed their overall
financial affairs well to date but that they run the risk of facing "systematic
difficulties" in the future if new restraints are not adopted for them and 12
Federal Home Loan Banks.

Greenspan's comments raised immediate ire from the National Association of Home
Builders. "Chairman Greenspan did what we feared most," said NAHB Executive Vice
President Jerry Howard. "Instead of constructively contributing to the debate on
how to develop an effective regulatory system for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, he
turned the forum into a referendum on the nation's housing finance system."

Howard charged that Greenspan in effect was calling for limiting the ability of
the secondary market institutions to issue debt and invest further in mortgage
assets. He also said that he does not see any evidence of the GSEs heading
toward a "systematic problem" because of current operational practices.

"Attempts to minimize the invaluable contributions of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
to the nation's housing finance system, as suggested by Chairman Greenspan and
some other policymakers, is merely a red herring designed to weaken or destroy
their GSE status and divert capital away from housing," Howard said.

Last week, the respective heads of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae were offered an
opportunity to present their case before the Senate committee.

"I've only been on the job two months, but I am convinced that legislation to
enhance the GSE regulatory oversight structure is needed - even overdue," said
Freddie Mac Chairman Richard Syron. "We tend to take the GSE model of housing
finance for granted. Freddie Mac strongly supports enhancement of legislation to
strengthen the GSE regulatory structure. Thus we respectfully encourage the
committee to focus on specific ways to improve the GSE regulatory structure and
avoid becoming sidetracked by issues that risk damaging the housing finance
system."

Syron said he was "sadly aware" that past accounting issues regarding this
institution are at the center of debate concerning the role of the GSEs and
offered a personal apology for practices within Freddie Mac having put doubt in
the minds of any borrowers, lenders and elected officials.

Fannie Mae Chairman Franklin Raines presented a more upbeat message when his
time came to speak during this hearing. "The [current] national policy is
working," he insisted. "Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have helped to create a
market-based, consumer-focused housing finance system that draws capital from
all over the world, making long-term, fixed-rate, refinanceable mortgages more
widely available at lower costs. All of this is accomplished at no cost to the
government."

Raines said that several sources have recently concluded that the current
procedures held by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are more rigorous than risk-based
capital tests recommended by critics of the GSEs. "Our mortgage finance system
today is the envy of the world. [It is] the only system in the world that has
made long-term, refinanceable fixed-rate mortgages the standard consumer
product. And the efficiency of our system has created an enormously liquid
mortgage market that reduces mortgage rates for millions of home buyers," he
said.

"I agree that Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae have done very well," said Mark Della
Camera, president for the St. Louis chapter of the Mortgage Bankers Association,
following testimony of the two organizations. "In looking at the mortgage
industry and how uniform and easily mortgages are placed on the secondary market
has really made lending and borrowing easier over the years."

Della Camera confirmed that without the GSE system, every community across the
country would have individual and wide-ranging mortgage products, interests and
financing charges that would make home buying a more difficult procedure and
nearly impossible for most would-be homeowners.

"I think Chairman Greenspan was looking at the size of Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac and saying that proper regulation of those two entities that is consistent
to their original congressional intent is very important. But I don't think that
having them remain among the largest financial institutions is seen as a
problem," Della Camera said. He noted that any call for updated regulations
should be seen as a matter of financial health maintenance rather than a threat
to an overall successful system. This mortgage expert also offered a reminder of
the importance of smaller lenders to a vast number of borrowers and said that
working in complimentary concert with the GSEs has kept many of them solvent
over the years. "There is a wide world of mortgage lending that thrives outside
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac," he said. "But keeping them consistent to their
charter is very important. Regulations help stabilize the market. New
regulations are not necessarily a bad thing and could help the market and
increase homeownership."

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were both created by Congress but are owned by stock
shareholders. The federal government does not guarantee the debt of these GSEs,
but it does offer oversight that provides them with a unique position and
backing among mortgage lenders.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Regulatory

                      Copyright 2004 Dolan Media Newswires


                              483 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                January 6, 1997

FHA Has Most Risk on AH

BYLINE: BY BRIAN COLLINS

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1027 words

DATELINE: Washington


Federal Reserve Board researchers have once again found that the Federal Housing
Administration single-family insurance program bears most of the credit risk of
serving low-income and minority homebuyers.

The FHA assumed 57% of the credit risk in this market, while the Veterans
Administration guarantee program assumed 12% of the risk, banks and thrifts 10%,
private mortgage insurers 10%, and the two government-sponsored enterprises,
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, only 6%.

The Fed study used 1995 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data and information
submitted by the private mortgage insurers to find that FHA insured 26% of
low-income and minority loans in dollars terms, but assumed 63% of the credit
risk because of 100% insurance coverage.

The private mortgage insurers insured 17% of these loans in dollar terms but
assumed only 10% of the credit risk.  The private companies insure only the
first 20% of losses on a mortgage loan.

"The FHA dominated all other lenders in the aggregate amount of credit extended
to lower-income and black and Hispanic borrowers and for properties in
low-income and minority neighborhoods.  About two-thirds of the risk dollars
extended to these borrowers and neighborhoods were extended by FHA," the Fed
researchers reported.

Last year, the Fed researchers found in their pioneering study that even though
FHA controls only 15% of the mortgage market, it is the major bearer of credit
risk for mortgage loans made to low-income and minority borrowers.

And when it comes to affordable housing lending, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac bear
very little credit risk, mainly because their Federal charters prevent them from
purchasing mortgages with high loan-to-value ratios.

As a result, the pmi companies insure the high LTV loans purchased by the two
GSEs.

"Even while Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are encouraged to promote lending to
low-income households, their charters may also create barriers to such lending
by limiting the credit risk they can bear," the Fed researchers note.

This year the Fed researchers redefined their definition of credit risk and
found that FHA bears even more of that risk than the first study indicated.

"In contrast, the conventional mortgage market bore only about one-fourth of the
credit risk associated with FHA-eligible mortgages extended in 1995," according
to the Fed study, written by Glenn Canner, Wayne Passmore and Brian Surette.

The study, "Distribution of Credit Risk Among Providers of Mortgages to
Low-Income and Minority Homebuyers," appears in the December Federal Reserve
Bulletin.

Among the findings is that banks, thrifts and other portfolio lenders have a
relatively large portion of their risk dollars in lending to low-income
borrowers and in low-income neighborhoods, compared with the GSEs and private
mortgage insurers.

"This finding may partly reflect the ability of these institutions to profitably
underwrite and hold the credit risk of nonconforming mortgages.  It may also
partly be a function of the rapidly expanding secondary market for nonconforming
mortgages," the authors said.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac can purchase only investment grade mortgages and they
are locked out of the nonconforming market by their charters.

Meanwhile, the private mortgage insurers concentrate their business on
GSE-eligible loans.  More than 90% of the mortgages backed by private mortgage
insurers in 1995 were at or below the loan limit size set by Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, which was $ 207,000 in 1995.

Fed researches noted that the portfolios of the GSEs and the private mortgage
insurers nearly mirror each.

"There were no striking differences among these institutions; the portfolio
shares of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and those of the private mortgage insurers
were similar across all borrower and neighborhood categories," the Fed
researchers said.

The Fed researchers also noted that VA mortgage program ranked second to FHA in
terms of the risk it shares in guaranteeing loans to low-income and black and
Hispanic borrowers.

"However, the VA was not among the higher-ranking institutions for lending in
lower-income and predominantly minority neighborhoods," the researchers said.

Who Shares Credit Risk on Low-Income and Minority Loans?

Note: This table may be divided, and additional information on a particular
entry may appear on more than one screen.
                               Borrower Characteristic
                              Lower Inc.  Black or Hisp.
                              Unadj. Adj.  Unadj.  Adj.
FHA                             32    63     42     67
VA                              8     12     9      11
Private mortgage insurers (1)   17    7      18      6
Govt Sponsored Enterprises
(Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac)     14    4      10      4
Portfolio Lenders
  Depository institutions       20    9      13      7
  Independent mtge cos. n2      2     2      2       2
  Other n3                      7     2      5       2
  Credit Unions                 1      *      *      *
All holders                    100   100    100     100
                              Census Tract Characteristic
                              Lower Inc.  Predom. Minor.
                              Unadj. Adj.  Unadj.   Adj.
FHA                             33    63     35      67
VA                              7     10     7       9
Private mortgage insurers n1    18    7      18      8
Govt Sponsored Enterprises
(Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac)     13    4      14      5
Portfolio Lenders
  Depository institutions       20    10     17      7
  Independent mtge cos. n2      2     2      3       2
  Other n3                      6     3      6       2
  Credit Unions                 1      *      *       *
All holders                    100   100    100     100
                                 Total
                              Unadj. Adj.
FHA                             26    57
VA                              8     12
Private mortgage insurers n1    20    10
Govt Sponsored Enterprises
(Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac)     18    6
Portfolio Lenders
  Depository institutions       19    10
  Independent mtge cos. n2      2     2
  Other n3                      6     3
  Credit Unions                 1      *
All holders                    100   100




n1 Mortgages packed by private mortgage insurers

n2 Includes mortgages originated and held in portfolio by independent mortgage
companies and mortgages sold to affiliates by independent mortgage companies

n3 Includes mortgages sold to life insurance companies, pension funds, and other
private-sector purchases

* Less than 0.5 percent


Note: Unadjusted shares are based on dollar amounts of mortgages extended;
adjusted shares are based on risk dollars.

Source: Derived from 1995 HMDA and PMI data

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1997 Faulkner & Gray


                              484 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     November 4, 1991, Monday, City Edition

Locked out of the dream

SECTION: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 581 words



For anyone seeking a home loan, the news is not good these days. Mortgage
interest rates are down, but with rising prices and shrinking wages, and tighter
lending practices in the wake of S&L failures, buying that first home is getting
tougher than ever.

    But the news is especially bad for some minorities. A study by the Federal
Reserve Board showed last month that blacks were denied conventional mortgage
loans more than twice as often as whites, and Hispanic applicants fared little
better. Other studies are trickling in showing roughly the same rejection ratios
by Tampa Bay area lending institutions.

    Such disparities are undoubtedly a factor behind the even more dismaying
news that so few blacks nationwide are even bothering to apply for mortgage
loans at all. Activists contend that past experiences lead blacks to believe
they won't get fair treatment from banks, so they don't try. In the Tampa Bay
area, white mortgage applicants outnumbered blacks nearly 40 to 1.

    That is more than inconvenient, it's tragic, because it guarantees that an
already shut-out group will continue to miss one of the fundamental advantages
of American citizenship. Home ownership is a traditional ticket to the middle
class. It is an investment that offers tax advantages and usually increases in
value; it's a source of equity loans to help send children to college or to
start businesses; it stabilizes families and neighborhoods; it's a nest egg for
old age, or a legacy to leave behind.

    This is the first time such lending figures have been compiled by race and
ethnic group, instead of by neighborhood. Although the figures don't examine why
applicants are rejected, lenders justify this exclusion from the American dream
exactly as expected: They say they reject applicants based on their
qualifications, not their race. But when even poor whites are approved more
often than well-to-do blacks, it doesn't take a genius to figure out that
something's wrong with this picture.

    If nothing else it underscores the disgrace of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corp. allowing such small black-owned institutions as Freedom National Bank in
Harlem to fail while spending billions to rescue larger banks. Such banks at
least provide some alternative for minorities.

    Unfortunately, too few mainstream lenders seem to realize that they too have
obligations to the entire communities whose savings they use, and whose taxes
insure them against failure. Especially promising are some experimental programs
that train marginal buyers how to arrange their finances and take other steps to
qualify for mortgages. But such programs will never work if lenders merely use
them as public relations devices rather than a way also to deal with their own
biases and stereotyping.

    A proposed amendment to the comprehensive banking reform legislation being
hashed out in Congress would help, by requiring banks to develop plans to lend
to minorities when data reveal such racial disparities. That would be a useful
supplement to the 1977 Community Reinvestment Act, the most effective remedy yet
devised against the invidious practice of "redlining" mapping a red line around
low-income or minority neighborhoods and making no loans to their residents.

    It would also be poetic justice for the concerted and nearly successful
lobbying effort banks mounted this year to repeal even that modest attempt at
fairness.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                            Times Publishing Company


                              485 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ginnie Mae's Popularity

BYLINE: By JAMES STERNGOLD

SECTION: Section 12; Page 62, Column 1; Personal Investing Supplement Desk

LENGTH: 1443 words


SINCE the postwar housing boom began, a mortgage has been the key to the dream
of home ownership for millions of Americans. Indeed, mortgages totalling an
estimated $2 trillion are outstanding, so widespread is their use. Given this
mammoth market, it is little wonder that, in today's aggressive financial
environment, mortgages have taken on new meaning. They have been bundled,
repackaged and reshaped into modern investment vehicles.

The mortgage-backed securities that have been created offer high yields and,
usually, great safety to the investor - to which dozens of advertisements from
brokerage houses attest daily. What the ads often do not make clear, however, is
that mortgage-backed securities are also highly complex instruments. While
appropriate for some investment situations, they can behave erratically and even
be damaging to some investors who do not understand them.

''From the start, there were all kinds of problems with these securities, and
some terrible abuses,'' said Robert Dall, an adviser to Morgan Stanley & Company
who has been involved with the latest generation of mortgage-backed securities
since their inception 15 years ago.

''I don't think the problems were the result of misrepresentation, but of lack
of knowledge,'' he added. ''These securities aren't mysterious. They do require
some thinking, though, and time to understand.''

George Hester, a vice president at Paine Webber and a booster of mortgage-backed
securities, said he cringes sometimes when he hears the ads. ''Some of these
brokers just tell you that you get these great yields of 12 percent or so,'' he
said. ''But they don't really tell you that there is more to know about them.
You have to exercise care and read that fine print.''

The Federal Government took the lead in creating investment se-curities from
mortgages. The idea was for the Government to buy mortgages from financial
institutions that had actually made the loans, and then bundle similar mortgages
into pools totaling millions of dollars.

Securities backed by these mortgages are sold, with a return that reflects the
interest rates that individual homeowners are paying. These ''pass-through''
securities have the full backing of the Federal Government, a guarantee of
safety for the investor.

The Government National Mortgage Association, familiarly known as Ginnie Mae. is
by far the leading issuer of such securities, with $227 billion worth
outstanding. Two other Government agencies, the Federal National Mortgage
Association, or Fannie Mae, and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Association, or
Freddie Mac, also issue mortgage-backed or mortgage-related securities. These,
however, are tailored largely for the institutional investor. Another difference
is that Ginnie Mae purchases only Government-insured mortgages, which adds
another layer of protection for investors in Ginnie Mae securities. The other
two buy conventional mortgages, which do not carry such insurance.

The Ginnie Mae certificate has thus become the most popular form of
mortgage-backed security for the individual. Its chief advantage is that it
offers the highest interest rate of any government security. An investor
receives as safe an investment as a Treasury bond, but with a better return.
Ginnie Maes will usually offer a yield one-half percentage point to one point
higher than a comparable Treasury bond. Ginnie Maes are generally sold in
maturities of 30 years, in a minimum denomination of $25,000.

However, unlike most Government securities, which pay inter-est semi-annually,
Ginnie Maes make payments monthly, of both interest and part of the principal.
Mr. Hester said this is a plus for retirees, who often prefer more frequent
payments. But it also means more bookkeeping.

The complications only start there. First, like a bond, the value of the
principal of a Ginnie Mae rises and falls inversely to changes in interest
rates. A one-half point increase in interest rates would decrease the face value
of an investor's Ginnie Mae, while a decline in rates would push the price up.
These changes, of course, affect only those who sell a Ginnie Mae before it
matures.

Second - and this can be terribly confusing - Ginnie Maes pay interest and also
return part of the investor's principal each month. Interest payments fall
throughout the life of the investment, as the amount of principal shrinks. It is
thus known as a ''wasting asset.''

''We have to train our brokers carefully, and constantly, to get this across to
the investor,'' said Stephen D. Leightman, first vice president and national
sales manager of Prudential-Bache Securities.

This payback of principal derives from the fact that some holders of the
underlying mortgages repay them before maturity. And the rate of payback on
Ginnie Maes is unpredictable, although there is a tendency to repay faster as
interest rates fall; homeowners like to refinance at lower rates.

This payback situation has several potential drawbacks. If investors do not
understand that part of the monthly check is principal, they could be spending
what they believe to be income, only to find later that their principal has
diminished. Even those who do understand must decide what to do with that
returned principal every month.

''You have to approach them differently than any other kind of fixed-income
investment,'' said Michael Perini, a first vice president of Merrill Lynch &
Company. ''You have that attractive yield, but there is the added risk because
of the uncertainty over the payback. This is often overlooked.''

Brokerages have introduced variations on the Ginnie Mae to overcome some of
these problems. Since many investors did not have the $25,000 minimum for a
Ginnie Mae, the first efforts were directed toward reducing the minimum
investment size. This resulted in the unit investment trust. The trust consists
of a pool of Ginnie Maes. Shares, or units, of this pool are sold to investors.
One can invest as little as $1,000, with $100 increments above that. The units'
characteristics closely parallel those of a straight Ginnie Mae.

Next on the scene, and currently one of the hottest mortgage-backed products, is
the mutual fund. The Ginnie Mae mutual fund is also a pool of the securities in
which the investor can, in effect, buy a share.

But the advantage is that the principal paid back to the investor by the Ginnie
Maes, and even the monthly interest income, can be reinvested in the fund
automatically. And the funds are actively managed by the mutual-fund company
through the use of various hedging strategies. This can produce additional
income for the investor.

There is, however, a cost for this management expertise. The mutual funds'
interest rate is usually about one-quarter to one-half percentage point below
that of a unit trust or actual Ginnie Mae certificate. The value of the units
both in a unit trust or a mutual fund rises or falls with fluctuations in
interest rates. Mr. Hester said that his brokers are now selling a combination
of these products.

Some retirees like to purchase Ginnie Mae certificates, and an adjoining Ginnie
Mae mutual fund. This way they get the high yield and monthly payments of the
cer-tificate, but can automatically reinvest the returned principal in the
mutual fund.

Then, when the amount invested in the mutual fund rises to $25,000, another
certificate can be bought. The Ginnie Mae mutual fund pays an interest rate of
about two to three percentage points higher than a typical money-market fund,
Mr. Hester said.

Other mortgage-backed investment products are also available from brokers. There
is growing popularity, Mr. Leightman said, of collateralized mortgage
obligations, known as C.M.O.'s. These are bonds, issued by corporate borrowers,
that have as collateral Ginnie Maes or some other mortgage-backed instrument.
The mortgages provide strong backing to the bonds. These bonds provide certain
and regular income; the Ginnie Maes do not.

This backing means that corporate borrowers pay less than they would otherwise.
But the investor still receives a better return, at higher risk, than the
straight Ginnie Mae. Mr. Leightman said that corporate C.M.O.'s pay from a
quarter-point to a half-point higher rates.

These C.M.O.'s come in a great many varieties and are generally being bought by
more sophisticated investors, said Mr. Perini, who added, that one important
factor is that the market is not so liquid as that for Ginnie Maes.

''What has made these accessible to the consumer now is that we've got them down
to denominations of $1,000 minimum,'' Mr. Leightman said. ''And you don't have
the problem of principal payback.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of return on mortgage pass-through securites, 1977-85 (Source:
Salomon Brothers Inc.); Graph of performance of mortgage pass-through securities
vs. high-grade corporate bonds, 1972-83 (Source: Salomon Brothers Inc.)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              486 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Indian Banking News

                       May 21, 2015 Thursday 6:30 AM EST

First Internet Bank Launches Rural Development Lending in Indiana

LENGTH: 266  words


May 21 -- First Internet Bank of Indiana (www.firstib.com), a premier provider
of online retail and business banking services nationwide, today announced the
expansion of its residential mortgage lending capabilities within the State of
Indiana. Backed by a loan guarantee from the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), First Internet Bank creates the opportunity for low- and
moderate-income households to own decent, safe and sanitary dwellings as their
primary residence. Homebuyers can finance up to 100% of the purchase price - no
down payment required - with a low upfront funding fee and low monthly USDA fee.
Properties must be in eligible rural areas, and applicants must meet eligibility
requirements.

"I'm proud to expand our residential loan program within our home state," said
David Becker, President and CEO of First Internet Bank. "As a native Hoosier, I
am gratified to see our team leverage our skills and technology to help
strengthen rural communities and foster homeownership."

The USDA program complements the Bank's other government-backed home loan
programs, FHA and VA, for homebuyers seeking a low down payment option. First
Internet Bank also offers fixed and variable rate conventional loans as well as
jumbo mortgages and home equity loans. The Bank currently originates loans in
all 50 states through its award-winning online platform, backed by experienced
loan officers.

For more information about the USDA Rural Development program, visit
http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/single-family-housing
-guaranteed-loan-program/in.

Source: First Internet Bank

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2015 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              487 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             National Mortgage News

                                October 21, 2013

Some Policy Principles for Multifamily Housing Finance

BYLINE: E.J. Burke

SECTION: OPEN FORUM; Pg. 3 Vol. 38 No. 6

LENGTH: 1761  words


Our nation's multifamily housing finance system should rely on private capital.
Private capital should be the primary source of financing for multifamily rental
housing. Private capital has historically been brought to bear through the range
of lending institutions that have supported multifamily finance, such as
portfolio lenders and CMBS issuers, the GSEs' multifamily programs that require
loss sharing with originators and with investors, and the capitalization of the
GSEs themselves. We believe that government policies should maintain this
reliance on private capital going forward.

Past experience shows that the federal government is the only entity that can
ensure the availability of liquidity in all market cycles. The recent financial
crisis and recession demonstrated that only the federal government can ensure
liquidity through all market cycles, and, as demonstrated by the conservatorship
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, as well as programs like the Federal Reserve's
asset purchases, the federal government will fill this role when necessary.
Government policies should anticipate and prepare for this role.

The government should ensure liquidity for multifamily mortgages through a
carefully crafted guarantee on multifamily mortgage-backed securities. The
federal government should provide a catastrophic backstop guarantee on
mortgage-backed securities. The catastrophic backstop role would be similar to
that of the U.S. government in a number of sectors and markets, including
federal deposit insurance in the banking system. This government backstop should
be available at the mortgage-backed securities level (rather than at the level
of the issuer, as it is today with the GSEs) at all times to ensure liquidity in
the multifamily finance market.

Taxpayers and the mortgage finance system itself should be protected through a
strong regulatory framework and multiple layers of private capital. To protect
taxpayers and the system itself, the government guarantee-related market should
be subject to strong and independent regulatory oversight and risk-based capital
requirements. Taxpayers also should be protected through multiple layers of
private capital, including the equity in the multifamily property itself and the
entity-level capital of the security-issuing institution and any risk sharing it
may undertake. As noted above, a federal risk insurance fund should also be
established, capitalized by risk-based premiums paid by participating firms.
Only when all layers of capital are exhausted would a draw on the U.S. Treasury
be authorized.

Policy makers should protect and preserve existing resources, as well as support
greater transparency, during the transition to an overhauled housing finance
system. Given the significant role of the GSEs in the multifamily market, their
infrastructures, human capital, and resources should be carefully managed to
avoid disruptions to the market, as well as to ensure an orderly transition to a
new housing finance system. Prudent management of existing multifamily
executions and mortgage portfolios is important due to its quality and positive
cash flow generated-all of which are taxpayer assets.

To implement these principles, MBA believes that a legislative solution should
incorporate the following structural recommendations:

Establish a Government Guarantor. A wholly owned government corporation should
function as a catastrophic guarantor, administrator of a risk insurance fund,
and regulator of secondary market entities. The government guarantor, which
would be backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S., would not be subject
to the federal appropriations process, but be funded by guarantee fees paid by
issuers, as well as other statutorily defined assessments.

The government corporation would, pursuant to statutory guidelines, approve
private sector secondary market entities, as well as set standards by which
secondary market entities would be eligible to issue government-backed
securities. The pricing of the guarantee should encourage competition, be
commercially reasonable, and be subject to calibration based on pre-determined
criteria that considers market conditions.

Allow Multiple, Privately Capitalized Issuers of Government-Guaranteed
Securities in the Secondary Multifamily Mortgage Market. Privately capitalized
secondary market entities would be eligible to purchase mortgages, aggregate (if
applicable), and issue government-backed mortgage-backed securities that support
the multifamily market. Regular and dependable security issuances would create
the liquidity in the market to get attractive pricing and broad market
participation by bond investors.

These issuers would be expressly permitted to purchase catastrophic reinsurance
from the government guarantor to wrap the MBS. The government guarantee should
be structured so that it can be expanded in times of market disruption. A
mono-line structure, with segregated assets and separate capital standards,
would facilitate capital adequacy determinations, regulatory oversight, and
aggregation capabilities to support structured risk-sharing transactions. The
government guarantor/regulator would be able to authorize the establishment of
multiple such entities.

The secondary market entities should be required to be separately capitalized.
Governance structures that enhance independence from potential affiliated
business lines (if any) should be considered. We believe that these entities
could be (but need not be) affiliated with single-family market entities. They
would provide liquidity to the workforce rental housing market, including
secondary and tertiary markets.

Preserve and Carry Over Execution Models. The GSEs' multifamily executions
incorporate substantial private capital and risk sharing with other market
participants, and have exhibited strong credit performance with current
delinquency rates of less than 20 basis points. This and other flexibility in
the structure of the government wrap on MBS is important to allow for multiple
risk-sharing executions to manage credit risk. These businesses are valuable to
U.S. taxpayers and should be transferred to new entities that would serve the
multifamily housing finance market. Notably, in the multifamily space, we do not
believe there is a need for utilization of a common securitization platform,
private mortgage insurance, or other single-family-specific concepts at this
time.

Consider Affordable Character of Multifamily Rental Housing. By its very nature,
multifamily rental housing tends to be affordable, with 93% of multifamily units
having rents affordable to households earning area median incomes or less.
Policy proposals contemplating affordability requirements, if any, on secondary
market entities should take this into account. Any proposed approaches also
should be reasonable and flexible, as well as balanced with regard to the need
to attract private capital.

MBA is encouraged by recent legislative activity that has revived the policy
debate on the future of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Senate and House members
have introduced thoughtful proposals that would create a comprehensive framework
for the future of housing finance. We commend these efforts. MBA views all such
proposals through the lens of our guiding principles. In particular, the future
system of multifamily finance should rely on private capital and protect
taxpayers, while ensuring stable and continued liquidity in all economic cycles
through a government backstop.

In the Senate, Sens. Corker and Warner have introduced bipartisan legislation
that would transform the housing finance system. To the extent that the
Committee considers portions of this bill in its efforts to craft comprehensive
GSE reform legislation, we offer several recommendations.

With regard to its treatment of multifamily housing finance, MBA strongly
supports the bill's approach that provides an explicit government guarantee
(through a Federal Mortgage Insurance Corp.) for multifamily loans. We also
support the establishment of premiums paid into an FMIC-administered insurance
fund, oversight by the FMIC as a strong regulator, and recognition of the value
and retention of the GSEs' multifamily executions.

However, we would urge that the statutory language explicitly distinguish
between the roles of the FMIC and multifamily private sector participants: The
FMIC should retain the role of regulator, government guarantor and administrator
of an insurance fund-but other roles should be transferred to private sector
entities. Specifically, the bill should direct the FMIC to establish privately
capitalized secondary mortgage market entities to serve as issuers in the
multifamily housing finance market. The current multifamily platforms of the two
GSEs could be moved over into such new entities. Moving these businesses to the
private sector (through a sale or public offering)-with continued access to a
government guarantee-would likely return substantial capital to the U.S.
Treasury.

These secondary market entities would purchase multifamily mortgages, aggregate
loans, manage and distribute credit risk, credit enhance, and structure and
issue government-backed MBS that support the multifamily market. In other words,
the secondary market entities would have access to purchase catastrophic
reinsurance from the government guarantor that wraps the MBS. We also believe
that the FMIC should be authorized to approve several such companies in order to
foster competition and innovation, setting forth criteria for the approval of
these multifamily issuers. Governance guidelines and approval standards should
be established as well.

While not the focus of today's hearing, I would like to emphasize the essential
role that FHA plays in supporting the multifamily housing market. The Federal
Housing Administration is a critical source of the long-term, fixed-rate debt
needed to build and refinance affordable rental units for working families,
seniors, and underserved populations. FHA's multifamily and healthcare loan
programs are each designed to address a different loan type or segment of the
market. FHA has played a strong, counter-cyclical role in this market as well.
Its status as a government agency subject to the federal appropriations process,
however, has presented inherent limitations in FHA's capacity, as we are
witnessing today with commitment authority limitations and the recent federal
government shutdown.

E.J. Burke is chairman-elect of the Mortgage Bankers Association and EVP and
group head KeyBank Real Estate Capital.

URL: http://www.nationalmortgagenews.com//

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMN


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              488 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               MortgageDaily.com

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 8, 2013 Tuesday

Mortgage Lender's Guide to Government Shutdown

BYLINE: Mortgage Daily

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1097 words


Oct. 08--With the federal government in shutdown mode for more than a week now,
the impact to the mortgage sector is growing. Contingency plans at government
mortgage agencies and temporary guidance from the government sponsored
enterprises have become more relevant.

GSEs

While the housing GSEs are not government entities, their business is impacted
by furloughed employees and employees who work for government contractors,
vendors and other impacted entities.

Temporary guidance issued by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac address a short-term
shutdown, and additional guidance will be issued if the shutdown lasts for a
prolonged period. Fannie's guidance became effective on Oct. 1, while Freddie's
went into effect on Oct. 8.

Fannie and Freddie will not accept delivery of loans to furloughed government
employees prior to the seller's obtaining a verbal verification of employment --
though loan closings can take place before the verbal VOE is received.

On military borrowers, however, Fannie said a "Leave and Earnings Statement" can
be used in lieu of a verbal VOE as long as it is dated within 30 days of the
note date.

Freddie noted that VOEs for government employees can often be obtained from
third-party service providers that continue to provide verification even for
furloughed government employees. Freddie also said that sellers must have no
knowledge that a borrower won't be returning to work after the shutdown ends.

While all borrowers are required by Fannie to complete and sign the form 4506-T
prior to closing, only borrowers with five to 10 financed properties are
required to have IRS-executed 4509-T forms. But during the shutdown, Fannie will
allow loans to be closed without an executed 4506-T form as long as it is
executed prior to delivery.

Freddie said it doesn't require form 4506-T to be processed by the IRS prior to
closing, but it does require that borrowers sign the form before a loans closes
and that the information be obtained as part of sellers' in-house quality
control programs.

On validation of Social Security numbers, Fannie is allowing loans to be close
before the SSA Form 89 is verified -- though verification must occur prior to
delivery.

Fannie is allowing mortgage servicers to offer unemployment forbearance on
monthly loan payments, repayment plans and trial period plan payments for the
shorter of six months of the term of the shutdown.

The unemployment forbearance for furloughed employees will not require a
borrower response package, and no prior approval from Fannie is needed. The
unemployment forbearance plan needs to be communicated in writing.

Once the unemployment forbearance plan is successfully completed, Fannie
borrowers can be placed on a new repayment or trial period plan.

Freddie highlighted that its existing options include short-term forbearance,
short-term unemployment forbearance and extended unemployment forbearance and
noted that furloughed government employees are eligible for both unemployment
forbearance options.

Both secondary lenders said that during forbearance, credit bureau reporting
must be suspended.

Fannie is requiring that late charges be waived for furloughed employees during
the shutdown, while Freddie reminded servicers that late charges are waived for
borrowers in forbearance.

Freddie said that servicers need to obtain a copy of the borrower's most recent
federal income tax return when the borrower is being evaluated for a workout
option and the forms 4506-T or 4506T-EZ can't be processed by the IRS.

HUD

Functions that are funded through multi-year appropriations will continue at the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, as will functions that avoid
imminent threat to the safety of human life or the protection of property. Such
activities are associated with the Federal Housing Administration's portfolio of
insured mortgages and executed commitments for project-based rental assistance.

Employees excepted from furloughs will administer the portfolio of FHA-insured
loans, including collecting premiums and paying claims. They will also handle
functions that relate to the protection of government property.

Minimal operations will be maintained to support FHA's existing portfolio. Call
centers for FHA and the National Servicing Center will be maintained. Also
continuing are the payment of claims, the servicing of Secretary-held notes and
mortgages and ensuring the continuity of FHA's REO disposition process.

Planned sales of defaulted notes will continue.

New single-family loans, except home-equity conversion mortgages and Title I
loans, will be endorsed under multi-year appropriation authority. HUD says this
will the ensure the health and stability of the U.S. mortgage market.

"Approximately 80 percent of FHA loans are endorsed by lenders with delegated
authority," HUD said. "The remaining 20 percent are endorsed through the FHA
Homeownership Centers, leveraging FHA staff with a contractor that works
on-site."

On multifamily loans, projects with firm commitments and a scheduled closing
date will move forward during the shutdown, as will closings on final
endorsements that have critical external deadlines.

Ginnie Mae

Government-owned Ginnie Mae, which operates with just 108 employees, has been
deemed as critical to the secondary market and will be allowed to continue
incurring obligations and maintain operations during a shutdown.

This means Ginnie can issue commitments, issue mortgage-backed securities,
receive and process monthly MBS and payment accounting data, pay securities, pay
employees, utilize and pay contractors and travel for emergency purposes.

VA

The Department of Veterans Affairs' Home Loan Guaranty Program, which is part of
the Veterans Benefits Administration, will remain operational.

VA can continue its home loan program because VBA employees are being funded
carryover balances for a limited time and then through mandatory funds.

USDA

The U.S. Department of Agriculture is not doing any home loan business.

"No new RD rural housing loans or guarantees would be issued, which would result
in a setback in construction start-up, as well as a potentially costly
inconvenience to buyers and sellers depending on a Single Family Housing loan or
guaranteed loan closing," the USDA said in its Rural Development Plan for
Operations in the Absence of Appropriations. "A more permanent interruption in
the program would cause a substantial reduction in housing available in rural
areas relative to population., including those on furlough."

___ (c)2013 Mortgage Daily Visit Mortgage Daily at www.mortgagedaily.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20131008-1MG-Mortgage-Lender-s-Guide-to-Government-Shutdown-1008-20131008

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1MG


                                 Copyright 2013


                              489 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     Marin Independent Journal (California)

                             June 4, 2011 Saturday

Federal mortgage change could dampen Marin housing market

BYLINE: By Will Jason Marin Independent Journal

SECTION: MARIN; News; Local; Business; Real Estate

LENGTH: 680 words


As Marin's housing market struggles to gain traction, it could soon lose a key
benefit created during the depths of the housing crisis: government support for
high-cost mortgages.

Since 2008, the federal government has backed loans as large as $729,750 in
Marin County and 72 other U.S. counties where housing is expensive. On Sept. 30
the cap is set to drop to $625,500.

"That's definitely going to hurt the market," said Renee Adelmann, owner of
Marin Modern Real Estate in San Rafael.

In a county where the median single-family house sold for $761,600 last month, a
lower cap would affect buyers and sellers below the upper reaches of the market.

"This is not going to affect somebody who is buying a $1 million-plus property,
but it is going to affect people who are in the middle," said John Zeiter, a
broker with McGuire Real Estate in Mill Valley.

The government cap determines which loans can be purchased by Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac and insured by the Federal Housing Administration. Borrowers seeking
more expensive loans must look to the private market, where interest rates are
as much as half a percentage point higher.

Here's how the change could play out: Under the current cap, a homebuyer could
borrow $700,000 and   provided he could come up with a 20 percent down payment
of $175,000   buy a $875,000 house. With a government-backed interest rate of
approximately 4.6 percent available last week, the monthly mortgage would be
about $3,599.

If the cap were lowered, the same mortgage would fall into the private, or
"jumbo" market. At last week's jumbo interest rate of 5.1 percent, the monthly
payment would jump to $3,811, an increase of $212 per month.

Over the life of the 30-year mortgage the lower cap would add more than $76,000,
or about 6 percent, to the total cost.

"People are going to have to put more money down "... or borrow more
expensively," said Andrew Grossman, a loan consultant for Princeton Capital in
Greenbrae.

Under the current mortgage cap, buyers can purchase a house of up to $912,188
and still receive a lower interest rate. After the change the figure would drop
to $781,875.

Between those two prices lie 100 of the 786 single-family houses for sale in
Marin last week   nearly 13 percent of the market   according to data from Bay
Area Real Estate Information Services.

Buyers who want to take advantage of the higher cap will need to obtain
mortgages by early to mid-August because banks will need time to package the
loans before the Sept. 30 deadline.

A congressional committee is set to review legislation that would extend the
higher cap, but it is not clear if the bill will make it through both houses of
Congress before the August recess.

If the cap decreases as scheduled, opinions are mixed on what change would have
on Marin's housing market, which has shown signs of a tepid recovery but remains
sluggish.

There were 175 single-family houses sold in April in Marin, up slightly from 165
in April 2010 but still well below the recent peak of 222 in April 2007. The
median sale price of $761,600 in April was off 12 percent from $865,000 a year
earlier.

"For sellers, I really think it's going to bring the prices down," Adelmann said
of the lower loan cap. "Buyers are going to be affected because they have less
choices."

But with more competition helping to drive interest rates down for private
lending, the effect could be reduced over time, said Sean Maley, a senior
mortgage adviser at Guarantee Mortgage in San Rafael.

"I don't think it's going to have a huge impact," he said.

Whatever the long-term effect, Marin could see a rush of buyers seeking to lock
in lower mortgage rates, followed by a short-term bust after Sept. 30, Adelmann
said. The impact could be similar to the recent expiration of a federal tax
credit for first-time homebuyers, she said.

"It was a mental thing," she said. "Most people didn't even qualify for the tax
credit because most people in Marin make more than what you had to make (in
income) in order to get the tax credit. But there was a big rush."

Contact Will Jason via email at wjason@marinij.com

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


    Copyright 2011 Marin Independent Journal, a MediaNews Group publication
                              All Rights Reserved


                              490 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 June 28, 1993

Roundtable Kicks Around Reforms of FHA

BYLINE: By VANESSA BUSH, NMN Correspondent

SECTION: BANKS AND MORTGAGES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


A recent public forum on the future of the Federal Housing Administration
elicited a whole range of new ideas, from emphasizing its credit-enhancement
authority, to targeting its insurance exclusively for low- and moderate-income
and first-time homebuyers, to privatizing FHA or totally eliminating the
program.

The public forum, held here recently, was sponsored by the Housing Roundtable, a
national business leadership group.

The debate about the FHA comes at a time when more conventional loan programs
are aimed at low- and moderate-income borrowers and when recent changes in the
FHA's premium structure have reduced the popularity of the government guaranteed
loan program.

Noting that the Housing Roundtable met the previous week with Henry Cisneros,
secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and Nicolas P.
Retsinas, assistant secretary of housing.  Weston E. Edwards, chairman of the
Housing Roundtable, said he expects the group to "provide a basic dialogue to
begin rethinking FHA."

However, Mr. Edwards said he does not expect final recommendations from the
Housing Roundtable for a year.

Speaking at the forum, housing advocate Gale Cincotta emphasized the "dilemma of
trying to cleanup and not kill the FHA."

Ms. Cincotta, executive director of the National Training and Information Center
in Chicago, recalled FHA's role in developing the suburbs and its troubled
lending record in urban areas.

She pointed to NTIC research indicating that over the last ten years, $ 35
million in claims have been paid by the FHA, with perhaps only half those claims
recovered.

She recommended increased "discipline of all the parties involved," citing
education for homeowners, use of census tract data to detect high-default rates
by specific lenders and better tracking of real estate brokers suspected of
encouraging fraudulent transactions.

Ms. Cincotta also advocated lower price limits on FHA-insured properties, a
broader menu of loan products and wider dispersal of FHA loans in urban areas to
avoid clustering of loans and defaults.

Examining FHA's role in providing financing for multifamily housing, Conrad E.
Egan, executive vice president for legislative affairs, National Corp. for
Housing Partnership, suggested that FHA use its insurance guarantee as a form of
credit enhancement.

"There was a time when FHA was virtually the only one on the block," Mr. Egan
said, referring to providing financing for multifamily housing.

"Now other highly qualified institutions have stepped forward," he said, citing
the secondary market agencies, the Federal Housing Finance Board, state housing
finance agencies and Wall Street.

"The question is how FHA insurance can fit into the larger picture and not go it
alone," Mr. Egan said.

Section 542 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 provides FHA
with an opportunity to enter into risk=sharing arrangements on multifamily
programs with other entities, including the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.,
the Federal National Mortgage Association, individual financial institutions and
state housing finance agencies.

The legislation provides for a pilot program that the FHA is currently
formulating, Mr. Egan said.  He recommended that the pilot program "not detract
from other FHA activities in multifamily areas" and not be designed to replace
private-sector involvement.

Moreover, Mr. Egan recommended that FHA require participants to be "stable,
strong mainstream" institutions, to avoid the problems that occurred in its
coinsurance program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 National Thrift News, Inc.


                              491 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Bond Buyer

Fannie Mae Raises Limit on Mortgages It Will Guarantee or Buy to $187,600

                           November 25, 1988, Friday

By Susan Kelly


The Federal National Mortgage Association said Wednesday it will increase the
maximum size of the single-family conventional mortgages it guarantees or buys
for its portfolio.

Effective Jan. 1, the agency will raise the limit to $187,600, 11.2% above the
1987 ceiling of $168,700.

By law, the size limit on mortgages for both Fannie Mae and the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corp. is reset annually based on the Federal Home Loan Bank
Board's monthly national survey of home prices.

Freddie Mac is expected to announce a similar increase, but a spokesman said the
agency's board had not yet voted on the measure.

The annual increase in the ceiling traditionally elicits protests from
representatives of the thrift industry, who argue that the federal agencies
should concentrate on lower-income buyers.

An official of the U.S. League of Savings Institutions said Wednesday that the
Bank Board's survey shows a much greater increase than do other indexes of home
prices.

The index has risen about 13% a year since 1985. "I think you'd be hard-pressed
to find that housing in general has increased 13% a year nationwide," said
Michael Wilson, vice president and associate director of research at the league.

With the new loan limit, "somebody can buy a $235,000 home and get a federally
subsidized interest rate," he said. "To afford a mortgage of that magnitude at
current interest rates, you're talking about an annual income of about $80,000.
You're providing a subsidy to someone with an $80,000 income who's buying a
$235,000 home."

But Dale P. Riordan, Fannie Mae's executive vice president for policy and public
affairs, said in a statement that few of the mortgages the agency buys "come
close to the maximum loan limit."

Increasing the limit will help "many middle-income home buyers, especially those
in high-cost areas," Mr. Riordan said.

In the first 10 months of this year, the average size of the loans that Fannie
Mae bought or securitized was $76,800, and almost half those mortgages were
under $70,000 in size, the agency said.

Wednesday's Trading

Corporate bond prices closed unchanged Wednesday in very quiet activity as many
traders and investors started their holiday weekend early.

Mortgage-backed traders said they saw some retail interest. "But as far as
volume and price action were concerned, it was a pretty boring day," one trader
said.

The 9 1/2% securities of the Government National Mortgage Association were
unchanged near the close at 97-00. By contrast, the Treasury 8 7/8s due in
November 1998 were down 3 on the day to yield 9.07%.

The 10% Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. participation certificates were quoted
at 99-08, up 2 from Tuesday's close, and the Federal National Mortgage
Association's 10% securities were quoted at 98-00, also 2 higher on the day.

Freddie Mac priced its first floating-rate debenture Wednesday.

The $750 million of one-year securities will be reset weekly to yield 65 basis
points above the bond equivalent yield on the 91-day U.S. Treasury bill. The
issue will pay interest quarterly.

Morgan Stanley & Co. was sole manager.

In the corporate market, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. priced $200 million of
Magma Copper senior subordinated notes.

The 10-year notes were priced at par to yield 18%. After six months, they will
be reset quarterly based on the average price of copper over the previous three
months.

The issue is rated B1 by Moody's Investors Service and BB-minus by Standard &
Poor's Corp.

Pioneer Finance Corp. offered $120 million of first mortgage bonds through
Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.

The issue matures in 1998 and was priced at par to yield 13.50%.

The bonds, guaranteed by Pioneer's parent, Sahara Casino Partners L.P., can be
called beginning in December 1991 at a price of 108. The issue is rated B1 by
Moody's Investors Service and B-plus by Standard & Poor's Corp.

In other news, the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corp., or Farmer Mac, said it
raised more than $20 million with its initial public offering of common stock,
which was priced this week.

The one million shares were priced at $20. Half the shares were sold only to
financial institutions participating in Farmer Mac programs and the other half
to members of the Farm Credit system.

First Boston Corp. was sole manager.

Congress created Farmer Mac in 1987 to help develop a secondary market for
agricultural loans, just as Ginnie Mae does in the residential mortgage market.

                     Mortgage Prices
                 GNMA  FNMA  FHLMC  Treas.
               10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 8 7/8s/98
 Price          99-25  99-24  99-06  98-20
 Change          UNCH    -03    -03    -01
 Yield          10.17  10.12  10.12   9.08
 Prior day      10.17  10.10  10.10   9.07
 52-week high   10.59  10.62  10.57   9.40
 52-week low     9.51   9.33   9.32   8.10


SECTION: MORTGAGE AND CORPORATE SECURITIES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 847 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Includes table

                      Copyright 1988 The Bond Buyer, Inc.


                              492 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            August 21, 2010 Saturday
                                 Every Edition

Proposed ban on private transfer fees could have hidden costs

BYLINE: Kenneth R. Harney

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 863 words


A federal agency is moving to prohibit controversial "private transfer fees" on
all mortgages funded by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. But its proposed ban might
extend to transfer fees routinely collected by community associations across the
country -- potentially forcing some of them to raise assessments on thousands of
unsuspecting homeowners.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), which oversees the two mortgage
giants in conservatorship, issued proposed "guidance" Aug. 12 that would
prohibit Fannie and Freddie plus the federal home loan banks from investing in
mortgages carrying private transfer-fee covenants.

Private transfer fees are starkly different from transfer fees imposed by local
governments to raise revenue for public services when properties change hands.
In a private transfer-fee arrangement, a developer or property owner records a
long-term covenant requiring payments to trustees or other private parties every
time the property is resold. The best-known and most controversial version of
this plan is being promoted by Freehold Capital Partners of New York. The
Freehold program, which the company says has attracted the participation of
"thousands" of development projects worth "hundreds of billions of dollars"
across the country, imposes a 1 percent fee that must be paid by the home seller
out of the settlement proceeds every time the house is resold during the next 99
years. The money flows from the closing to a trustee, who distributes shares of
it to private investors and others, including the developer in some cases.

Freehold's activities have raised widespread opposition -- 18 state legislatures
have either restricted or banned the use of private transfer fees in varying
forms. The proposal from the FHFA seeks to cut off federally related funding or
guarantees for the underlying conventional mortgages that support private
transfer-fee programs such as Freehold's.

Although under conservatorship, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac still account for a
large share of new conventional mortgages. Along with the Federal Housing
Administration, which had earlier indicated opposition to private transfer-fee
plans, the three entities are responsible for upwards of 95 percent of mortgage
market volume, according to industry estimates.

Edward J. DeMarco, acting director of the FHFA, said the proposed ban -- pending
a 60-day public comment period -- is necessary because the fees "may impede the
marketability and the valuation of properties," may raise homeownership costs
and "contribute to reduced transparency for consumers because the fees are not
disclosed by sellers and are difficult to discover through customary title
searches."

The wording of the ban, however, appears to reach well beyond Freehold-type fees
to include mortgages where covenants require payments to homeowners
associations, affordable housing groups, or other community or nonprofit
organizations upon each resale of the property.

Many new housing development projects come with not-for-profit homeowners
associations that collect assessments from owners to fund community improvements
and property management. Some also receive covenanted transfer-fee payments to
fund part of their work. Still others impose long-term transfer fees designed to
benefit specific charities.

For example, Lennar, a builder based in Miami, has imposed mandatory transfer
fees on thousands of homes constructed in its California developments. The fees,
which amount to one-20th of a percent of the price of the home each time it
resells, support the efforts of the Lennar Charitable Housing Foundation's
anti-homeless and affordable shelter activities, according to a spokesman for
the firm, Marshall Ames.

But the FHFA's proposal explicitly includes a broad spectrum of such programs in
the ban. It says "even where such fees are payable to a homeowners association,"
they are "likely to be unrelated to the value rendered and at times may apply
even if the property's value has significantly diminished since the time the
covenant was imposed."

Andrew Fortin, vice president of government affairs for the 30,000-member
Community Associations Institute, which represents homeowners and association
managers nationwide, said that banning investments in mortgages on properties
with transfer fees payable to associations "is potentially a big problem." Among
other negatives, it could force associations to increase annual assessments on
individual homeowners.

Fortin said his group "shares the concerns of FHFA about programs that create
neo-feudal arrangements" with outside investors, but believes the agency needs
to better distinguish between profit-motivated transfer fees and those that
benefit public interest and nonprofit organizations.

Meanwhile, a spokesman for Freehold Capital Partners deplored the FHFA's
proposal. Arguing that private transfer fees provide crucial financial support
for developers and their customers, Bryan J. Cohen, the company's executive vice
president and general counsel, said "this is precisely the wrong time to
eliminate a program that halts foreclosures, helps restart failed projects,
creates jobs and reduces upfront costs to American homebuyers."

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Prince George's County

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              493 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                   New Orleans CityBusiness (New Orleans, LA)

                           October 15, 2005 Saturday

Freddie Mac gives Hurricane Rita victims payment break

BYLINE: CityBusiness Staff Report

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 449 words


Single-family mortgage borrowers whose lives were disrupted by Hurricane Rita
may defer their October and November payments if their mortgages are owned by
Freddie Mac, the company announced. In addition to suspending the next two
months of mortgage payments, Freddie Mac said it was extending to victims of
Hurricane Rita the same special mortgage servicing relief policies it announced
to ease the financial pressures on borrowers with Freddie Mac-owned mortgages
after Hurricane Katrina.

The temporary suspension applies to Freddie Mac-owned single-family loans in
federally declared disaster areas where FEMA's Individual Assistance programs
are being made available. None of these temporary measures will affect Freddie
Mac's guarantee on its Mortgage Participation Certificates. "We are determined
to go the extra mile to help Texas and Louisiana borrowers cope with this year's
unusually destructive storms in the "Gulf of Mexico," said Freddie Mac Chairman
and CEO Richard F. Syron. Protecting investors while helping borrowers overcome
unexpected shocks like hurricanes Rita and Katrina is part of Freddie Mac's
mission to keep America's housing finance system affordable, stable and liquid."

After November, servicers have the discretion to continue suspending or reducing
payments on Freddie Mac-owned mortgages for a total of 12 months on a
case-by-case basis, depending upon each borrower's specific circumstances.
Servicers must make their determinations before the mortgages' December payments
due date. A servicer is the company to which borrowers send their monthly
mortgage payments.

For those borrowers who may have already made their October mortgage payments,
Freddie Mac is giving its servicers the discretion to automatically return
payments withdrawn through an automated clearinghouse but not yet reported to
Freddie Mac. Borrowers who made their October payments through other means have
the option to contact their servicers to request their payment's return. In
either case, borrowers will still be required to work with their servicer to
reinstate their mortgage once the temporary suspension period ends.

Freddie Mac also instructed its servicers:

* not to report to credit bureaus any reversed and suspended payments on Freddie
Mac-owned loans as a result of Hurricane Rita during the suspension period; * to
suspend all late fees, collection and foreclosure activities in the federally
declared major disaster areas during the suspension period; and * extend to all
National Guard members on state duty involved in Hurricane Rita recovery
operations mortgage relief comparable to the relief available under the
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Financing

                      Copyright 2005 Dolan Media Newswires
                                All Rights Reserved


                              494 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The Financial Express

                            February 28, 2011 Monday

Raising the FII investment cap on infra bonds is the best

BYLINE: fe Bureau

LENGTH: 302  words


PRADEEP JAIN,Chairman, Parsvnath Developers

I thank the finance minister for giving due importance to the second largest
employment generating sector of the Indian economy-the real estate sector. For
the real estate and infrastructure sectors, there are at least six major
influencers.

The hike in the priority home loan limit to R25 lakh from R20 lakh will help the
lower income group of buyers who plan to buy a home through bank loans. In last
year's Budget it was directed that every bank has to maintain 20% of its loans
to this priority section, this is definitely a boost for the sector as it will
increase demand. Liberalising the existing scheme of interest subvention of 1%
on housing loans by extending it to housing loans upto R15 lakh where the cost
of the house does not exceed R25 lakh is definitely a giant leap as it will
boost the demand for affordable housing.

The allocation of R58,000 crore to Bharat Nirman projects and the proposal to
set up a mortgage risk guarantee fund for rural housing is a very good move
towards rural development. As the project also includes development of rural
housing, this allocation is going to help the developers in setting up quality
housing projects in rural parts of India.The creation of an infrastructure debt
fund will certainly help us in securing regular flow of funds for our ongoing
and new projects. The plan to raise the investment limit for foreign
institutional investors (FII)  in corporate bonds raised by the infrastructure
sector up to $25 billion is the most important step taken by the  finance
minister in this Budget. This will solve the funding problem of the entire
sector up to a great extent.

As the government has  proposed a cut in the excise duty on cement and steel, it
will further help real estate developers in cutting input costs.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2011 The Financial Express, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              495 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 10, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Officer Faults Mortgage Giants for 'Orgy' of Nonprime Loans

BYLINE: By LYNNLEY BROWNING

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 857 words


Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac engaged in ''an orgy of junk mortgage development''
that turned the two mortgage-finance giants into vast repositories of subprime
and similarly risky loans, a former Fannie executive testified on Tuesday.

The mortgage development, which began in 2005 and lasted until at least last
year, happened as senior executives at the two government-sponsored enterprises
ignored repeated warnings from internal risk officers that they were delving too
deeply into dangerous territory, according to internal documents released at a
Congressional hearing in Washington. The two companies have been taken over by
the government.

The former executive, Edward J. Pinto, who was chief credit officer at Fannie
Mae, told the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee that the mortgage
giants now guarantee or hold 10.5 million nonprime loans worth $1.6 trillion --
one in three of all subprime loans, and nearly two in three of all so-called
Alt-A loans, often called ''liar loans.''

Such loans now make up 34 percent of the total single-family mortgage portfolios
at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, a level that will link them to eight million
foreclosures, or one in six, in coming years, Mr. Pinto said. The nonprime loans
''have turned the American dream of homeownership into the American nightmare of
foreclosure,'' he said.

The hearing was the latest by Congress on the collapse of the two companies,
which guarantee half of all mortgages nationwide and are the engine of the
housing market. The former chief executives of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
Daniel H. Mudd and Richard F. Syron, and their predecessors, Franklin D. Raines
and Leland C. Brendsel, faced pointed questioning from lawmakers.

Referring to what he called ''the total denial that's going on here today and
the refusal to answer simple questions,'' Representative Stephen F. Lynch,
Democrat of Massachusetts, told the executives that ''if you have accomplished
anything here today, you have made conservatorship look very, very good.''

But the testimony of Mr. Pinto, who was Fannie Mae's chief credit officer in the
late 1980s and who has studied the company's financial statements, and other
private analysts shed new light on the role of the housing giants in the
subprime crisis.

That role has not been fully recognized, in part because many subprime and Alt-A
loans show up in databases as prime loans.

Arnold Kling, an economist who once worked at Freddie Mac, testified that a
high-risk loan could be ''laundered,'' as he put it, by Wall Street and return
to the banking system as a triple-A-rated security for sale to investors,
obscuring its true risks.

Charles W. Calomiris, a finance professor at Columbia, testified that nobody saw
the crisis coming because the two mortgage giants ''adopted accounting practices
that masked their subprime and Alt-A lending,'' but he did not elaborate.

The former executives at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were questioned relentlessly
on why they did not see the collapse in housing prices coming and why they
ignored warnings from their risk officers about stepping up purchases of
nonprime loans.

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have long insisted that their involvement with
subprime and other nonprime loans has been minimal. Asked about the increased
purchases, Mr. Mudd insisted that ''Alt-A loans were essentially a subset of
overall A loans,'' and not subprime.

But internal e-mail the committee obtained told a different story.

A June 2005 presentation by Mr. Mudd described the crossroads faced by the
company, which at the time was focused on prime loans amid an expanding subprime
market. ''We face two stark choices: one, stay the course; two, meet the market
where the market is,'' he wrote. Another 2005 Fannie Mae document referred to
''underground efforts to develop a subprime infrastructure and modeling for
alternative markets.''

And in March 2006, Enrico Dallavecchia, Fannie Mae's chief risk officer, wrote
to Mr. Mudd to say, ''Dan, I have a serious problem with the control process
around subprime limits.''

Despite the concerns, Fannie Mae further increased its purchases of subprime
loans, according to a January 2007 internal presentation.

Freddie Mac's senior executives ignored similar warnings. Donald J. Bisenius, a
senior vice president, wrote in April 2004 to a colleague that ''we did no-doc
lending before, took inordinate losses and generated significant fraud cases.''

''I'm not sure what makes us think we're so much smarter this time around,'' he
wrote.

Housing analysts say that the former heads of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
increased their nonprime business because they felt pressure from the government
and advocacy groups to meet goals for affordable housing as well as pressure to
compete with Wall Street. But Mr. Pinto said one in five Alt-A loans in recent
years were made to investors, not to first-time home buyers.

Another lever was what Representative Christopher Shays, Republican  of
Connecticut, said was more than $175 million in lobbying fees the companies
spent over 10 years, in part to counter attempts at stronger oversight.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Former heads of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac testified in the
House Tuesday: left to right, Richard Syron, Daniel Mudd, Leland Brendsel and
Franklin Raines.(PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              496 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                October 16, 1995

Seattle District Bank Steps in to Aid FNMA-Navajo Mortgage Deal

BYLINE: BY MARK FOGARTY

SECTION: AFFORDABLE HOUSING; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: New York


The Federal Home Loan Bank of Seattle has stepped in to remove a roadblock from
the pending reservation trust land mortgage deal between the Federal National
Mortgage Association and the Navajo Nation.

The FHLB and Zions First National Bank of Salt Lake City have proposed that $
250,000 of Federal Home Loan Bank Affordable Housing Program funds be used for
credit enhancement for Navajo borrowers, many of whom will be low-or very
low-income.

Credit enhancement emerged as a Fannie Mae concern after the agency and the
Indian nation, the country's largest, came to an agreement in principal on the
deal, which would be the first to extend private mortgage credit to those living
on reservation trust land.

Since this kind of lending has never been done before, the loss exposure to
lenders and secondary agencies has never been measured.

But Zions was expected to have filed by Oct. 15 an application which would allow
AHP money to be used as a loan loss pool on a demonstration program of 50 units
on which Zions would make mortgages on Navajo reservation land and which it
would then sell to Fannie Mae.

Judy Dailey, community investment officer at the Seattle FHLB, said AHP money
has never been used for this purpose before and must be approved by the Federal
Housing Finance Board.

The money would be used as credit enhancement for a finite time period, she
said, since loan losses typically occur during the first few years of a
mortgage.

Any funds left after the credit enhancement period ends could then be
reinvested.

Ms. Dailey said the impetus for the proposal was to put in place "a piece that
was needed to make the deal work."

The $ 250,000 for 50 homes would replace an earlier AHP grant made to Zions for
$ 500,000 for 500 loans.  Zions was unable to put the money to work because of
the lack of a structure for conventional mortgages on tribal trust land.
Besides credit enhancement the money will be used for downpayment and closing
cost assistance.

The proposal came at a recent meeting in Aneth, Utah, on the Navajo reservation.
The Navajo mortgage initiative has been in the works since a similar "housing
summit" held in Utah in June of last year.

The FHLBs already have granted $ 1.6 million in AHP funds to three lenders who
are poised to participate in the program once it is approved by the Navajo
Nation, Fannie Mae and the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

Three district banks have jurisdictions on the Navajo Nation, which has 200,000
members and extends over an area the size of West Virginia.  The FHLB-Seattle
includes the Utah part of the reservation.  The FHLB-Dallas has jurisdiction
over the New Mexico part of the reservation, and the FHLB-San Francisco's
territory includes the Navajos' Arizona holdings.

Zions is one of the three AHP lenders.  The others are Norwest Bank of Arizona,
currently the only bank with offices on the reservation (Zions has just
announced plans for one) and First National Bank of Farmington, N.M.

Financial institutions currently will not extend mortgages on trust lands
because the land may not be used as collateral except by express consent of the
government, which holds it in trust for Indian tribes (this is why the BIA must
sign off on the deal).

The Fannie Mae-Navajo deal has been constructed to assauge the foreclosure
concerns of both lenders and tribes.  It will allow lenders for the first time
to perfect security agreements on the reservation properties to be mortgaged.
and the tribe may assume or find new borrowers in the case of mortgagor default,
thus giving the tribe the option not to lose any of its land.  The deal, part of
Fannie Mae's Native American Housing Initiative, presents a model that if
adopted will open private mortgage lending to the nearly one million persons who
live on the nation's trust lands.

In other housing news announced at the summit, the tribe said it will
participate in the HUD 184 mortgage program, which guarantees lender mortgage
outlays on reservations.  The program is the most successful government-private
effort on Indian mortgages, and has committed $ 22 million across the country so
far (see separate story, page 11).

The tribe also is establishing nonprofit housing and community development
corporations, with DNA-People's Legal Services in the lead, and the Community
Reinvestment Corp. will provide counseling services for potential Navajo
homeowners.

Federal Housing Administration commissioner Nicolas Retsinas, who attended the
meeting, pledged an effort to step up FHA 248 lending on the reservation.  He
also pledged to consult with tribal leaders "on potential changes to the section
248 processing procedures which would help facilitate its delivery and
implementation."

The mortgage insurance program has been little-used in Indian Country,
reportedly because of concerns about lands passing out of tribal control and
because of lack of construction financing.

FHA and the Department of Housing and Urban Development also pledged to hold
homeownership meetings in half of the Navajo chapters for each of the next two
years.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1995 Faulkner & Gray


                              497 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                               September 11, 1995

MBA Finds Upward Tick In Overdues, Reversing Trend

BYLINE: BY TED CORNWELL

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 660 words

DATELINE: Washington


Residential mortgage delinquencies increased in the second quarter, marking what
may be the end of a four-year trend toward lower delinquency rates.

After hitting a 22-year low in the first quarter, single-family mortgage
delinquencies increased 24 basis points in the second quarter.  On a seasonally
adjusted basis, 4.15% of single-family home loans were at least 30 days late in
the second quarter, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.

The delinquency rate increased for both conventional and government guaranteed
loans, and delinquencies edged up in all regions of the country.  However, the
overall delinquency rate was largely unchanged from a year ago, and the rate
remained near a two-decade low.

Most of the change was in the 30-day late category, which saw a 15 basis-point
increase from the first quarter.  The number of loans in the 60-day late
category increased three basis points; 90-day late delinquencies increased by
six basis points; and foreclosure starts increased by one basis point from the
first quarter.

Nationally, MBA executive vice president Warren Lasko said the trend toward
lower delinquency rates "almost definitely" has ended.

"What I think we see is the long-term decline in delinquencies is over.  We have
had about a four-year decline.  That decline is probably behind us," he said
during a news conference.

The huge volume of loans originated during the refinancing boom is entering its
period of peak risk for default.  Meanwhile, employment and income growth are
unlikely to be strong enough to push the delinquency rate lower.

Mr. Lasko said he anticipates that delinquency rates will show a "flat or
slightly upward trend" in future quarters.

While the delinquency increase was wide-spread, the West was hardest hit.  The
delinquency rate in the western region was up 44 basis points from the first
quarter to 3.67%.  However, that remained below the national average.

Because of its huge size, California is closely watched for delinquencies.  In
that state, 4.07% of home loans were at least 30 days late in the second
quarter, according to the MBA survey.

Nima Nattagh, an analyst for TRW Redi Property Data, said that the news is not
all bad out West.  While Southern California remains weaker than Northern
California, home values have stabilized in most of the state, and serious
delinquencies have declined in many metropolitan areas.

"The thing in California is that for the first time since 1991, foreclosures are
stabilizing and in some cases even declining," Mr. Nattagh said.

Other regions of the country also reported higher delinquencies.  The
delinquency rate in the Northeast was 4.36%, up 30 basis points from the first
quarter; in the North Central states the delinquency rate was 3.59%, up 23 basis
points; in the South the rate was 4.67%, up 18 basis points.

The second-quarter delinquency rate for conventional mortgages was 2.68%; for
Veterans Affairs guaranteed loans it was 6.38%; and for Federal Housing
Administration guaranteed loans it was 7.36%.  Data from the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corp. and the Federal National Mortgage Association show that they
benefited from slightly lower delinquencies this summer.  In June, Fannie Mae
reported that 0.55% of the residential loans it holds or guarantees were at
least 90-days past due, while Freddie Mac reported that 0.56% of its loans were
delinquent.  Both rates were down slightly from earlier in the year.

Delinquencies for adjustable rate mortgages were higher than for fixed-rate
mortgages.

At Fannie Mae, ARM delinquencies, at 1.19% of loans at least three months
overdue, were more than double the FRM delinquency rate of 0.5% in June.

At Freddie Mac, the ARM delinquency rate was 0.87% and the FRM rate was 0.52%.

The MBA is preparing to include separate ARM and FRM delinquency data in their
survey for future quarters.  Currently, they do not have separate data for ARMs
and FRMs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph, Residential Delinquencies, Source: Mortgage Bankers Assoc.

                         Copyright 1995 Faulkner & Gray


                              498 of 998 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2017 Thomson Financial, All Rights Reserved
                            Reuters Knowledge Direct

                                 March 27, 2017

                      Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh

                                  601 Grant St
                           PITTSBURGH,  PA 15219-4419
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: Main Phone: 1-412-2883400
URL: Home Page: http://www.fhlb-pgh.com/

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
PLACE OF INCORPORATION: Pennsylvania
LEGAL STATUS: Private
OPERATING STATUS: Active
EMPLOYEES: 206

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *



OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS
NAME            CURRENT TITLE (DATE)      OFFICER      DIRECTOR     AGE   SEX
                                          SINCE        SINCE
Mr. Winthrop    President, Chief          2009                      61    M
Watson          Executive Officer (2011)
Mr. John Darr   Independent Vice Chairman 2010         2008         70    M
                of the Board (2010)
Ms. Kristina    Chief Operating Officer   2004                      50    F
Williams        (2013)
Mr. Edward      Chief Accounting Officer  2013                      51    M
Weller          (2014)
Mr. Michael     Chief Risk Officer (2010) 2010                      53    M
Rizzo
Mr. Dana Yealy  General Counsel,          1991                      55    M
                Corporate Secretary
                (1991)
Mr. David       Chief Financial Officer,  2012                      50    M
Paulson         Managing Director -
                Capital Markets (2013)
Mr. John Mason  Chief Strategy Officer    2012         2009         60    M
                (2012)
Ms. Pamela      Director (2015)                        2015         50    F
Asbury
Mr. Joseph      Director (2013)                        2013         62    M
Blaston
Mr. William     Director (2012)                        2012         48    M
Marsh
Ms. Charlotte   Director (2011)                        2011         61    F
McLaughlin
Ms. Lynda       Director (2012)                        2011         62    F
Messick

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh (the Bank) is a government-sponsored
enterprise (GSE), engaged in raising funds in the capital markets at narrow
spreads to the United States Treasury yield curve. The Bank is a cooperative
institution, owned by financial institutions that are also its primary
customers. The Bank's primary business is to intermediate between the capital
markets and the housing market through member financial institutions. The Bank
provides credit for housing and community development through two primary
programs. First, it provides members with loans against the security of
residential mortgages and other types of collateral. Secondly, the Bank
purchases residential mortgage loans originated by or through member
institutions.

   The Bank offers other types of credit and non-credit products and services to
member institutions. These include letters of credit, interest rate exchange
agreements (interest rate swaps, caps, collars, floors, swaptions and similar
transactions), affordable housing grants, securities safekeeping, and deposit
products and services. The Bank issues debt to the public (consolidated
obligation bonds and discount notes) in the capital markets through the Office
of Finance (OF) and uses these funds to provide its member financial
institutions with a source of credit for these programs.

   The Bank makes advances on the security of pledged mortgage loans and other
eligible types of collateral. The Bank's RepoPlus advance products serve member
short-term liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2014, the total par value of
these advances was $14.3 billion, or 22.6% of the total advance portfolio. The
Mid-Term RepoPlus product assists members with managing intermediate-term
interest rate risk. To assist members with managing the basis risk, or the risk
of a change in the spread relationship between two indices, the Bank offers
adjustable-rate Mid-Term RepoPlus advances with maturity terms between three
months and three years. Adjustable-rate, Mid-Term RepoPlus advances can be
priced based on 1-month London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) or 3-month LIBOR
indices. As of December 31, 2014, the par value of Mid-Term RepoPlus advances
totaled $11.8 billion, or 18.7% of the total advance portfolio.

   For managing longer-term interest rate risk and to assist with
asset/liability management, the Bank offers long-term fixed-rate advances for
terms from one year to 30 years. Amortizing long-term fixed-rate advances can be
fully amortized on a monthly basis over the term of the loan or amortized
balloon-style, based on an amortization term longer than the maturity of the
loan. As of December 31, 2014, the par value of Core (Term) advances totaled
$35.1 billion, or 55.6% of the total advance portfolio.

   Some of the Bank's advances contain embedded options, which the member can
choose to exercise to have the right to prepay them on certain pre-determined
dates without a fee. As of December 31, 2014, the Bank had no Returnable
advances. Some of the Bank's advances contain embedded options, which the member
can sell to the Bank. If the option is exercised by the Bank (based on a
predetermined frequency), the member can choose to either repay the advance or
allow the advance to be converted into an adjustable-rate advance with a
predetermined spread. As of December 31, 2014, the par value of these
Convertible Select advances was $1.9 billion, or 3.1% of the total advance
portfolio.

   The Bank makes advances to members and eligible nonmember housing associates,
based upon the security of pledged mortgage loans and other eligible types of
collateral. At December 31, 2014, approximately 43% of the total member eligible
collateral (after collateral weighting) available to secure members' obligations
to the Bank was single-family, residential mortgage loans.

   Through community investment cash advance programs, such as the Affordable
Housing Program (AHP) and the Community Lending Program (CLP), members have
access to subsidized and other low-cost funding. Members use the funds from
these programs to create affordable rental and homeownership opportunities, and
for commercial and economic development activities.

   Lending Activities

   The Bank's loans portfolio includes 1-4 family residential first mortgage
loans; multi-family mortgage loans; 1-4 family residential second mortgage
loans; home equity lines of credit; and commercial real estate loans. The Bank
offers the Banking on Business loan program to members, which is specifically
targeted to small businesses for both start-up and expansion. Its loan portfolio
had a total loan of $2.86 billion, as of December 31, 2014.

   Investment Activities

   The Bank maintains a portfolio of investments for three main purposes:
liquidity, collateral for derivative counterparties and additional earnings. For
liquidity purposes, the Bank invests in shorter-term instruments, including
overnight Federal funds and overnight reverse repurchase agreements. In
addition, the Bank also invests in other short-term instruments, including term
Federal funds, interest-earning certificates of deposit. The Bank maintains a
short-term investment portfolio to provide funds to meet the credit needs of its
members and to maintain liquidity. The Bank also maintains a secondary liquidity
portfolio, which consists primarily of the United States agency debentures and
the United States Treasury securities that can be financed under normal market
conditions in securities repurchase agreement transactions to raise additional
funds. At December 31, 2014, the Bank held $16.5 billion of total investment
securities, including trading, available-for-sale (AFS) and held-to-maturity
(HTM) investment securities, as well as interest-bearing deposits and Federal
funds sold.

   Sources of Funds

   The Bank offers several types of deposit programs to its members, including
demand, overnight and term deposits. Noninterest-bearing demand and overnight
deposits include funds collected by members pending disbursement to the mortgage
loan holders, as well as member funds deposited at the Federal Reserve Bank
(FRB). The primary source of funds for the Bank is the sale of debt securities,
known as consolidated obligations. These funds are primarily used to provide
advances, purchase mortgages from members through the Mortgage Partnership
Finance (MPF) Program and purchase certain investments. The consolidated
obligations are issued as both bonds and discount notes, depending on maturity.
Consolidated obligations are the joint and several obligations of the federal
home loan (FHLBanks), backed by the financial resources of the 12 FHLBanks.
Consolidated obligations are not obligations of the United States government,
and the United States government does not guarantee them. The Bank's total
deposits were $641.2 million, as of December 31, 2014.

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
NAICS CODES:
52211 - Commercial Banking
PRIMARY SIC:
6111 - Federal & Fed.-Sponsored Credit
SECONDARY SIC:
6029 - Commercial Banks, Nec
COMPETITORS:

     ·    Federal National Mortgage Assctn Fnni Me
     ·    Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp


* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: December 31, 2016

MOST RECENT EXCHANGE RATE:  1.0
CHART OF ACCOUNTS:  Bank
ACCOUNTING STANDARD:  U.S. GAAP
LATEST AVAILABLE ANNUAL:  20170327

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Cash & Due from Banks               80,396,309      76,881,740      65,859,486
Interest-earning Deposits                5,909           6,075           6,782
FedFundsSold/ScrtyPurch              5,222,000       4,980,000       4,585,000
UnderResaleAgrmt
Trading Account Assets                 395,247         394,737         281,016
Other Short Term Investments            81,891          65,855          36,217
Securities Held                      2,566,135       2,663,304       3,246,788
Securities for Sale                  9,038,081       8,099,894       8,408,835
Total Investment Securities         11,604,216      10,763,198      11,655,623
Other Earning Assets, Total         17,309,263      16,209,865      16,564,638
Net Loans                            3,403,003       3,098,131       3,134,901
Property/Plant/Equipment,                9,762          10,687          10,446
Total - Net
Interest Receivable                    124,247         107,345          86,109
Other Assets                            17,492          22,015          21,496
Other Assets, Total                    141,739         129,360         107,605
Total Assets                       101,260,076      96,329,783      85,677,076



LIABILITIES ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Accounts Payable                       117,183          92,765         103,151
Non-Interest Bearing Deposits           53,461          50,469          39,726
Interest Bearing Deposits              505,430         635,468         601,454
Total Deposits                         558,891         685,937         641,180
Long Term Debt                      95,656,372      90,876,297      80,772,628
Other Liabilities                      133,715         173,183         157,161
Other Liabilities, Total               133,715         173,183         157,161
Total Liabilities                   96,466,161      91,828,182      81,674,120



EQUITY ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Common Stock                         3,755,411       3,539,648       3,040,976
Common Stock, Total                  3,755,411       3,539,648       3,040,976
Retained Earnings (Accumulated         986,200         881,270         837,547
Deficit)
Other Comprehensive Income              52,296          80,683         124,433
Other Equity, Total                     52,296          80,683         124,433
Total Equity                         4,793,915       4,501,601       4,002,956
Total Liabilities &                101,260,076      96,329,783      85,677,076
Shareholders' Equity
Total Common Shares                     37,554          35,396          30,410
Outstanding



FOOTNOTE
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Other Property/Plant/Equipment           9,762          10,687          10,446
- Net
Non-Curr Derivative Liab.               14,010          42,508          58,964
Hedging, Suppl

* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Interest & Fees on Loans               729,462         469,989         402,218
Interest & Dividends on                216,393         207,256         211,927
Investment Secs.
FedFundsSold/ScrtyPurch                 27,227           8,195           3,929
UnderResaleAgrmt
Interest on Deposits                     1,276             348             351
Trading Account Interest                11,265           9,784           7,663
Interest Income, Bank                  985,623         695,572         626,088
Interest on Deposit                      1,694             274             220
Interest on Other Borrowings           635,007         377,482         342,766
Total Interest Expense                 636,701         377,756         342,986
Loan Loss Provision                      1,261           (167)         (4,129)
Credit Card Fees                        24,662          23,655          17,383
Dealer Trading Account Profit            (583)           1,598          22,408
Other Revenue                         (12,005)           5,820        (35,020)
Non-Interest Income, Bank               24,426          29,224           4,771
Labor & Related Expenses              (46,575)        (43,146)        (43,098)
Litigation Expense                         545          15,263          70,896
Other Expense                         (66,040)        (62,794)        (64,029)
Non-Interest Expense, Bank           (112,070)        (90,677)        (36,231)
Net Income Before Taxes                288,941         256,530         255,771



EXTRAORDINARY ('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Income Available to Com Incl           260,017         256,530         255,771
ExtraOrd

* * * * * * * * * * CASHFLOW STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


('000 USD)
                                    12/31/2016      12/31/2015      12/31/2014
Net Income/Starting Line               260,017         256,530         255,771
Other Non-Cash Items                  (58,708)         (3,443)          18,823
Non-Cash Items                        (58,708)         (3,443)          18,823
Other Assets                          (17,710)        (22,657)           8,363
Other Liabilities                       21,194          17,763          26,562
Investment Securities,                  12,081       (113,721)        (51,717)
Gains/Losses
Changes in Working Capital              15,565       (118,615)        (16,792)
Cash from Operating Activities         191,692         134,472         257,802
Purchase of Fixed Assets               (2,329)         (3,961)         (3,923)
Capital Expenditures                   (2,329)         (3,961)         (3,923)
Sale/Maturity of Investment          3,568,794       4,574,951       2,569,134
Purchase of Investments            (4,037,807)     (3,701,009)     (3,333,306)
Loans                              (2,818,361)    (11,187,714)    (13,322,522)
Foreclosed Real Estate                  11,333          11,050          17,748
Other Investing Cash Flow            (126,111)       (336,348)     (1,578,587)
Other Investing Cash Flow          (3,001,817)    (10,639,070)    (15,646,633)
Items, Total
Cash from Investing Activities     (3,804,146)    (10,643,031)    (15,650,556)
Deposits                             (129,451)          35,376        (48,945)
Other Financing Cash Flow             (18,504)        (32,218)        (32,699)
Financing Cash Flow Items            (147,955)           3,158        (81,644)
Cash Dividends Paid - Common         (155,079)       (212,807)       (103,943)
Total Cash Dividends Paid            (155,079)       (212,807)       (103,943)
Sale/Issuance of Common              3,573,624       3,153,069       2,135,063
Repurchase/Retirement of           (3,358,698)     (2,648,930)     (2,055,684)
Common
Common Stock, Net                      214,926         504,139          79,379
Issuance (Retirement) of               214,926         504,139          79,379
Stock, Net
Long Term Debt Issued              173,494,557     189,955,615     157,779,924
Long Term Debt Reduction         (168,583,354)   (179,815,713)   (142,951,176)
Long Term Debt, Net                  4,911,203      10,139,902      14,828,748
Issuance (Retirement) of Debt,       4,911,203      10,139,902      14,828,748
Net
Cash from Financing Activities       4,823,095      10,434,392      14,722,540
Net Change in Cash                   1,210,641        (74,167)       (670,214)
Net Cash - Beginning Balance         2,376,964       2,451,131       3,121,345
Net Cash - Ending Balance            3,587,605       2,376,964       2,451,131
Cash Interest Paid                     553,710         407,926         378,194

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
SECURITY TYPE: Ordinary Shares
EXCHANGE: Not Available
TOTAL SHARES OUTSTANDING: 35,565,000
LISTING TYPE:  Ordinary Shares

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017


                              499 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                             August 20, 2010 Friday
                                   C1 Edition

Ban on private transfer fees could cost homeowners

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 879 words


WASHINGTON -- A federal agency is moving to prohibit controversial "private
transfer fees" on all mortgages funded by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. But its
proposed ban may extend to transfer fees routinely collected by community
associations across the country -- potentially forcing some of them to raise
assessments on thousands of unsuspecting homeowners.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees the two mortgage giants in
conservatorship, issued proposed "guidance" Aug. 12 that would prohibit Fannie
and Freddie plus the federal home loan banks from investing in mortgages
carrying private transfer fee covenants.

Private transfer fees are starkly different from those imposed by local
government authorities to raise revenue for public services when properties
change hands. In a private transfer fee arrangement, a developer or property
owner records a long-term covenant requiring payments to trustees or other
private parties every time a resale occurs.

The best-known and most controversial version of this plan is being promoted by
Freehold Capital Partners of New York. The Freehold program, which the company
says has attracted the participation of "thousands" of development projects
worth "hundreds of billions of dollars" around the country, imposes a 1 percent
fee that must be paid by the home seller out of the settlement proceeds every
time the house is resold during the next 99 years. The money flows from the
closing to a trustee, who distributes shares of it to private investors and
others, including the developer in some cases.

Freehold's activities have raised widespread opposition -- 18 state legislatures
have either restricted or banned the use of private transfer fees in varying
forms. The proposal from the FHFA seeks to cut off federally related funding or
guarantees for the underlying conventional mortgages that support private
transfer fee programs such as Freehold.

Though under conservatorship, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac still account for a
large share of new conventional mortgages. Along with the Federal Housing
Administration, which had earlier indicated opposition to private transfer fee
plans, the three entities are responsible for upward of 95 percent of mortgage
market volume, according to industry estimates.

Edward J. DeMarco, acting director of the FHFA, said the proposed ban -- pending
a 60-day public comment period -- is necessary because the fees "may impede the
marketability and the valuation of properties," may raise homeownership costs
and "contribute to reduced transparency for consumers because the fees are not
disclosed by sellers and are difficult to discover through customary title
searches."

The wording of the ban, however, appears to reach well beyond Freehold-type fees
to include mortgages where covenants require payments to homeowners
associations, affordable housing groups or other community or nonprofit
organizations, upon each resale of the property.

Many new housing development projects come with not-for-profit homeowners
associations that collect assessments from owners to fund community improvements
and property management. Some also receive covenanted transfer fee payments to
fund part of their work. Still others impose long-term transfer fees designed to
benefit specific charities.

For example, Lennar Corp., a homebuilder based in Miami, has imposed mandatory
transfer fees on thousands of homes constructed in its California projects. The
fees, which amount to one-20th of a percent of the price of the home each time
it resells, support the efforts of the Lennar Charitable Housing Foundation's
anti-homeless and affordable shelter activities, according to a spokesman for
the firm, Marshall Ames.

But the FHFA's proposal explicitly includes a broad spectrum of such programs in
the ban. It says "even where such fees are payable to a homeowners association,"
they are "likely to be unrelated to the value rendered and at times may apply
even if the property's value has significantly diminished since the time the
covenant was imposed."

Andrew Fortin, vice president of government affairs for the 30,000-member
Community Associations Institute, which represents homeowners and association
managers nationwide, said that banning investments in mortgages on properties
with transfer fees payable to associations "is potentially a big problem." Among
other negatives, it could force associations to increase annual assessments on
individual homeowners.

Fortin said his group "shares the concerns of FHFA about programs that create
neo-feudal arrangements" with outside investors, but believes the agency needs
to better distinguish between profit-motivated transfer fees and those that
benefit public interest and nonprofit organizations.

Meanwhile, a spokesman for Freehold Capital Partners deplored the FHFA's
proposal. Arguing that private transfer fees provide crucial financial support
for developers and their customers, Bryan J. Cohen, the company's executive vice
president and general counsel, said "this is precisely the wrong time to
eliminate a program that halts foreclosures, helps restart failed projects,
creates jobs and reduces upfront costs to American homebuyers."

* Write to Ken Harney at P.O. Box 15281, Chevy Chase, MD 20815 or via e-mail at
kenharney@earthlink.net

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              500 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                             August 20, 2010 Friday
                                   F1 Edition

Ban on private transfer fees could cost homeowners

SECTION: REAL ESTATE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 879 words


WASHINGTON -- A federal agency is moving to prohibit controversial "private
transfer fees" on all mortgages funded by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. But its
proposed ban may extend to transfer fees routinely collected by community
associations across the country -- potentially forcing some of them to raise
assessments on thousands of unsuspecting homeowners.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees the two mortgage giants in
conservatorship, issued proposed "guidance" Aug. 12 that would prohibit Fannie
and Freddie plus the federal home loan banks from investing in mortgages
carrying private transfer fee covenants.

Private transfer fees are starkly different from those imposed by local
government authorities to raise revenue for public services when properties
change hands.

In a private transfer fee arrangement, a developer or property owner records a
long-term covenant requiring payments to trustees or other private parties every
time a resale occurs.

The best-known and most controversial version of this plan is being promoted by
Freehold Capital Partners of New York. The Freehold program, which the company
says has attracted the participation of "thousands" of development projects
worth "hundreds of billions of dollars" around the country, imposes a 1 percent
fee that must be paid by the home seller out of the settlement proceeds every
time the house is resold during the next 99 years. The money flows from the
closing to a trustee, who distributes shares of it to private investors and
others, including the developer in some cases.

Freehold's activities have raised widespread opposition -- 18 state legislatures
have either restricted or banned the use of private transfer fees in varying
forms. The proposal from the FHFA seeks to cut off federally related funding or
guarantees for the underlying conventional mortgages that support private
transfer fee programs such as Freehold.

Though under conservatorship, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac still account for a
large share of new conventional mortgages. Along with the Federal Housing
Administration, which had earlier indicated opposition to private transfer fee
plans, the three entities are responsible for upward of 95 percent of mortgage
market volume, according to industry estimates.

Edward J. DeMarco, acting director of the FHFA, said the proposed ban -- pending
a 60-day public comment period -- is necessary because the fees "may impede the
marketability and the valuation of properties," may raise homeownership costs
and "contribute to reduced transparency for consumers because the fees are not
disclosed by sellers and are difficult to discover through customary title
searches."

The wording of the ban, however, appears to reach well beyond Freehold-type fees
to include mortgages where covenants require payments to homeowners
associations, affordable housing groups or other community or nonprofit
organizations, upon each resale of the property.

Many new housing development projects come with not-for-profit homeowners
associations that collect assessments from owners to fund community improvements
and property management. Some also receive covenanted transfer fee payments to
fund part of their work. Still others impose long-term transfer fees designed to
benefit specific charities.

For example, Lennar Corp., a homebuilder based in Miami, has imposed mandatory
transfer fees on thousands of homes constructed in its California projects.

The fees, which amount to one-20th of a percent of the price of the home each
time it resells, support the efforts of the Lennar Charitable Housing
Foundation's anti-homeless and affordable shelter activities, according to a
spokesman for the firm, Marshall Ames.

But the FHFA's proposal explicitly includes a broad spectrum of such programs in
the ban. It says "even where such fees are payable to a homeowners association,"
they are "likely to be unrelated to the value rendered and at times may apply
even if the property's value has significantly diminished since the time the
covenant was imposed."

Andrew Fortin, vice president of government affairs for the 30,000-member
Community Associations Institute, which represents homeowners and association
managers nationwide, said that banning investments in mortgages on properties
with transfer fees payable to associations "is potentially a big problem." Among
other negatives, it could force associations to increase annual assessments on
individual homeowners.

Fortin said his group "shares the concerns of FHFA about programs that create
neo-feudal arrangements" with outside investors, but believes the agency needs
to better distinguish between profit-motivated transfer fees and those that
benefit public interest and nonprofit organizations.

Meanwhile, a spokesman for Freehold Capital Partners deplored the FHFA's
proposal. Arguing that private transfer fees provide crucial financial support
for developers and their customers, Bryan J. Cohen, the company's executive vice
president and general counsel, said "this is precisely the wrong time to
eliminate a program that halts foreclosures, helps restart failed projects,
creates jobs and reduces upfront costs to American homebuyers."

* Write to Ken Harney at P.O. Box 15281, Chevy Chase, MD 20815 or via e-mail at
kenharney@earthlink.net

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.
