
                              501 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 27, 1985 Thursday

U.S. lumber imports debate   aiding bilateral trade critics

BYLINE: RONALD ANDERSON; GAM

LENGTH: 1006 words


RONALD ANDERSON
 The heat building up in Washington over U.S. imports of lumber from
 Canada, if it does nothing else, promises to solidify the opposition of
 Canadian critics to a new bilateral trade deal with the United States.

Canadian producers have increased their share of the U.S. market to
 about 31 per cent from 28 per cent in the late 1970s - and mills in the
 Northwest states are hurting. They and the politicians who represent them
 in Congress claim their competitive difficulties result from the
 relatively low prices charged Canadian producers for standing timber on
 Crown lands.

A U.S. tribunal ruled two years ago that, while Canadian stumpage
 practices differ from those in the United States, the lower fees do not
 constitute a subsidy on Canada's lumber exports. But this has not silenced
 the demands in Congress for restraints on lumber imports or an increase in
 Canadian stumpage fees.

The lumber dispute raises in an acute form one of the most troublesome
 issues involved in any move toward a bilateral trade liberalization
 agreement between the two countries - the hazy and ill-defined nature of
 subsidies, and the effect any real or fancied subsidies might have in
 attracting countervailing duties.

Clayton Yeutter, the nominated U.S. trade representative, is reported
 to have told the Senate Finance Committee this week that Canada and the
 United States cannot proceed on the broad issue of trade liberalization
 while such sensitive questions as the lumber dispute remain unresolved. If
 Canada wants freer trade, he suggested, it will first have to move on the
 U.S. complaints about lumber imports.

The lumber dispute, however, is only one of a very large number of
 situations in which charges of subsidies and unfair competition may be
 raised. The U.S. Commerce Department's International Trade Administration
 has satisfied itself that Canada's stumpage fees do not constitute a
 subsidy and that other government programs in Canada in which a subsidy
 element does exist for lumber producers are too insignificant (less than
 0.5 per cent of sales value) to warrant countervailing duties.

But Abraham Rotstein, professor of economics at the University of
 Toronto, cites estimates that the total value of all government grants and
 special contributions to Canadian businesses would reach an annual total
 of $4.5- billion.
    "If any of these programs fail to pass the American test for 'fair
 trade,' countervailing duties would be applied and thus would defeat or
 obstruct the purpose of the free trade exercise," he said in The Economic
 Constraints of a Free Trade Treaty, a policy study published by the U of
 T's Institute for Policy Analysis.

Mr. Rotstein says U.S. companies that have been injured by the flood of
 lower- priced imports "have tended to see subsidies everywhere in the
 world" rather than putting the blame for their troubles on the high-priced
 U.S. dollar, where it belongs. They have initiated a microscopic hunt for
 subsidies that they say have been unfairly provided by foreign governments
 to promote exports.

What angers Mr. Rotstein particularly is his judgment that the U.S.
 system is not even-handed in its pursuit of "unfair" subsidies - its own
 home-grown subsidies evidently are more acceptable than those of other
 countries. "In the case of Canadian pork, for example, it was sufficient
 to prove that the Canadian Government had provided subsidies through its
 marketing arrangements and irrelevant to the case that Americans had
 subsidized their pork products as well. This is one of the many features
 of American administrative and legal practices that we will have to face
 (under a freer trade regime)."
    The cost of obtaining "secure access" to the U.S. market, Mr. Rotstein
 suggested, might well be the dismantling of Canada's industrial and
 incentive programs, agricultural market boards, subsidies to fish, grain
 and energy, and subsidized efforts to catch up on research and
 development. Small business programs and regional development efforts
 might have to go in the interest of reducing the number of targets for
 U.S. companies to shoot at when they go looking for subsidies lying hidden
 in Canadian exports.
    "The price for the 'secure access' to the American market on which we
 are so intent is the silent American presence at the table of virtually
 every domestic negotiation and decision that we shall make in the field of
 industrial policy. . . . The fewer industrial programs we have, the less
 vulnerable we will be to American non- tariff barriers."
    Mr. Rotstein's warnings about the perils of entering a free trade
 arrangement with the United States may be dismissed by some as the
 excessively alarmist outcries of an economic nationalist. Perhaps it
 actually would be in the national interest to shed some of the government
 interventionist programs that might cause difficulties under a bilateral
 trade agreement, even one that fell short of free trade.

Still, the U of T economist has a point when he argues that Canada
 needs to preserve some freedom of action to adopt policies aimed at
 helping the country's industry to adjust to the massive shift in the
 structure of manufacturing that is occurring throughout the world, and
 that is causing the migration of industries, for example, to Southeast
 Asia. "This is hardly the time," he said, "to foreclose our options."
  Agreement needed
   At the very least, even if industrial subsidies are held to confer an
 unfair advantage on their recipients, there needs to be closer agreement
 than exists at present on what constitutes a subsidy. Mr. Rotstein said it
 will be difficult for Canada to come to terms with the U.S. conception of
 a subsidy - particularly because that definition itself is imprecise.
    "If the restless mood of Congress erupts into more protectionist
 legislation, the term 'subsidy' may be stretched over a very wide area
 indeed, and may offer an endless field day for lawyers and legal
 tribunals."
    The lumber dispute indicates that this fear should not be dismissed
 lightly by the Canadian negotiators.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1985 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              502 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                             The Hollywood Reporter

                             May 16, 2007 Wednesday

U.K. tax credit gives indies stake in films

BYLINE: Stuart Kemp

LENGTH: 454  words


A triumvirate of the biggest public funders in British movies -- BBC Films,
FilmFour and the U.K. Film Council -- have agreed to rules to give indie
producers a financial stake in their movies, the trio said Tuesday.

The three, who among them invest more than £40 million ($80 million) annually in
moviemaking, said that producers will get "an equity stake" in the movies in
which the trio invest.

BBC Films, FilmFour, the Film Council and producers trade body PACT have spent
the past few months hammering out a deal to give producers a position against
the new-look U.K. tax credit attached to projects.

They said the new system means U.K. production firms will be able to "hold a
significant interest in their own films and, as a consequence, be able to
attract commercial investment into their companies to the benefit of the whole
of the U.K. film industry,."

In practical terms, the three have agreed to endorse the principle that in every
British film in which they participate, the net value of the U.K. tax credit
created should be treated as the U.K. producer's equity share in the film,
recouping and participating, wherever possible, on a pro-rata, pound-for-pound
basis with other equity funding.

Said BBC Films chief David Thompson: "BBC Films is really reliant on the talent
and competence of British producers. We have a great, great community of
producers, and for everyone's sake we really need them to flourish."

Added Tessa Ross, Channel 4 controller of film and drama: "At FilmFour we need
our producing partners to be strong, and we hope that this initiative will boost
the entire sector and allow producers to move onto even bigger and better things
... with us, hopefully."

U.K. Film Council CEO John Woodward described the agreement as "a real step
change" for British indie producers.

"For the first time, we will all start with the principle that the net value of
the tax break -- around 10%-18% of the negative cost of the picture -- belongs
to the producer, not the film's financiers," he said.

But Woodward issued a word of warning. "We still have to make our numbers add
up," he said, "but this is a big shift in attitude and approach from the old
sale-and-leaseback days where the tax subsidy was used solely to the benefit of
the financiers to reduce their investment."

Rebecca O'Brien, who produced last year's Palme d'Or winner "The Wind That
Shakes the Barley" and is acting deputy film chair at PACT, said the initiative
"presents us with a unique opportunity to begin to build viable businesses and
to become effective partners in our industry."

She added: "With the public funders standing side by side with the production
sector, we now hope to see properly capitalized companies begin to emerge."

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Print

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                    Copyright 2007 VNU Business Media, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              503 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Variety

                         March 27, 2006 - April 2, 2006

SLITHER

BYLINE: JOE LEYDON

SECTION: FILM REVIEWS; Pg. 51

LENGTH: 857 words


A Universal release of a Universal Pictures and Gold Circle Films presentation
of a Strike Entertainment production. Produced by Paul Brooks, Eric Newman.
Executive producers, Marc Abraham, Thomas A. Bliss, Norm Waitt, Scott Niemeyer.
Co-producer: Jeff Levine.
  Directed, written by James Gunn. Camera (color), Gregory Middleton; editor,
John Axelrad ; music, Tyler Bates; production designer, Andrew Neskoromny; art
director, Michael Norman Wong; costume designer, Patricia Louise Hargreaves;
sound (Dolby Digital/SDDS/DTS), William Skinner; visual effects supervising
producer, Joan Collins Carey; visual effects supervisor, John Gajdecki; makeup
and creature effects, Todd Masters, Dan Rebert ; associate producer, Jonathan
Shore; assistant director, Bryan C. Knight; casting, Eyde Belasco. Reviewed at
SXSW Film Festival (Round Midnight), Austin, March 17, 2006. MPAA Rating: R.
Running time: 94 MIN.
Bill Pardy ..... Nathan Fillion
Starla Grant ..... Elizabeth Banks
Jack MacReady ..... Gregg Henry
Grant Grant ..... Michael Rooker
Kylie Strutemyer ..... Tania Saulnier
Brenda Gutierrez ..... Brenda James
Wally ..... Don Thompson

   Slither" is a gleefully nasty and ingeniously twisted horror-comedy that
pits a populace of heavily armed but mostly clueless rednecks against
flesh-eating zombies, slimy extraterrestrial slugs and an acid-spewing,
multitentacled mutant. Call it "Night of the Living Dead" meets "Tremors."
Scripter James Gunn infuses the pic, his debut feature as a director, with the
exuberance of a movie geek given carte blanche to play fast and loose with the
cliches and conventions of his favorite films. Result is a rock-the-house
crowd-pleaser for genre aficionados, though its breakout potential appears
iffy.
  Gunn --- a Troma Entertainment alumnus whose writing credits range from
"Scooby Doo" to 2004's "Dawn of the Dead" remake --- deftly balances broad
humor, rude shocks and gross-out special effects for a fang-in-cheek
extravaganza that often feels like a slightly more upscale version of
cheapie-creepy Troma product.
  Wheelsy, the kind of small town where the start of hunting season is
celebrated as a local holiday, is where Grant Grant (Michael Rooker), a wealthy
but none-too-refined businessman, somehow managed to claim Starla (Elizabeth
Banks), a local beauty, as his trophy wife. Trouble is, Starla has grown tired
of fulfilling her conjugal duties.
  Stung by Starla's latest rejection, Grant seeks solace in a seedy bar, where
tarty Brenda (Brenda James) proves far more receptive to his sex appeal.
Unfortunately, when the couple decides to take a walk in the nearby woods, they
come across a recently landed meteorite. Something emerges from within --- and
plunges into Grant.
  For the first half-hour or so, "Slither" seems to be a seriocomic riff on
sci-fi thrillers in which hapless humans are infected by extraterrestrial
contamination or manmade maladies. As such, the pic often echoes David
Cronenberg's "Rabid" and John Carpenter's remake of "The Thing."
  But by the time Grant evolves into a toothy, slime-encrusted behemoth with a
pronounced resemblance to a squid, and Brenda expands to become a humongous
breeder of malignant slugs, it's clear Gunn won't be content to reference only
one kind of monster. Much to the great distress of dry-witted police chief Bill
Pardy (Nathan Fillion) and blowhard mayor Jack MacReady (Gregg Henry), the
victims of the malignant slugs won't stay dead. Rather, the dearly departed
reawaken as staggering, shambling zombies, mentally connected to Grant, an
increasingly more powerful (and more disgusting) entity.
  "Slither" begins briskly, gradually accelerates and eventually achieves a
breakneck momentum that makes the wild ride even more exhilarating. Here and
there, though, pic slows down for a clever bit of throwaway lunacy, like the
revelation that Wheelsy has a karaoke bar.
  The special effects are a nifty mix of old-school prosthetics and high-tech
CGI, making for a few genuinely shocking moments amid the farcical facade.
Overall tech values are smartly dedicated to making "Slither" appear polished,
but not too polished, so it can impress without straying too far from its
B-movie roots.
  The well-cast actors --- including Tania Saulnier as a feisty teen whose
family gets slugged --- go just far enough over the top to maintain the
jokey/scary tone without becoming cartoonish. Fillion is particularly amusing
while delivering wisecracks and ironic asides with the same sly spin he brought
to cheeky dialogue in the cult fave "Firefly" TV series (and, more recently,
its "Serenity" feature spinoff). For all his funny moments, however, Fillion
also rises to the challenge of being, relatively speaking, the straight man, or
at least the pic's voice of sanity. Henry gets big laughs with a
much-bigger-than-life approach. And Rooker is surprisingly sympathetic even as
his character turns into a special effect.
  Incidentally, the film has absolutely nothing to do with Howard Zieff's 1973
pic of the same name, starring James Caan and Sally Kellerman. Latter also was
a comedy but had no slugs to speak of and nary a single zombie.


LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Reed Elsevier Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              504 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Daily Variety

                             March 20, 2006 Monday

Slither

BYLINE: JOE LEYDON

SECTION: REVIEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 858 words


A Universal release of a Universal Pictures and Gold Circle Films presentation
of a Strike Entertainment production. Produced by Paul Brooks, Eric Newman.
Executive producers, Marc Abraham, Thomas A. Bliss, Norm Waitt, Scott Niemeyer.
Co-producer: Jeff Levine.
   Directed, written by James
Gunn.
Camera (color), Gregory Middleton; editor, John Axelrad ; music, Tyler Bates;
production designer, Andrew Neskoromny; art director, Michael Norman Wong;
costume designer, Patricia Louise Hargreaves; sound (Dolby Digital/SDDS/DTS),
William Skinner; visual effects supervising producer, Joan Collins Carey;
visual effects supervisor, John Gajdecki; makeup and creature effects, Todd
Masters, Dan Rebert ; associate producer, Jonathan Shore; assistant director,
Bryan C. Knight; casting, Eyde Belasco. Reviewed at SXSW Film Festival (Round
Midnight), Austin, March 17, 2006. MPAA Rating: R. Running time: 94 MIN.
Bill Pardy .....
Nathan Fillion
Starla Grant .....
Elizabeth Banks
Jack MacReady ..... Gregg Henry
Grant Grant ..... Michael Rooker
Kylie Strutemyer ..... Tania Saulnier
Brenda Gutierrez ..... Brenda James
Wally ..... Don Thompson
"Slither" is a gleefully nasty and ingeniously twisted horror-comedy that pits
a populace of heavily armed but mostly clueless rednecks against flesh-eating
zombies, slimy extraterrestrial slugs and an acid-spewing, multitentacled
mutant. Call it "Night of the Living Dead" meets "Tremors." Scripter James
Gunn
infuses the pic, his debut feature as a director, with the exuberance of a
movie geek given carte blanche to play fast and loose with the cliches and
conventions of his favorite films. Result is a rock-the-house crowd-pleaser for
genre aficionados, though its breakout potential appears iffy.

Gunn
--- a Troma Entertainment alumnus whose writing credits range from "Scooby Doo"
to 2004's "Dawn of the Dead" remake --- deftly balances broad humor, rude
shocks and gross-out special effects for a fang-in-cheek extravaganza that
often feels like a slightly more upscale version of cheapie-creepy Troma
product.
   Wheelsy, the kind of small town where the start of hunting season is
celebrated as a local holiday, is where Grant Grant (Michael Rooker), a wealthy
but none-too-refined businessman, somehow managed to claim Starla (
Elizabeth Banks
), a local beauty, as his trophy wife. Trouble is, Starla has grown tired of
fulfilling her conjugal duties.
   Stung by Starla's latest rejection, Grant seeks solace in a seedy bar, where
tarty Brenda (Brenda James) proves far more receptive to his sex appeal.
Unfortunately, when the couple decides to take a walk in the nearby woods, they
come across a recently landed meteorite. Something emerges from within --- and
plunges into Grant.
   For the first half-hour or so, "Slither" seems to be a seriocomic riff on
sci-fi thrillers in which hapless humans are infected by extraterrestrial
contamination or manmade maladies. As such, the pic often echoes David
Cronenberg's "Rabid" and John Carpenter's remake of "The Thing."
   But by the time Grant evolves into a toothy, slime-encrusted behemoth with a
pronounced resemblance to a squid, and Brenda expands to become a humongous
breeder of malignant slugs, it's clear
Gunn
won't be content to reference only one kind of monster. Much to the great
distress of dry-witted police chief Bill Pardy (
Nathan Fillion
) and blowhard mayor Jack MacReady (Gregg Henry), the victims of the malignant
slugs won't stay dead. Rather, the dearly departed reawaken as staggering,
shambling zombies, mentally connected to Grant, an increasingly more powerful
(and more disgusting) entity.
   "Slither" begins briskly, gradually accelerates and eventually achieves a
breakneck momentum that makes the wild ride even more exhilarating. Here and
there, though, pic slows down for a clever bit of throwaway lunacy, like the
revelation that Wheelsy has a karaoke bar.
   The special effects are a nifty mix of old-school prosthetics and high-tech
CGI, making for a few genuinely shocking moments amid the farcical facade.
Overall tech values are smartly dedicated to making "Slither" appear polished,
but not too polished, so it can impress without straying too far from its
B-movie roots.
   The well-cast actors --- including Tania Saulnier as a feisty teen whose
family gets slugged --- go just far enough over the top to maintain the
jokey/scary tone without becoming cartoonish. Fillion is particularly amusing
while delivering wisecracks and ironic asides with the same sly spin he brought
to cheeky dialogue in the cult fave "Firefly" TV series (and, more recently,
its "Serenity" feature spinoff). For all his funny moments, however, Fillion
also rises to the challenge of being, relatively speaking, the straight man, or
at least the pic's voice of sanity. Henry gets big laughs with a
much-bigger-than-life approach. And Rooker is surprisingly sympathetic even as
his character turns into a special effect.
   Incidentally, the film has absolutely nothing to do with Howard Zieff's 1973
pic of the same name, starring James Caan and Sally Kellerman. Latter also was
a comedy but had no slugs to speak of and nary a single zombie.


LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Reed Elsevier Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              505 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The Times (London)

                            April 28, 2007, Saturday

Film-maker who lost plot is jailed for £ 1.8m fraud

BYLINE: Simon de Bruxelles

SECTION: HOME NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 504 words


* Producer lied to gain grant money

* Studio collapsed after just one film

A London film producer who promised to create Britain's answer to Hollywood in
Cornwall was jailed yesterday for stealing £ 1.8 million that he was given in
grants.

Alex Swan dubbed his South West Film Studios "Aggiewood" after the nearby
village of St Agnes. He said that the studios would create hundreds of jobs and
generate tens of millions of pounds for Cornwall, one of the poorer counties of
England.

The tale that he spun was considerably more imaginative than the studio's only
production, a low-budget horror film that starred Luke Goss, the former pop
singer.

Instead of making films, Swan, 44, was creating false bank statements and
invoices and forging letters from nonexistent investors.

The letters were used to persuade the Government to hand over the grant, which
was conditional on Swan raising sufficient private funding.

He spent a large chunk of the grant buying a share of the Aston Martin car that
was used in the James Bond film Die Another Day.

Swan, from Notting Hill, West London, admitted four offences of forgery and
seven of obtaining money by deception when he appeared at Truro Crown Court
yesterday.

He was jailed for 4 years.

Andrew Oldland, for the prosecution, said that Swan had a background in film
production and had planned to develop the studios with his uncle, Derrick, a
builder. They bought a model village tourist attraction and applied for £ 2
million under the European Union's Objective One funding for disadvantaged
regions.

The grant is administered by the government office in the South West and is
allowed to cover only 35 per cent of the total cost of a project. The remaining
65 per cent must be in place before the money is released, so Swan invented
bogus investors who, he claimed, had promised almost £ 4 million. Swan claimed
to have nearly £ 2 million in the bank when he was actually overdrawn by £ 3.

He forged invoices for building work totalling £ 5.2 million from a non-existent
construction company, against which the EU money was paid out. He was given £
1,816,920 before the business went bust with the studios half built.

None of the money has been repaid. The studios have been repossessed and another
company is attempting to revive the project.

Mr Oldland said: "This defendant forged official documents to support his claim
and over a period of three and a half years he perpetrated an increasingly
sophisticated and sustained fraud."

Judge Philip Wassall told Swan: "You must have realised that you would have to
embark upon a sophisticated and deliberate fraud and you took that route from
the start. Everything that has stemmed from it was entirely forseeable."

Thomas Kark, in mitigation, said that Swan had been a professional film producer
whose previous projects had included Relative Values, which starred Colin Firth
and Julie Andrews.

He said: "My client was not trying to line his own pockets but was motivated by
a passion for film and a passion for this project."

Little star, page 30

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              506 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               Leadership (Abuja)

                               November 09, 2014

N3 Billion Grant - Film Makers Decry Stringent Conditions for Access

LENGTH: 417 words


A veteran Nigerian film maker, Eddie Ugbomou on Sunday, expressed concern about
the stringent conditions attached to accessing the N3 billion fund for the
development of film industry in Nigeria.

Speaking at the ZAAFAR Film Award in London, he said that "the process of
accessing the fund is too cumbersome and film makers are discouraged to access
it.

"Producers have undergone three stages of interviews where they were asked to
provide various documents on their projects.

"Yet, they cannot access the loan, the sooner the authority releases the money
the better; if that is done, it will boost the industry because more than 150
producers will be empowered."

The veteran also said that inadequate funding had remained a major challenge to
Nollywood film producers.

"Even though Nigeria is rated as the third most valuable film industry in the
world, it is difficult to breakthrough from its infancy stage.

How can you shoot a film with N20 million and compare it with the one shot with
20 million dollars? Nollywood requires funding for it to grow," he said.

Also speaking at the occasion, Mr Sola Omole, the Director-General of Nigerian
Television Authority (NTA), stressed the need for private sector's engagement in
funding Nollywood.

"There is a tendency for Nigerians to think that everything has to be done by
government, I think that is a wrong premise. "Government is buffeted on all
angles, it has to provide all kind of things but if you want a successful
venture, especially one that is profit oriented, the private sector has a huge
role to play.

"Government is a social provider, it provides water, electricity and an enabling
environment, but it is the private sector capital that yields profit.

"Developing an artistic endeavour such as film industry is a private initiative,
and if the story is good, then it becomes marketable and it will attract
funding," he said.

In the same vein, Mrs Patricia Bala, the Director-General of the National Film
and Video Censors Board (NFVCB), expressed government's commitment to developing
Nollywood.

He noted that Nollywood was a veritable platform for branding the nation's image
and urged film producers to key into the fund.

The News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) recalls that in 2013, President Goodluck
Jonathan created a N3 million grant to promote film industry in the country.

The lecture entitled "Promoting Ethics and Values in the African Film Industry,"
attracted participants from the British Film Institute, Nollywood film makers,
NTA and NFVCB.(NAN)

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              507 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                            October 30, 2015 Friday

Kentucky: Fourteen Agricultural Incentives Approved

LENGTH: 515  words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Frankfort: Commonwealth of Kentucky has issued the following news release:



 Today the Kentucky Agricultural Development Board, chaired by Gov. Steve
Beshear, approved $2,692,136 for 14 agricultural diversification and rural
development programs across the Commonwealth during its October board meeting.









 Technical Assistance for Agribusinesses



 The Kentucky Center for Agriculture and Rural Development (KCARD) was approved
for $700,000 in state funds over a two year period. These funds will allow KCARD
to deliver technical assistance and provide educational opportunities for
agricultural and rural businesses. For more information about this project,
contact Aleta Botts at 859-951-8328 or email at abotts@kcard.info







 Mini-Grant Programs for Small Farms

 Kentucky State University was approved for $990,000 in state funds over a two
year period.  These funds will be used to provide mini-grants that will assist
small farmers, as well as producers with limited resources statewide. This will
include areas related to organics, value-added products, aquaculture, farmer
education and demonstration projects. For more information about this project,
contact Kirk Pomper at 502-597-5942 or kirk.pomper@kysu.edu







 Purchasing of Locally Grown Products

 Knotty Corner Caf&eacute;, LLC was approved for $5,000 in state funds to
purchase locally grown or raised products from Kentucky farmers for their
caf&eacute; and market. For more information about this project, contact Cynthia
Owens at 606-785-0477 or knottycornercafe@gmail.com







 On-Farm Investments

 The County Agricultural Investment Program (CAIP) offers 10 investment areas
that give Kentucky agricultural producers the ability to increase net farm
income, add value to their products and diversify their operation. CAIP benefits
and enhances agriculture across the state by stimulating markets for Kentucky
agricultural products. Nine CAIPs were approved by the board totaling $860,870,
for Bullitt ($100,000), Caldwell ($69,854), Carroll ($167,943), Kenton
($110,435), Robertson ($306,638) and Russell ($106,000) counties.



 In addition to these new approvals, an additional $124,529 was approved to
enhance existing CAIPs in Hardin ($54,529) and Jessamine ($70,000) counties.



 Shared-Use Equipment

 The Shared-use Equipment Program assists broad-based community organizations on
the purchase of farm equipment. The equipment purchased is made available for
producer use in a specific county on a leased basis.  One Shared-use Equipment
Program was approved by the board for Marion County Extension District Building
Foundation Inc. totaling $2,362. The funds will be used to purchase a sprayer.



 Environmental Stewardship



 Bullitt ($1,875) and Shelby ($7,500) counties were approved for the Deceased
Farm Animal Removal Program (DAR) totaling $9,375. DAR serves as a measure to
facilitate the coordination of environmentally sound and cost-effective disposal
of deceased livestock for Kentucky producers.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              508 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Daily Observer (Banjul)

                                 March 26, 2014

NEMA Boss Urges Gambians to Respond to President Jammeh's Call

BYLINE: Samba Jawo

LENGTH: 567 words


The head of business development office at the National Agricultural Land and
Water Development Project (NEMA) has urged Gambians to take heed of the
President's call for people 'to go back to the land to be able to reduce our
food import bills. Banky Njie made these remarks recently during a four-day
capacity- building training workshop, organised by the Capital Investment
Stimulation Fund (CISF), under the aegis of the NEMA Project on Entrepreneurship
for Smallholder Producers and Actors at the Jenoi Agricultural Centre in the
Lower River Region (LRR).

He maintained that IFAD and The Gambia government found it necessary to give
financial support that has long been lacking for the smallholders' producers,
through the Tripartite Matching Grant. "As participants of this very useful
training, you had the opportunity to reflect upon the important role that
business development can play in enhancingsmallholder farmers'/producers
entrepreneurship skills to you to integrate yourselves into the value chain," he
told the participants.

According to him, it has also provided an opportunity to share their experiences
and learn how successful enterprises can transform smallholder agriculture into
profitable businesses that can contribute to generating employment and the
creation of wealth, thereby reducing poverty. "It is highly expected that this
entrepreneurship training has provided you with the pre-requisite business
knowledge and skills for a better understanding in preparing for your business
and its operation," Njie noted.

The head of business development office at the NEMA spoke at length about "the
land scar in The Gambia, saying with the intervention of different projects,
they also have the investments, whether it's NEMA as asset financing scheme, or
FASDEP's version and Reliance standalone farming as a business." Njie further
stated that the opportunities are provided here to transform their activities to
increase production, not only to feed them, but also feed the world.

The Business Development officer thus urged Gambians to have a sense of pride in
what they produce and get out of their mindsets that anything imported,
especially from the West, is better. Njie lamented that, "if Africa can redirect
and invest (only a fraction of its $40 billion dollars food importation bill),
in the production of the food she consumes, they will begin to realise how they
can transform their lives and become drivers of their own destiny, without
depending on food aid.'

He informed that NEMA CISF have been rendering supports in the areas of
irrigation systems, farming equipment, cold storage facilities, refrigerated
trucks, threshing and milling machines, among others, coupled with other project
interventions of improving the infrastructure, building access roads, creating
market access and women's land rights, etc.

Agriculture, he said, is the issue of their time, noting that over 70% of their
people depend on agriculture for a living. "The African Union has declared 2014
as the "Year of Agriculture and Food Security" and so it is therefore very
important that we embark on a crusade to respond to this declaration," he urged
them.

Njie expressed his profound gratitude to Concern Universal, through the team of
trainers for their professionalism.

The event brought together over 80 applicants of NEMA's Capital Investment
Stimulation Fund (CISF), in two separate batches.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              509 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Herald (Glasgow)

                                  July 3, 1996

Highland's £88m 'take it or leave it' offer will deplete dwindling ranks of
independent producers Macallan looks powerless to resist

BYLINE: By Robert Powell

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 901 words


HIGHLAND Distilleries posted its offer document to Macallan-Glenlivet
shareholders yesterday, 24 hours after announcing its hostile takeover bid.

Highland did not even wait for the Macallan board to give its response, which,
according to Macallan chairman Allan Shiach, will come later this week.

However, City analysts said there was little Macallan's minority shareholders
could do to resist Highland's £88m "take it or leave it" offer.

Highland and its one-time rival Suntory of Japan already control 51% of the
Speyside distiller, famed for its single malts.

They have now teamed up in a joint venture to buy out Macallan's minority
shareholders, including Mr Shiach's family which owns just over 20%.

But the offer values the company at only 152.5p per Ordinary share, considerably
less than Macallan's closing price of 187p on Friday before the bid was
announced. Mr Shiach is understood to be deeply unhappy at the shotgun proposal.

Many City analysts reckon Highland, the producer of Famous Grouse, is still
paying a ridiculously high price for Macallan shares.

These have been carrying a heavy bid premium for several months, but Charles
Winston, a drinks analyst at BZW said fair value for Macallan - in line with the
rest of the whisky sector - would be nearer 80p to 90p.

However, 152.5p was the price paid by Highland to purchase a 26% stake in it
from its associate Remy Cointreau in January and it has stuck to this level,
even though the return on capital deployed will be only about 5%.

Speculation arose yesterday as to Remy Cointreau's possible role in the Macallan
deal, as the French group unexpectedly delayed the announcement of its 1995-96
results until after July 18.

This is the day on which Highland holds an extraordinary meeting to approve the
Macallan takeover bid.

The French drinks giant has a cross-holding with Highland and handles most of
its overseas whisky distribution. However, a Highland spokesman said there was
"no connection whatsoever" between the delay in announcing Remy's results and
the Highland meeting.

Remy's results are expected to be poor, following a profits warning in March.

Analysts said the delay in publishing could be linked to falling sales of cognac
in China, one of Remy's main markets.

Macallan has carved out an up-market niche for its single malts and its
disappearance as a stand-alone company will deplete still further the dwindling
ranks of independent whisky producers in Scotland.

William Grant, the family-owned firm which produces Scotland's top-selling
single malt Glenfiddich, lamented Macallan's imminent demise.

"It is sad to see another bastion of Speyside lose its independence," said
director David Grant. "As one of the last Scottish family-owned distilling
companies, we feel more and more alone."

The takeover of Macallan would leave only three independent Scotch whisky
companies still quoted on the Stock Exchange - Highland Distilleries,
Glenmorangie and Burn Stewart.

Highland is somewhat protected against a takeover bid by its complex association
with Robertson & Baxter. There are substantial cross-holdings between the two
companies and Robertson & Baxter, which is controlled by the Edrington Trust,
owns half the rights to Highland's top-selling Famous Grouse brand.

The joint venture with Suntory to take over Macallan will muddy the waters for
any potential predator still further.

"Highland is not quite bid-proof, but it's as near as dammit," Mr Winston of BZW
said.

Glenmorangie, which was until recently called Macdonald Martin, enjoys an even
more robust defence against takeover in the form its two-tier share structure.
This guarantees the Macdonald family continuing majority control of the company,
whose Glenmorangie single malt is Glenfiddich's nearest rival in the world
market.

Burn Stewart, which specialises in producing own-label whiskies for the lower
end of the market, looks at first sight more vulnerable.

There are no major shareholders who might be inclined to block a hostile bid,
but the company holds limited attractions. Its profit margins have been severely
squeezed in recent years and it carries a high level of gearing to support the
whisky stocks necessary for continued sales growth.

The most logical predators for Burn Stewart would be companies with interests in
the same sector such as William Grant or Whyte & Mackay, now a subsidiary of
American Brands.

There are, of course, a number of privately owned independent distillers left in
the game, but the takeover of any of these would have to come in the form an
agreed deal.

And the biggest of them all, William Grant, is definitely not for sale. Mr Grant
said yesterday that the takeover bid for Macallan "only increases our
determination to preserve our independence".

Five multinational giants - Guinness, Allied Domecq, Seagrams, American Brands
and Grand Metropolitan - dominate the sector. Unless they decide to reshuffle
the cards among themselves, further moves to consolidate ownership will depend
on one of the smaller players volunteering to sell out.

Standing firm .... Glenmorangie and William Grant, which makes Glenfiddich, have
no plans to give up their independence following the moves by Highland
Distilleries, producer of Famous Grouse, to buy Macallan-Glenlivet Picture: IAN
HOSSACK

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1996

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                   Copyright 1996 Caledonian Newspapers Ltd.


                              510 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                 Central Asian News Service (English language)

                              July 25, 2016 Monday

MP offers to introduce 10% VAT rate for import of grain and flour to Kyrgyzstan

LENGTH: 202  words


The member of the Kyrgyz Parliament (Respublika-Ata-Jurt faction) Kenjebek
Bokoyev proposed to establish a VAT rate of 10% for import and supply of grain
and flour to Kyrgyzstan, reportsTazabek with reference to the draft law on
amendments to the law on introduction to the Tax Code of the Kyrgyz Republic.



The gross collection of the Kyrgyz wheat in 2013 made 819,383 tons, while import
of the grain was 361,700 tons, which is almost one third of the gross wheat
collection.

The study of the agricultural activity revealed that in this case the annual tax
revenues to the national budget from the flour producers will decrease by more
than 1 billion soms (about $14,905) a year, says the justification note to the
draft law.

Meanwhile, the government of Kazakhstan has an opportunity to support their
producers of grain through grants and various benefits, while the state budget
of the Kyrgyz Republic can not afford such grants and benefits for their
farmers, according to the parliamentarian.

The bill is aimed at preserving Kyrgyzstan's food security and the reduction of
the deficit of the state budget of the Kyrgyz Republic in the amount of 22,453.8
billion (about $334,684,855) that is 4.5% of the GDP.AKIpress

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 894


                            Copyright 2016 AKIpress
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              511 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            August 30, 2012 Thursday

Grape demand outpacing vineyard supply for Okla. winemakers

BYLINE: Brian Brus

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 428  words


A recent study of the Oklahoma vineyard and winery industry suggests that grape
growers deserve more economic support, said Gene Clifton, president of the
Oklahoma Grape Industry Council.

The state has more than 60 wineries, up from just three in 2000 when state
legislation allowed commercial winery tasting rooms. Now the state ranks 31st in
wine production, with about 4,000 cases of wine per year, according to the study
by the Frank, Rimerman & Co. research firm.

Those wineries don't all have their own vineyards, so a complex network of
contracts and business partnerships has developed to keep grapes flowing to the
presses. About 140 commercial vineyards operate 440 acres of mature vines,
researchers found, but demand is exceeding supply.

"We've been here almost 13 years, so we have contracts with three vineyards to
supply us with grapes; we have a rapport," Clifton said, while working at his
own vineyard, Canadian River Winery. "But there's a lot of vineyards that don't
have those contracts and wineries that don't use Oklahoma grapes. We think that
situation can be improved for our local producers.

"We need some attention and funding for grape growers, because the wine starts
in the field," he said. "You can be the best winemaker in the world and unless
you have excellent grapes you can't produce anything good. "

The study estimated the industry's value to the state at $98.5 million, with 840
full-time-equivalent jobs. The retail value of the wine produced in Oklahoma is
about $4 million, and the industry attracts about 134,000 tourists annually.

Those numbers are based on 2010 producer data. Research was funded by a grant
from the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture. The council will use the study to
pursue marketing and government lobbying goals for growth of the grape and wine
industry.

While some people might assume that Oklahoma's weather patterns and variable
soil types would preclude serious wine production efforts, the data shows
otherwise, Clifton said. Some vineyards have been around long enough now to have
mature vines that produce delicious grapes appropriate to specific wines. And
the producers themselves are growing in experience and wisdom.

"We have so many variables that grapes three miles from here might be completely
different," he said. "And you don't want to mix the lesser quality with your
good stuff. This year was particularly good for us, for example. We had a
perfect spring, an easy winter; the grapes developed before the heat hit, so we
had a grand year. ... It looks like it was pretty good across the state. "

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              512 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Television Week

                                October 29, 2007

Opportunities Growing for Women in Hollywood;
diverse voices

BYLINE: Dinah Eng

SECTION: PRESS ROOM; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 837  words


An Old Boys' Network may still run Hollywood, but a Young Women's Network is
working to equalize things.

Conversations with a number of women in the television industry-ranging from
actresses to network executives-paint a picture of slow improvement in
opportunities for females, with Baby Boomer and Generation X women leading the
way.

While parity for all is nowhere on the horizon, the women say talent, focus and
determination will lead to success.

``I know I defy the statistics,'' says actress Beth Grant, who works in both
film and TV and recently had a recurring role in CBS drama ``Jericho.'' ``I'm
57, and I work all the time. It's luck, a blessing and a gift.

``The first thing I noticed on `Jericho' was that Carol Barbee was the
showrunner. Women showrunners are really rare,'' Grant adds. ``If women have
dropped out of TV, it's because they're smart in knowing the hours are inhumane,
and our children are more important.''

Women who have to choose between their careers and taking care of families often
have made choices that men do not face. Grant, a familiar face in films
including ``Little Miss Sunshine'' and ``Flags of Our Fathers,'' starred as
Thelma Wainwright on ABC sitcom ``Delta'' in 1992, and shares one memory she'll
never forget.

``I had worked with (executive producer) Barry Kemp on `Coach' and auditioned
for `Delta' when I was pregnant,'' Grant says. ``I went into labor the night we
taped the 11th show. They shot everything twice, had a doctor on standby and I
had to stop once for a contraction. But we got through the show, and the entire
crew got in a line and hugged me as I left for the hospital.

``A lot of producers would have said no way, but Barry gave me the part. Women
of my generation have had to align ourselves with men in order to learn how to
be team players in the game.''

One female manager, who asked to remain unidentified, says that in many cases
the women who succeed are physically attractive and know how not to threaten
men.

``(Former ABC Entertainment President) Jamie Tarses was a victim of sexism in
the business,'' says the manager, who handles both male and female clients.
``She got slammed for being mean, but male executives are mean, too. People
expect women to be nice. When they're strong, they're bitches. Strong men are
just called ambitious.''

So what does being a team player in a game run by men entail?

``To be `one of the boys' means not getting easily offended,'' says Elizabeth
Yost, VP development for the Hallmark Channel and Hallmark Movie Channel. ``I'm
not talking about tolerating abusive language. But we're in a very PC
environment, and if someone's constantly worried about every word, they're
probably not someone people want to be around.''

Yost, formerly executive producer for EMY Entertainment and an associate
producer for Hearst Entertainment, says women have made great strides in the
executive suite.

``We've gotten to the point where choices are made based on talent and not
sex,'' says Yost, who's in her 40s. ``A lot of my girlfriends are in senior
positions around the industry. Women are running networks and divisions. There
are women who struggle. But my advice is, don't give up. Set your goals.
There'll be many opportunities for disappointment. Use them as opportunities to
turn things around.''

Yost notes it's also important to find a niche that's compatible with your
values. A woman with MTV interests probably won't rise very rapidly at Spike.
But any factor-race, ethnicity, age, gender-can be spun to be an advantage or a
disadvantage.

Smart women focus on what they want and aren't shy about speaking up. If needed,
they ask others for help.

``Too many women are surprisingly demure in this business,'' says Susanne
Daniels, Lifetime's entertainment president. ``They allow themselves to be a
part of the team, rather than the leader of the team. That said, I don't think
there's a glass ceiling for women executives. It's in the producing, directing
and writing ranks that we need more women.''

Daniels says the way to make that happen is to make diversity a hiring
criterion.

``We're committed to diversity in our casting,'' says Daniels, 42. ``I think you
have to say there's a certain percentage of shows that you must develop with
women and older writers. It has to be a priority.''

So what do members of the Young Women's Network bring to the table that men
don't? Other than the food, the silverware, the plates and glasses? Perhaps it's
a realization that success isn't measured by money and titles. Perhaps it's the
ability to juggle meetings, mothering and mentoring, knowing it's impossible to
have it all, at least all at once.

Daniels interrupts the interview to talk to her 8-year-old son on the phone.
``Now I need you to try the swim team, just this one time,'' she says,
encouragingly. ``Will you try it? It's up to you. This week or next week?''

Clearly, the Old Boys' Network is going to have to grow up.

Dinah Eng is a Los Angeles-based freelancer who writes a syndicated column for
Gannett News Service.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Art Credit: Dinah Eng

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: tw


                      Copyright 2007 Crain Communications
                              All Rights Reserved


                              513 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             August 5, 2011 Friday

Journal Recor Business Briefs: August 8, 2011

BYLINE: Journal Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1509  words


Academy Salute set for Aug. 19

TULSA - The Oklahoma Academy's 18th annual Academy Salute is scheduled Aug. 19
at the DoubleTree Hotel Warren Place in Tulsa.

A reception is scheduled at 5:30 p.m. with the program at 6:30 p.m.

The Salute theme is "Movers, Shakers and Policy Makers: Saluting Those Who Make
a Difference!" The program will include "Salutes" to members of Oklahoma's
congressional delegation, statewide elected and appointed officials and the
legislative leadership.

"It is an excellent opportunity to be among the state's elected leaders,
business leaders and community leaders," said Tom McKeon, president of Tulsa
Community College and the chairman of The Oklahoma Academy.

Gov. Mary Fallin will present opening remarks. Honorary chairs are Stuart
Solomon, president and chief operation officer, Public Service Company of
Oklahoma, and his wife, Dana Solomon. Mike Turpen, former state attorney
general, will be emcee.

Dave Lopez, state secretary of commerce and tourism, will be presented the Key
Contributor award. The Capitol Steps, a Washington, D.C., musical troupe, will
provide entertainment.

Ticket prices for Oklahoma Academy members are $150 per person and $275 per
couple. Tickets for nonmembers are $175 per person and $300 per couple. To buy
tickets, call (405) 232-5828.

- Staff report

Tribe to open casino in Shawnee

SHAWNEE - The Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma plans to open a casino on
Thursday at 2501 S. Gordon Cooper Dr. in Shawnee.

Officials said Thunderbird Casino: Shawnee will create 60 jobs.

Marketing director Lisa Frazier said the new casino will have 250 slot machines,
a seating area for dining and full-service cocktails.

A grand-opening celebration will feature live music from the band Smilin Vic.

Drew Word will be the general manager.

The Absentee Shawnee Tripe also operates Thunderbird Casino: Norman.

- Staff report

Oneok, Partners to join in conference

TULSA - Oneok Inc. and Oneok Partners will participate in the Tuohy Brothers
Annual Midstream One-on-One Conference in New York City on Tuesday.

John W. Gibson, chairman, president and CEO of Oneok and Oneok Partners, will
conduct a series of meetings with investment-community representatives at the
conference.

The materials utilized at the conference will be at www.oneok.com and
www.oneokpartners.com at 7 a.m. Tuesday.

- Staff report

Chamber sets networking sessions

EDMOND - The Edmond Area Chamber of Commerce has scheduled its monthly
networking events -Morning Mingle and Business After Hours.

The August Business After Hours event, presented by Cox Business, is scheduled
from 5:30 p.m. to 7 p.m. Tuesday at Oklahoma Fidelity Bank, 1127 E. Second St.
Food will be provided by Cafe 501.

The August Morning Mingle is scheduled from 8 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. Aug. 17 at
Integris Family Care-Coffee Creek, 2916 N. Kelly Ave. Graco Roofing is the
presenting sponsor for the Morning Mingle Series.

- Staff report

Panhandle Oil, Gas plans presentation

OKLAHOMA CITY - Panhandle Oil and Gas will participate in Enercom's Oil and Gas
Conference in Denver.

Michael C. Coffman, Panhandle president and CEO, and Paul Blanchard, senior vice
president and chief operating officer, will make a presentation at 10:45 a.m.
Aug. 16. The presentation will be available at
theoilandgasconference.com/webcast.shtml.

- Staff report

Broken Arrow Chamber sets expo

BROKEN ARROW - The Broken Arrow Area Chamber's annual Home & Business Expo will
be at Nienhuis Park Community Center from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Aug. 20.

Admission is free. More than 70 vendors are expected to participate.

Sponsors include Cox Business, The Broken Arrow Ledger, Floral Haven Funeral
Home and Tulsa Technology Center.

For information, visit www.brokenarrowchamber.com.

- Staff report

YMCA seeks mentors

OKLAHOMA CITY - The YMCA of Greater Oklahoma City is seeking business
professionals to serve as mentors to minority teenagers to help them develop
aspirations for careers through Y Achievers, a college-prep and career
exploration program.

"Through academic aid, career exploration and mentoring, Y Achievers helps
students raise their academic standards, consider college and career options and
learn from role models who inspire them to greater heights," said Shannon
O'Connor, director of teen leadership initiatives at the YMCA of Greater
Oklahoma City.

Mentors are asked to volunteer about two hours per month from September to
April. Those interested in volunteering with the program must set up an initial
phone interview by Aug. 19 with Program Coordinator Milyaka Edwards at (405)
297-7734. There will be a mandatory training session for mentors later this
month.

- Staff report

Workers' comp workshop offered

OKLAHOMA CITY - The Northwest Chamber will present a workers' compensation
workshop from 11:30 a.m. to 1 p.m. Aug. 18 at the Fairfield Inn & Suites,
located at 5700 Northwest Expressway.

A panel will include Sen. Anthony Sykes, R-Moore; Mike Seney, senior vice
president, The State Chamber of Oklahoma; and Denise Engle, deputy commissioner
of workers' compensation with the Oklahoma Insurance Department.

Registration is $15 and includes lunch. To register, call (405) 789-1256.

- Staff report

Minority and Women Business Summit set

BROKEN ARROW - Rural Enterprises of Oklahoma Inc. has scheduled a "Minority and
Women Business Summit" in Broken Arrow.

The summit is scheduled from 8:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Aug. 17 at Northeastern State
University in Broken Arrow.

There is a $25 fee, which includes lunch. Registration information is at
www.ruralenterprises.com.

Presenters will include James Ray, coordinator, REI's Native American Business
Enterprise Center; Larry Findeiss, Tulsa Technology Center Oklahoma Bid
Assistance Network Coordinator; Terri Shook, Small Business Administration
Procurement Center representative; John Blue, Oklahoma Small Business
Development Center director; Veronica Hix, Cherokee Nation; Terri Gateward, city
of Tulsa Bridge Program coordinator; Pam Walker, SBA; Curtis Evans, Oklahoma
Manufacturing Alliance; Vanessa Woodfork, SBA; Sam Vaverka, REI loan officer;
Freida Satepeahtaw-Bailey, U.S. Department of the Interior; and Barbara Rackley,
REI's Women's Business Center Coordinator.

Co-sponsors of the summit include the REI Native American Business Enterprise
Center, SBA, Oklahoma Small Business Development Center, Tulsa Technology
Center, Oklahoma Business Assistance Network, Northeastern State University,
Cherokee Nation, city of Tulsa Bridge Program, Oklahoma Manufacturing Alliance
and REI's Women's Business Center.

- Staff report

OHFA presents Apex Awards

OKLAHOMA CITY - The Oklahoma Housing Finance Agency has presented five Apex
Awards.

Herb Matlock of Garvin received the Friend of Affordable Housing award. Matlock
is chairman of the Little Dixie Community Action Agency's board of directors and
represents the Idabel Chamber of Commerce.

The Housing Revitalization award was presented to the Midwest Housing Equity
Group, which in 2010 raised $24 million in equity capital for developments in
Oklahoma.

Palo Duro II Inc., managed by Neighborhood Services Organization, received the
Special Needs Housing award. Palo Duro II completed construction on a 14-bedroom
apartment complex in Oklahoma City's Midtown for homeless people.

The Community Development award was presented to Redwood Development/Bell
Management. Redwood Development has developed more than 400 affordable housing
units in Oklahoma.

The Rural Housing award was presented to the Housing Authority of the Seminole
Nation of Oklahoma, which provides affordable housing for tribal members.

- Staff report

Producer grants available

STILLWATER - Aug. 29 is the deadline to submit applications for value-added
producer grants.

The program is designed to help agricultural producers add value to their raw
commodity prior to sale. This can include the development of marketing
strategies or the development of business plans for the viable production of
products from agricultural commodities.

Applicants may apply for either a planning grant of up to $100,000 or a working
capital grant of up to $300,000.

"Value-added agricultural not only improves margins for producers, but allows a
greater amount of wealth creation to be retained in rural areas," said Ryan
McMullen, state director for USDA Rural Development.

For information, visit www.rurdev.usda.gov/BCP_VAPG_Grants.html.

- Staff report

Entrepreneurship school receives grant

STILLWATER - Oklahoma State University's School of Entrepreneurship received a
$36,400 grant from the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation to encourage
innovative thinking and market-based principles across campus.

The grant will be used to support four new initiatives in the School of
Entrepreneurship during the next 12 months.

The first initiative involves development of liberty modules for all sections of
"Introduction to Entrepreneurship. " These modules will focus on the roles of
ethics, values, free enterprise and personal liberty in supporting
entrepreneurial behavior.

The dissemination of the results of the overall project to various audiences is
the final initiative.

- Staff report

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              514 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                     The News-Democrat (Waverly, Tennessee)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                  May 9, 2014

USDA announces effort to cut energy costs for farmers, ranchers, rural small
businesses;
Up to $12.3 Million in Grants and $57.8 Million in Loan Guarantees Available In
Rural Energy for America Program

BYLINE: The News-Democrat staff

LENGTH: 803  words


Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced that USDA is seeking
applications from rural small businesses and agricultural producers for funding
to make energy efficiency improvements or to install renewable energy systems.

"Developing renewable energy presents an enormous economic opportunity for rural
America," Vilsack said. "This funding will help farmers, ranchers and rural
small business owners incorporate renewable energy and energy efficiency
technology into their operations, create jobs and help America become more
energy independent. When small rural businesses and farmers cut their energy
costs with cleaner and more efficient energy, we are both helping their bottom
lines and reducing the amount of greenhouse gas pollution that affects our
climate.".

The funding announced today is being provided through USDA's Rural Energy for
America Program (REAP). Investments from programs like REAP help support the
true engine of America's economic growth - a thriving middle class. REAP is one
of many USDA programs and initiatives to support an expanded domestic energy
economy. In addition to helping to increase renewable energy production, USDA
makes investments in the bioeconomy, provides support for the emerging biobased
products industry, supports new technologies, and supports energy efficiency
improvements.

REAP funding has helped farmers expand renewable energy use in recent years. The
new Census of Agriculture shows the number of farms utilizing renewable energy
production has doubled in the last five years. More than 57,000 farms reported
using a renewable energy system in 2012, while 23,451 operations reported doing
so in 2007. Solar panels accounted for 63% of renewable energy systems on farms,
with 36,331 farms reporting their use.

REAP funding is an example of the many ways that USDA is helping revitalize
rural economies to create opportunities for growth and prosperity, support
innovative technologies, identify new markets for agricultural producers and
better utilize our nation's natural resources.

Created by the 2008 Farm Bill, REAP was reauthorized by the recently passed 2014
Farm Bill. For fiscal year (FY) 2014, USDA plans to award up to $12.3 million in
grants and $57.8 million in loan guarantees. Additional REAP funds provided by
the Farm Bill will be made available with a subsequent notice. USDA is accepting
applications for: Renewable energy system and energy efficiency improvement loan
guarantee and grant combinations Renewable energy system and energy efficiency
improvement loan guarantees; and Renewable energy system and energy efficiency
improvement grants.

Renewable energy system and energy efficiency improvement grants.

Requests for grants may not exceed 25 percent of a project's cost - either for
stand-alone grant requests or for grants combined with loan guarantees.

Since the start of the Obama Administration, REAP has supported more than 8,200
renewable energy and energy efficiency projects nationwide. During this period,
USDA has provided more than $264 million in grants and $212 million in loan
guarantees to agricultural producers and rural small business owners.

Cozy Acres Greenhouse in North Yarmouth, Maine, used a $48,750 REAP grant to
help offset the cost of installing a solar and geothermal system in new
greenhouses. Owners Jeff and Marianne Marstaller needed to expand
their'greenhouse operations and were determined to do so in a cost-effective
'arid energy-efficient way. They teamed up with USDA Rural Development to fund a
geothermal system to provide heat for the greenhouses and solar photovoltaic
panels that help offset their electricity needs. The greenhouses were completed
in fall 2013. The Marstallers plan to market their locally grown herbs and
vegetables to area restaurants and farmers markets.

Information on how to apply for REAP funding and on the application deadlines
(which vary by project type) is available on page 25564 of the May 5, 2014
Federal Register.

President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way -
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities. USDA's
investments in rural communities support the rural way of life that stands as
the backbone of our American values.

USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. To file a complaint of
discrimination, write: USDA, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights,
Office of Adjudication, 1400 Independence Ave., SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or
call (866) 632-9992 (Toll-free Customer Service), (800) 877-8339 (Local or
Federal relay), (866) 377-8642 (Relay voice users).

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NDW

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2014 The News-Democrat


                              515 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Milton Canadian Champion

                            October 4, 2016 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Province, Greenbelt Fund serve up $60K grant to Milton's Gordon Food Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 796  words


To help promote locally grown, raised and processed ingredients for everyday
eating-out experiences, Gordon Food Service (GFS) got a financial boost.

North America's largest privately held, family-managed foodservice distributor,
GFS received $60,000 from the Province in partnership with the Greenbelt Fund,
announced this morning at the Milton distribution centre on James Snow Parkway.
The announcement was made to kick off Ontario Agriculture Week, October 3 to 9.

GFS's project, dubbed Ontario Ingredients for Success, aims to strengthen the
connection between foodservice operators, growers and processors in the province
over the next year and a half.

In total, 27 local food projects - including GFS - received a boost to help
provide support to campaigns in restaurants highlighting Ontario-grown options
to patrons.

GFS will partner with Mushrooms Canada, Grain Farmers of Ontario, Ontario
Greenhouse Vegetable Growers, Ontario Turkey Growers and Egg Farmers of Ontario
to increase the sale of food by $5 million each year.

In fact, those five farming organizations represent 30,000 farms covering more
than six million acres of farmland.

They also collaborated with Niagara College, Centennial College and the
University of Guelph on the initiative.

"GFS is showing strong leadership in recognizing the value that buying local has
for Ontario's economy," said Burkhard Mausberg, CEO of the Greenbelt Fund. "From
match-making producers with restaurateurs to helping promote local food items on
the menu, this project will mean more Ontarians will be able to eat local even
when eating out."

He said the Greenbelt Fund received hundreds of applicants for the funds.

The funds will help GFS to promote menu items containing Ontario ingredients
through forum workshops and promotional materials highlighting Ontario products
for restaurants. It will also connect local producers, processors and grower
associations with distributors and foodservice operators.

Leal said that it's important to have more Ontario-grown and harvested food on
tables.

"Through the Local Food Investment Fund, our government is helping to source
more agricultural products from Ontario growers and producers to get more local
food onto Ontario plates, which is creating new opportunities for the agri-food
sector," he said. "This funding encourages the private sector to invest and help
strengthen the value chain so that more Ontario-grown, raised and harvested food
is enjoyed across the province.

"The agri-food sector is a $36.6-billion industry," he said.

Meanwhile, GFS President - Ontario division Lisa MacNeil said she knows
firsthand how hard farmers work. She recalled being a child at around nine years
old, plucking the feathers off a "recently harvested" chicken that her farming
parents had raised.

"GFS is committed to continually working to find ways to increase our offerings
of Ontario local food," she added. "This project supports the local food
movement by shining a spotlight on quality Ontario ingredients. Thank you to the
Greenbelt Fund and Ontario egg, grain, greenhouse vegetable, mushroom and turkey
farmers for sharing our passion."

The Greenbelt Fund is investing more than $1.3 million to support 27 projects
across Ontario through the Local Food Investment Fund, bringing more
Ontario-grown and raised food to Ontarians. The program is administered by the
Greenbelt Fund, which has seen a 13-to-1 return on investment on grants made
since 2010.

Last year, the government provided the Greenbelt Fund with $6 million over three
years to support the local food strategy. It supports such things as the Local
Food Investment Fund, a grant program for farmers, business and non-profits
working to increase local food purchases.

Halton MPP Indira Naidoo-Harris thanked farmers for the work they do day in and
day out.

"I go to the (downtown) farmers' market each week and it makes me realize how
much our local farmers contribute to the community," she said. "It's good to be
able to recognize local famers and growers, and I know it isn't easy being a
farmer."

Growing up in a small town in Alberta, Naidoo-Harris recalls her friends who
lived on farms, having to do chores before school, attend school, then go back
home to do more chores again, even before dinner.

"There are so many unpredictable factors in farming," she added. "They feed us a
variety of fresh food."

Naidoo-Harris pointed to the 790,000 jobs they provide, which "our economy
depends on."

"Farmers are our friends and neighbours," she said, adding they provide us with
access to locally-sourced food that's "the best in the world."

Leal also noted that he, along with other government officials will travel to
India this fall to create new economic opportunities for Ontario's agri-food
industry and strengthen trade.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              516 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Milton Canadian Champion

                             October 3, 2016 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Province, Greenbelt Fund serve up $60K grant to Milton's Gordon Food Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 796  words


To help promote locally grown, raised and processed ingredients for everyday
eating-out experiences, Gordon Food Service (GFS) got a financial boost.

North America's largest privately held, family-managed foodservice distributor,
GFS received $60,000 from the Province in partnership with the Greenbelt Fund,
announced this morning at the Milton distribution centre on James Snow Parkway.
The announcement was made to kick off Ontario Agriculture Week, October 3 to 9.

GFS's project, dubbed Ontario Ingredients for Success, aims to strengthen the
connection between foodservice operators, growers and processors in the province
over the next year and a half.

In total, 27 local food projects - including GFS - received a boost to help
provide support to campaigns in restaurants highlighting Ontario-grown options
to patrons.

GFS will partner with Mushrooms Canada, Grain Farmers of Ontario, Ontario
Greenhouse Vegetable Growers, Ontario Turkey Growers and Egg Farmers of Ontario
to increase the sale of food by $5 million each year.

In fact, those five farming organizations represent 30,000 farms covering more
than six million acres of farmland.

They also collaborated with Niagara College, Centennial College and the
University of Guelph on the initiative.

"GFS is showing strong leadership in recognizing the value that buying local has
for Ontario's economy," said Burkhard Mausberg, CEO of the Greenbelt Fund. "From
match-making producers with restaurateurs to helping promote local food items on
the menu, this project will mean more Ontarians will be able to eat local even
when eating out."

He said the Greenbelt Fund received hundreds of applicants for the funds.

The funds will help GFS to promote menu items containing Ontario ingredients
through forum workshops and promotional materials highlighting Ontario products
for restaurants. It will also connect local producers, processors and grower
associations with distributors and foodservice operators.

Leal said that it's important to have more Ontario-grown and harvested food on
tables.

"Through the Local Food Investment Fund, our government is helping to source
more agricultural products from Ontario growers and producers to get more local
food onto Ontario plates, which is creating new opportunities for the agri-food
sector," he said. "This funding encourages the private sector to invest and help
strengthen the value chain so that more Ontario-grown, raised and harvested food
is enjoyed across the province.

"The agri-food sector is a $36.6-billion industry," he said.

Meanwhile, GFS President - Ontario division Lisa MacNeil said she knows
firsthand how hard farmers work. She recalled being a child at around nine years
old, plucking the feathers off a "recently harvested" chicken that her farming
parents had raised.

"GFS is committed to continually working to find ways to increase our offerings
of Ontario local food," she added. "This project supports the local food
movement by shining a spotlight on quality Ontario ingredients. Thank you to the
Greenbelt Fund and Ontario egg, grain, greenhouse vegetable, mushroom and turkey
farmers for sharing our passion."

The Greenbelt Fund is investing more than $1.3 million to support 27 projects
across Ontario through the Local Food Investment Fund, bringing more
Ontario-grown and raised food to Ontarians. The program is administered by the
Greenbelt Fund, which has seen a 13-to-1 return on investment on grants made
since 2010.

Last year, the government provided the Greenbelt Fund with $6 million over three
years to support the local food strategy. It supports such things as the Local
Food Investment Fund, a grant program for farmers, business and non-profits
working to increase local food purchases.

Halton MPP Indira Naidoo-Harris thanked farmers for the work they do day in and
day out.

"I go to the (downtown) farmers' market each week and it makes me realize how
much our local farmers contribute to the community," she said. "It's good to be
able to recognize local famers and growers, and I know it isn't easy being a
farmer."

Growing up in a small town in Alberta, Naidoo-Harris recalls her friends who
lived on farms, having to do chores before school, attend school, then go back
home to do more chores again, even before dinner.

"There are so many unpredictable factors in farming," she added. "They feed us a
variety of fresh food."

Naidoo-Harris pointed to the 790,000 jobs they provide, which "our economy
depends on."

"Farmers are our friends and neighbours," she said, adding they provide us with
access to locally-sourced food that's "the best in the world."

Leal also noted that he, along with other government officials will travel to
India this fall to create new economic opportunities for Ontario's agri-food
industry and strengthen trade.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              517 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Dickinson Press (North Dakota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            June 12, 2013 Wednesday

Senate farm bill 'a great start'

BYLINE: Betsy Simon, The Dickinson Press, N.D.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 784 words


June 12--Better late than never.

The federal farm bill jumped another hurdle toward becoming law when the Senate
passed a five-year proposal Monday evening that would cost $955 billion over 10
years.

The bill, which passed by a 66-27 vote, now will be taken up by the House.

"It's a great start," said Woody Barth, president of the North Dakota Farmers
Union. "The version passed by the Senate does away with direct payments, which
we have been advocating for for quite some time and are glad to see."

Wesley Niederman, who farms in Grant County and is director of the NDFU District
5, which represents Morton and Grant counties, said the Senate bill is "workable
as written."

"The uncertainty of not knowing what programs will look like has been weighing
on the mind of producers," he said. "In this day of high-priced inputs and
volatile weather patterns, producers need to know they have a farm bill to
protect them in times of crop disaster. As producers in southwest North Dakota,
we know the value of a strong safety net in times of crop failures."

The legislation enhances crop insurance with the Supplemental Coverage Option,
which would allow producers to buy a supplemental policy beyond their individual
farm-based policy.

A newly introduced Agriculture Risk Coverage program would cover assistance for
multiple-year losses and work with crop insurance to cover between 78 and 88
percent of a producer's historic five-year average revenue based on price and
yield.

Niederman said crop insurance was the main focus of many producers watching the
debate.

"The one part of the farm bill that producers didn't want weakened was the crop
insurance title," he said. "We heard time after time. 'I can't farm without a
viable crop insurance product.' Lenders want the guarantee of getting paid back
for loans made and crop insurance does that in times of low crop yields or total
crop failures."

Barth wanted the Senate bill to pass, but added that the one big disappointment
he had with the legislation was the continuation of the conservation compliance,
which links a producer's eligibility for farm bill programs to erosion control
on highly erodible land.

The provision states that producers who receive certain farm bill subsidies
can't drain wetlands or farm vulnerable land without following a conservation
plan.

Conservation compliance has been around since 1985, Barth explained, and is
required of farmers who receive certain farm bill subsidies or participate in
conservation programs.

"It is a burden to farmers along the northern tier of the Red River Valley,"
Barth said. "Those producers lost land production to wetlands overtaking
grounds. Other areas of the country were drained prior to 1985, but not North
Dakota because of the cost of doing it at that time. Having this in the bill
will limit the ability of some North Dakota producers to purchase crop
insurance, which is very important."

The farm bill, which sets the agricultural and food policy in the U.S., is
supposed to be reauthorized by the Congress every five years, but the Sept. 30
deadline was last year. An extension was passed on the previous farm bill.

Barth said not having a new farm bill has had a somewhat limited impact on
producers.

"We still had a good plan and direct payments in place for producers," he said,
adding the disaster payments for livestock producers in particular may have been
limited and he hoped the new bill would add some protection for them.

The bill proposed by the Senate would cut $4 billion from food stamps, focuses
on enhanced crop insurance and continues the sugar program. It would also cut
more than $24 billion over 10 years.

It is now up to the U.S. House of Representatives to keep the bill moving.

The House's version of the $940 billion farm bill, which passed out of committee
two weeks ago, spends more money on crop insurance and less for food stamps and
conservation efforts.

Rep. Kevin Cramer, R-N.D., expects the House to bring the bill to the floor next
week.

"My goal is to have a reconciled bill passed before Congress goes on August
recess," Cramer said in a statement. "We've received a mixed bag of comments
from farmers about the farm bill. Many don't want the conservation compliance
tied to crop insurance, and some groups would like to see an extension of the
existing farm bill if conservation compliance isn't fixed.

"Generally, not having a new farm bill passed creates uncertainty, and I hope we
can do away with that by getting a bill in place that will provide some guidance
for farmers."

More from around the web

___ (c)2013 the Dickinson Press (Dickinson, N.D.) Visit the Dickinson Press
(Dickinson, N.D.) at www.thedickinsonpress.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130612-QX-Senate-farm-bill-a-great-start-0612-20130612

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QX


                       Copyright 2013 The Dickinson Press


                              518 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                        Progressive Media - Company News

                             April 14, 2014 Monday

Vireol Bio to commission former Osage bio energy facility

SECTION: PHARMACEUTICAL & HEALTHCARE PACKAGING; Products/Brands/Services

LENGTH: 823 words



HIGHLIGHT: Governor Terry McAuliffe announced that Vireol Bio Energy will
commission the former Osage Bio Energy facility and begin production of ethanol
in the City of Hopewell.


The company, which will produce ethanol from corn, barley and other small
grains, will invest more than $26.2m  to begin production at the facility,
creating 70 new jobs in the process.

The new plant will be the largest ethanol plant on the East Coast of the United
States. Governor McAuliffe began playing a significant role in keeping this
project in Virginia during the first month of his term, meeting with
representatives from Vireol to discuss the economic advantages of locating in
Virginia, including port and transportation facilities as well as rich grain
production, and the various business incentive programs Virginia offers.

The Commonwealth of Virginia is partnering with the City of Hopewell and Vireol
Bio Energy on this project through the Governor's Agriculture and Forestry
Industries Development Fund (AFID).

Speaking about today's announcement, Governor McAuliffe said, "In the first
month of my administration, I was able to sit down with Vireol's business and
investment team to share with them my commitment to creating jobs and
diversifying the Commonwealth's economy and encourage them to begin their
ethanol production here in Virginia. Vireol's decision to invest in Virginia
rather than sending the plant's assets overseas brings to life an impressive yet
completely unutilized facility that will create good paying jobs right here in
Virginia. It is outstanding that we are able to bring a new company like Vireol
to Virginia by leveraging an existing asset and Virginia's outstanding climate
for business. As Vireol begins production, we'll have new jobs in Hopewell as
well as a new market in which Virginia farmers will be able to sell their
grains."

In addition to the investment and jobs created in Hopewell, Vireol Bio Energy
will spend more than $100 million to purchase from Virginia producers
approximately 21.7 million bushels of grains that the company will need over the
next three years, providing new opportunities for Virginia's farmers. Vireol Bio
Energy plans to produce over 170 million gallons of ethanol over a three year
period, utilizing corn, wheat and barley, which will ultimately be blended with
gasoline for fuel.

"The Vireol Bio Energy project creates good jobs at its facility while providing
new opportunities for agricultural producers throughout Virginia, the very
reason we created the AFID program two years ago," said Todd Haymore, Virginia
Secretary of Agriculture and Forestry. "Vireol's commitment to source at least
30% of their grain needs from Virginia, as required by the AFID grant, creates a
substantial opportunity for grain producers in our rural communities while also
generating additional activity in our transportation and aggregation sectors.
The byproducts from this facility, like the dried distiller grains, a much
sought after component of animal feed, also provide new domestic usage and
export opportunities for Virginia.

"Many thanks for the grant. This is great for the City of Hopewell, great for
the Commonwealth of Virginia and great for our farmers." said Delegate Riley
Ingram (R - 62nd District).

"Several jurisdictions within District 16, including Hopewell, Prince George,
Dinwiddie and Chesterfield, have significant agricultural activity and will
benefit from AFID grants," said Senator Henry Marsh (D - 16th District). "I am
excited that the Governor has issued the first two grants and look forward to
expansion of the program across the Commonwealth."

The company will improve the facility's ethanol production capabilities as well
as expand and construct new value-added processes at the site. One major
co-produce byproduct of Vireol Bio Energy's ethanol production are dried
distiller grains (DDGs), a high protein feed ingredient, sought out by poultry
and livestock producers. The company is also investing in a facility to capture
the high-quality carbon dioxide that is created during fermentation that is
utilized for beverage carbonation and food preservation.

"The City of Hopewell eagerly anticipates the potential opening of the Vireol
operation here in our great city," said Hopewell mayor, Michael C. Bujakowski.
"We are appreciative of the Governor, our State Representatives, and our State
Senator for the support they have shown toward both Vireol and Hopewell. We
anticipate a long and prosperous relationship with our new business partners
from across the Atlantic."

A $250,000 AFID grant is being awarded to the City of Hopewell to assist the
Vireol Bio Energy in the restart and expansion of the ethanol plant. Hopewell is
providing a rebate of their local machinery and tool tax, an incentive offered
to businesses in their Enterprise Zone, as the required local match for the
grant. The company will also receive Virginia Jobs Investment Program (VJIP)
employee training incentives, various state Enterprise Zone incentives and
qualifies for the Biofuels Production Incentive Grant, recently passed by the
General Assembly.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 Progressive Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              519 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               Arts & Book Review

                                  June 1, 2013
                                 First Edition

A TROUBLING PICTURE;
British films were overlooked at Cannes 2013. Martin Baker asks if we should
care, and if we are getting value from BFI, Bafta, and the rest

BYLINE: Martin Baker

SECTION: FILMS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 989 words


The stars have departed the Croisette for another year, and what did we learn?
As usual, the post-Cannes talk is firmly focused on numbers. Large ones, too -
Lionsgate is spending big on The Hunger Games: Catching Fire, box-office figures
are buoyant, and one of the trade papers reported that a young woman got a Euro
40,000 tip for providing an Arab prince with an evening's entertainment - now
there's a number to crunch. Venality, greed, lust and excruciatingly expensive
steak frites have reasserted their rightful place in the festival's order of
things. God is back in his heaven, and cinema has returned to Paradiso.

But where are the British in this newly self-righted world? On the one hand,
things seem to be going pretty well. Four modestly budgeted British movies
premiered at Cannes. Clio Barnard's The Selfish Giant is clearly the pick of the
bunch, having drawn favourable notices in Directors' Fortnight. On the other,
Stephen Frears's Muhammad Ali's Greatest Fight, given a Cannes Special Screening
at the Salle du Soixantième, is produced by Rainmark Films - according to the
BFI's website "the only British production company represented within the
festival's official selection".

So the Cannes festival organisers and jury, this year presided over by Steven
Spielberg, appeared somewhat unimpressed by British film. Is this just a matter
of timing (maybe there'll be more Brit-flicks next year)? And anyway, should we
care? One could argue that the Cannes festival is nothing more than a cinematic
version of the Eurovision Song Contest, but with different secrets and different
branding issues.

If the UK film industry is going to rely on government or "third-sector"
handouts, the outlook is poor. The Government's Department for Media Culture and
Sport has a budget of £2.2bn (compared to total Government spending of around
£700bn). That £2.2 billion is set to be cut right back.

A relatively bright spot, however, appears to be the BFI Film Fund, which
allocates Lottery funding to film production, development and distribution. But
it's not just about money, according to a BFI spokeswoman: "It's not simply a
question of handing cheques out. We get really involved. We nurture our
projects. One of our executive producers was at the sound mix of The Selfish
Giant till 3am the other day. That's typical of the dedication people show."

That said, without money, movies simply don't get made. "The total value of
production and distribution aid this financial year was £26m," says the BFI. "Of
that, £20m was for development and production, and £4m was devoted to
distribution."

Last year, the BFI made about 30 production grants, more than 100 development
grants, and a lot more on the distribution side. Do just the four UK movie
premieres and one Special Screening constitute good value? On that question, the
jury is out.

What constitutes a "British" film is an interesting side issue. The BFI has a
32-question test - a sort of citizenship examination for film - and a 50 per
cent mark is required to qualify for its grants. The Ali movie may be officially
British, but the funding was largely put up by HBO, the American TV company. In
sum, a British movie is like pornography - difficult to define, but you know it
when you see it.

Kevin Price, the chief operating officer of Bafta, believes that the UK film
industry is showing signs of life. He says: "There are a number of good signs
such as cinema attendances which are up for the 'Nth' year in succession, the
tax credit stimulating new production, and British talent is recognised as
world-leading. But the Pinewood expansion has been blocked and the UK film
industry is hardly awash with profits and backers."

Ian Wall, director of education at Film Education, a charity supported by the UK
film industry with the object of using film within the curriculum, champions an
argument favoured by many. He says: "Is it really an industry? UK producers try
to get their films made and shown in cinemas. Distributors try to attract
audiences to films, using their marketing knowledge and expertise. Exhibitors
try to get people to see films within their own cinemas. Is this an industrial
model? I'm not sure. The key question, in a digital age, is are more people
watching films?"

Which brings us back to Bafta. Isn't it the academy's role to get more people
doing just that? You could almost hear the sound of Britain's best and most
vocal slithering off the record when asked about Bafta's role and its usefulness
in promoting UK film. Price believes Bafta's mission is "to celebrate excellence
in film (also in television and games) and to inspire practitioners, especially
emerging talent, to reach the highest standards in their craft???" and after
talking of "our ever-growing learning and events programme which this year will
not only extend to the US but also internationally with a view to forging
relationships with future practitioners from all parts of the world", says "we
feel that Bafta has an important role to play in supporting the future UK film
industry." For all the nameless critics, the types who might look at Price's
words and say, "well he would say that, wouldn't he?", there is some strong
support for the academy. Wall, for example, says "Bafta is now doing a splendid
job, not just in giving out awards but also revealing the areas of the craft and
creativity on which its members evaluate and critique films."

Talking of awards, perhaps there's a moral to be drawn from this year's
Oscar-winner, Argo. The movie was more than just a tense, rescue-operation
thriller, but spoke to the nature of film itself - its power to enthral and
entertain. And it underscored the banality of movies when compared to real
dramas.

So the real drama is the UK film industry - will it make more films, and will we
want to watch them? Or is it otiose to ponder such matters? Perhaps the words of
the film itself are relevant: "Argo, fuck yourself".

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TR


                    Copyright 2013 Independent Print Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              520 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           The Edmond Sun (Oklahoma)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 16, 2008 Sunday

3-16 business briefs

BYLINE: The Edmond Sun, Okla.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1103 words


Mar. 16--EDMOND -- New gift store opens

Hibiscus Gifts & Collectibles is celebrating its grand opening now through March
22.

The store features brands such as Lampe Berger, Waterford and Vera Wang crystal,
Boyds Bears, Annalee dolls, Aromatique decorative fragrance, imported bath and
body products, Caldrea luxury home care and Crane & Kate Spade stationery. It
also has an artisan chocolate and gourmet food sampling every Saturday.

During the celebration, visitors may register to win prizes such as Waterford,
Boyds, a Jim Shore figurine and much more.

Hibiscus is just west of Penn at 2204 N.W. 164th St. The store is open Monday
through Saturday and stays open late on Thursday evenings. For more information,
call 513-8595.

Chesapeake gift means more Big Brothers and Big Sisters for Oklahoma children

A $500,000 gift from Chesapeake Energy Corporation in Oklahoma City to Big
Brothers Big Sisters of Oklahoma will help provide many more mentors for
Oklahoma children. The gift of $100,000 per year for five years will support the
organization's Capacity Building Campaign, which includes volunteer recruitment
efforts and expenses associated with making new matches between caring adults
and children in need of safe, solid role models.

In addition to the company's financial support, Chesapeake will work with the
Oklahoma City office to recruit 150 Chesapeake employees to serve as Big
Brothers and Big Sisters.

Big Brothers Big Sisters of America is the largest mentoring organization in the
United States. Big Brothers Big Sisters of Oklahoma served almost 2,400 children
last year and the national organization served 242,000 children nationwide.

Dressing for success made easy, thanks to local dressbarn

Making a good first impression is a huge contributing factor to landing a job.

"We know how important a job interview is; that is why we partnered with our
local Dress for Success affiliate to help disadvantaged women make that first
impression a good one," said Shannon Saunders, district manager for dressbarn in
Oklahoma City.

During Dress for Success's Send One Suit Week, March 30 through April 5,
dressbarn stores across the country will collect clothes from customers and
donate them to underprivileged women in the local community seeking career
development support through Dress for Success.

Local residents are being asked to donate new or gently used suits and other
professional apparel to dressbarn in Oklahoma City or any other dressbarn
location during Send One Suit Week, March 30-April 5. Each customer who donates
during this week will receive a coupon from dressbarn for 15 percent off their
total purchase. For more information, call your local dressbarn store at
302-2032, or visit www.dressbarn.com.

Log on to www.dressforsuccess.org to learn more.

Strong February ratings continue growth

KOCO 5's growth trend and ratings victories continued in the just-completed
February ratings competition.

In early evening news, Eyewitness News 5 at 5 p.m. is again No. 1 in its time
period, growing audience year to year and up three straight ratings periods.
Eyewitness News 5 at 6 p.m. is again No. 1 in its time period, also growing
three straight ratings periods. ABC's World News with Charles Gibson is No. 1
with growth in four straight ratings periods, up 8 percent year to year.

Restaurant gains 15 years of culinary experience

Red Prime Steak is proud to announce Ryan Murphy has joined Chef Robert Black's
culinary team as the Chef de Cuisine.

"Ryan trained under one of Oklahoma's best chefs and has worked in the kitchens
of several Oklahoma restaurants. His 15 years of experience is a great asset to
the Red Prime Steak culinary team," said Red Prime Steak owner Keith Paul.

A graduate of the Coach House Apprenticeship program, Murphy credits his
knowledge of cooking from working at several restaurants in the metro area
including The Mantel, Deep Fork Grill and The Metro Wine Bar and Bistro.

Red Prime Steak is on North Broadway in downtown Oklahoma City, open daily at
4:30 p.m. For reservations, call 232-2626.

Agriculture grant, loan deadline is April 1

Grant and loan application deadline for the next Oklahoma Agricultural
Enhancement and Diversification program is April 1. State agriculture officials
are urging all producers with innovative ideas to apply.

Agricultural diversification grants of up to $5,000 are available as well as
interest-free loans in three categories: Cooperative Marketing Loans, Marketing
and Utilization Loans, and Basic and Applied Research Loans.

Loans may not be used to purchase land, buildings or equipment. Eligible
expenses include feasibility studies, business plans, legal expenses, consultant
fees, product development and marketing.

Producers interested in either diversifying their current operations or entering
some form of value-added or marketing venture are eligible. Producers or
producer groups interested in pursuing forms of value-added enterprises or
marketing cooperatives are also urged to apply.

Among other things, OAED loans and grants have been used in the development of a
variety of agritourism ventures, biofuel projects and food processing
businesses.

Applications are available online from the ODAFF at www.oda.state.ok.us by
clicking the "Loans" link. For more information, call Harvey at 522-5563. The
mailing address is Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food, and Forestry, 2800
N. Lincoln Blvd., Oklahoma City, OK 73105.

Newest elements therapeutic massage studio opens in Warr Acres

Elements therapeutic massage is now open on Northwest Expressway. Ora and Ron
Merhib, two local entrepreneurs, have opened Warr Acres' first elements
therapeutic massage studio at 5501 Northwest Expressway, Ste. 5519.

"I am excited to bring this business to the neighborhood," Ora said. "The
community will truly enjoy elements' professional massage services for years to
come."

Elements therapeutic massage's certified massage therapists provide customized
massage services at a retail price. Franchising since 2006, elements therapeutic
massage is growing rapidly with 32 open studios and several new locations
opening each month. Other Oklahoma locations include: 1321 N. Bryant Ave. in
Edmond and 3533 W. Memorial Rd. in Oklahoma City.

To see more of The Edmond Sun or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.edmondsun.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, The Edmond Sun, Okla. Distributed
by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080316-EO-3-16-business-briefs-0316

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EO


                                 Copyright 2008


                              521 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Ararat Advertiser & Stawell Times

                               May 4, 2012 Friday

Flood bill rises to $22 million

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 620 words


REGION - The estimated cost of repairs to damage caused by the flood events
between September and January has continued to increase.

Northern Grampians Shire Council's latest estimate is that overall, the known
impact on the Northern Grampians Shire economy from the direct and indirect
losses directly attributed to all of the flood and storm events in 2011, is
calculated at $22.17 million.

Municipal Recovery Manager for the shire, Greg Little, said the direct loss
estimates from the floods for local businesses were considered to be around
$260,000 and a further $11 million for primary producers.

"Economic modeling tool 'Remplan' calculates that the economic impact to our
shire of this is a total cost of $16.4 million. This is further compounded by
the December event in which 19 businesses with losses of at least $161,500 has
been identified and primary producer losses of $3.71 million - a 'Remplan' total
cost calculation of $5,673,000," Mr Little said.

Mr Little said the impact on farmers across the region by the December floods,
was the reason council had campaigned so strongly at both state and federal
level for Category C funding.

"Council has been incredibly strong at advocating for Category C funding under
NDRRA for December," he said.

"Direct representation, written requests, information provision and site tours
have occurred with State and Federal parliamentarians.

"Access to Category C would provide for grants to flood affected business,
primary producers and community organisations. The evidence of how vital these
grants are to support the effected business and primary producers is that from
the September 2010 and January 2011 grants program, 271 applications were
approved for funding to a total of $2.7 million, which has the effect under
'Remplan' of putting a value of $3.95 million back into the Northern Grampians
Shire economy, including about 19 jobs.

"Council's Economic Development Officers and Flood Recovery officers continue to
undertake visits with businesses which have been flood affected, including
meeting with Stawell Biz as a peak representative body of business impacts from
December to speak on the economic recovery process and how business can be
involved."

Mr Little said as well as impacting on built infrastrcuture, the floods also had
a significant impact on the security and welfare of livestock on farms.

He reported that 390 kilometres of fencing was damaged during the storm and
flood to bring the total flood damaged agricultural fencing to 1670km that
council is aware of.

"Approximately 850km of fencing has been restored through the 'Flood-mate'
prisoner team, other prison teams, Project Platypus, the Catchment Management
Authorities and Conservation Volunteers," he said.

"The December flood meant that the planned work schedule was delayed while all
agencies pulled resources to the Joel Joel area to ensure critical boundary
fences were secured to ensure livestock containment."

Mr Little said because of the extensive impact on the agricultural sector across
the entire municipality, the flood recovery program has had a strong focus on
providing support in this area.

"While government grants are not being offered as yet, this doesn't prevent the
Flood Recovery team from being involved with the agricultural sector flood
recovery," Mr Little said.

"The flood recovery team has been active in facilitating and partnering with Red
Cross to undertake an outreach visit to each farm and residence in the Joel
Joel, Crowlands, Greens Creek and Landsborough West area, with the intention
that information is given on road and asset repairs, personal and financial
support, emerging livestock and agriculture issues, and referrals to services
made where requested."

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              522 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Daily Variety

                             May 16, 2007 Wednesday

TAX CREDIT IS PRODUCER EQUITY

BYLINE: ADAM DAWTREY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 388 words


The U.K. Film Council, BBC Films and Film4, the three principal public funders
of feature films in Blighty, have agreed to give British indie producers an
equity stake in their own movies.   After months of negotiation with producers'
org PACT, the three financiers have jointly announced that they will treat the
U.K.'s new tax credit as the producer's investment in a movie.   The net value
of the tax credit will typically be worth 10%-18% of a film's budget. Producers
of British films backed by the UKFC, the BBC or Film4 can thus expect to recoup
proportionately alongside any other equity investors.   This ground-breaking
agreement is intended to give producers a real chance to build up significant
assets in their companies, rather than living from hand to mouth on production
fees. However, deals on individual projects will still have to be negotiated
between the producer and all the financiers.   "This is a real step change for
British independent producers," said UKFC chief exec John Woodward.

"For the first time, we will all start with the principle that the net value of
the tax break ... belongs to the producer, not the film's financers. We still
have to make our numbers add up, but this is a big shift in attitude and
approach from the old sale-and-leaseback days where the tax subsidy was used
solely to the benefit of financiers to reduce their investment."   Rebecca
O'Brien, acting chair of the PACT film policy group, said, "This initiative is
of great importance to independent film production companies --- it presents us
with a unique opportunity to begin to build viable businesses and to become
effective partners in our industry."   When the government announced that it
was replacing the old Section 42/Section 48 tax relief with the new tax credit,
its stated intention was to ensure that producers received the benefit, rather
than the financial middlemen who prospered under the old schemes.   "We really
hope it's going to do something positive to help build the sustainability of
film production in this country," David Thompson, head of BBC Films, said.
Film4 topper Tessa Ross added, "At Film4, we need our producing partners to be
strong, and we hope that this initiative will boost the entire sector and allow
producers to move onto even bigger and better things (with us, hopefully!)."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 Reed Elsevier Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              523 of 998 DOCUMENTS


             Journal Record Legislative Report (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            September 8, 2008 Monday

Wagon Creek Creamery in Helena to receive $35K from USDA

BYLINE: Brian Brus

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 435  words


Wagon Creek Creamery owner Ron Crain has enjoyed pulling money out of Texas
instead of sending his company's raw product out of state for someone else to
develop and profit from, he said.

A recent recipient of the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Value-Added Producer
Grant - and the only Oklahoma company out of 144 awarded - Crain is planning to
use the funds to create a marketing plan to more efficiently move his creamery
products out of Helena.

"We try to focus on Oklahoma and around our region, mostly by grass-roots
efforts when people find us," he said. "To say we have any marketing now would
be generous. ... But when I've tried to raise sales we went to Dallas where our
products sold pretty well. And that's the Texas dollar coming into Oklahoma.
That's a real plus if we can do more of that. "

Wagon Creek Creamery will receive about $35,000; the USDA awarded nearly $20
million nationwide. Many of the other recipients are planning feasibility
studies and marketing programs for alternative or renewable fuels, the
department announced.

"These grants will improve financial returns and help create jobs for
agricultural producers, business and families across rural America," Agriculture
Secretary Ed Schafer said in prepared statement.

Crain and his wife, Barbara, have operated a small dairy farm for about 17
years. The operation is strictly organic - their 50 head of mixed-breed cattle
are pasture grass fed, raised without hormone-boosting drugs or grain, and when
a cow needs doctoring for anything even as simple as vaccinations its milk is
discarded and not used in products.

A couple of years ago the Crains realized they couldn't continue to merely sell
their milk as a wholesale commodity.

"We got tired of the inevitable up-and-down cycles of that market, since we were
selling to a national co-op," Ron Crain said. "We decided that we would either
lose the farm or go for it. ... We've been hustling ever since. "

"Go for it" means the Crains take their milk and add value by processing it
themselves into finished products such as yogurt cheese, ricotta, onion dip and
cheesecakes, he said. Sales have continued to rise, even for lack of elaborate
marketing plan. The creamery now retails through about a dozen grocers such as
Akin's Natural Foods in Oklahoma and bordering states.

 "We're catering now to a health food catering niche and those people who are of
a sustainable resource mind-set," he said.

 "Oklahomans need to take the commodities they produce and turn them into more
value-added products because it keeps money here in our state. We can make our
own finished products. "

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Corporate earnings

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              524 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Nottingham Evening Post

                             August 7, 2012 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Medical help as sure as eggs is eggs

BYLINE: Mark Patterson

SECTION: BUSINESS POST;BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 748 words


QUESTION: what do you do with your egg shells after you've eaten the eggs
inside? It's an issue facing British food producers, who currently dispose of
15,000 tons of egg shell waste every year by dumping it into landfill.

Disposal in this way costs the producers money and is arguably a wasteful means
of dealing with the by-product of an essential food that goes into everything
from bread to meringue.

But now a Nottingham businessman is hoping he can turn waste egg shells into
high value medical products to treat wounds and conditions such as
osteoarthritis.

Andrew Stacey, director of Cellular Systems, has received a £25,000 Government
grant to research the commercial feasibility of extracting products such as
collagen proteins from egg shells.

Collagens, which are present in the thin white membrane that lines the inside of
eggs, are used in the £1.2bn wound care industry because they provide a
supporting cellular structure that helps healing. Another potential application
of the shells is glucosamine, which is a supplement used in the treatment of
osteoarthritis.

Mr Stacey, who is based at BioCity, has teamed up with Professor Carole Perry of
Nottingham Trent University, who will spend six months researching the
feasibility of extracting collagen and other compounds from egg shells Prof
Perry said: "Egg shells are a good example of a bio mineral which is mostly made
up of an inorganic, chalk-like material such as calcium carbonate but also
contains organic compounds including collagen and glucosamines.

"What we are going to try to do is extract the mineral compounds by getting rid
of the organic material and, vice-versa, try to get rid of the inorganic
material so we can look at the organic compounds. The more gentle the process
is, the more likely it is that we can extract the collagen and other compounds
intact."

Mr Stacey, a former business development manager with the Nottingham food
bioscience company Eminate, said he had met half a dozen smaller food companies
in the Midlands to discuss support for an egg shell processing business.

Although one product of processing could be calcium carbonate, which is widely
used in agriculture and the construction industries, he said the real target
would be higher value products such as collagen proteins. "Calcium carbonate
sells for £60-£100 per ton and for that it's not really worth looking into the
processing," said Mr Stacey.

"But one of the egg company MDs I spoke to looked up quickly when I told him
that the potential of other products could be £1,000 per gram. The main things
are collagens, which are in the white membrane you see when you cut the top off
a boiled egg. Collagens are used in wound care and are also used as a
glucosamine supplement to treat osteoarthritis. In the USA that market alone is
worth $800m."

If the science suggests that these high-value products can be extracted from
shell waste in a usable form, and using a process that can scaled up, the plan
is to set up a processing plant using waste supplied by several egg-using
companies.

"I haven't spoken to any of the massive egg-using companies because I feel that
we would lose control of the process if we did that," said Mr Stacey. "If we get
some of the smaller companies around the table we can look at setting up a
processing plant. If we can bring waste to a central point then we can process
it and everyone makes a profit from the high-value products. If we can extract
collagen then we would sell it on to medical companies and let them take it from
there."

So why has nobody thought of this before? "They have, but few people have put
the effort in. I've seen Defra papers from ten years ago that looked at this.
But for egg-using companies, the issue is peripheral because they're interested
in what is inside the egg, not the shell. And research costs would come off
their bottom line." Prof Perry said: "Scientists know what is in egg shells -
it's more about how we can get it out in a way where we can do something useful
with it."

The £25,000 research grant is one of two received by Mr Stacey from a joint
Technology Strategy Board/Defra competition for Innovation for Growth in
Agriculture, Food and Drink. The other £25,000 grant will be used to research
methods of passively monitoring the presence of bacteria in farm poultry houses.

The grants recognise Mr Stacey's expertise in finding technological development.

'' The more gentle the process is, the more likely it is that we can extract the
collagen intact

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Egg-heads: From left: Andrew Stacey and Professor Carole Perry of
Cellular Systems.
NOSR20120803A-016_C

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NEP


                     Copyright 2012 Nottingham Evening Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              525 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                              June 12, 2005 Sunday

Midyear is a good time to check personal portfolio, make changes

BYLINE: Andrew Leckey

LENGTH: 988 words


Are you experiencing a midyear crisis?

The jump in oil prices, an unpredictable stock market and some disappointing
economic indicators in the first several months of 2005 were unwanted surprises
that have left investors wondering which way to turn.

Many upbeat assumptions didn't morph into reality. Fortunately, midyear is an
opportune time for a personal portfolio checkup to determine whether adjustments
are necessary.

A growing, though not universal, trend is a more positive attitude toward stocks
over bonds. In particular, industry groups whose prices were unduly punished in
the past should do well in a second half characterized by modest interest rate
increases and a decent economy.

"On the more pleasant side of the 2005 ledger -- really all we've had in terms
of good news -- are very, very solid corporate profits," said Hugh Johnson,
chairman and chief investment officer for Johnson Illington Advisors, Albany,
N.Y. "Despite those strong profits, investors sold stocks because of fear about
oil prices."

Increase your small-capitalization stock holdings because they should continue
to outperform large caps, Johnson advised. Shares of exchange-traded fund
iShares Russell 2000 Index (IWM), which replicates the Russell 2000 small-stock
index, are a handy way to do this.

Johnson's latest breakdown for a model stock portfolio is 80 percent large cap,
14 percent mid cap and 6 percent small cap. Emphasize growth stocks over value
stocks, he said, because bull-market groups such as technology and consumer
cyclical stocks have been gaining ground.

"I'm more bullish on the stock market than bonds because we've had companies
raising dividends at an unprecedented rate this year," observed Richard E.
Cripps, chief market strategist with Legg Mason Wood Walker in Baltimore, who
favors larger-cap stocks and would keep 80 percent of a stock portfolio in them.
"We've also had stock buybacks by companies that feel good about their financial
outlook and consider their stock to be undervalued."

Reduce fixed-income securities, especially Treasuries, instead shifting that
money into stocks because it should perform better there over the next five
years, Cripps said. Higher interest rates or inflation could hurt bonds more
than stocks because so many investor bond holdings have long-term maturities and
the value of their principal will decrease.

As part of a tech revival, Cripps and Johnson recommend stock in computer chip
giant Intel Corp. (INTC).

"Everyone says there's this worldwide slowdown, but we believe it's just a
head-fake because there is long-term sustainable growth," said James Grant, a
financial adviser with Scott & Stringfellow Inc. in Charlottesville, Va. "Get
away from bonds and into stocks, especially since Wall Street has oversold the
industrial and large-cap value stocks."

Focus your personal portfolio on stocks and certificates of deposit, said Grant.
Pharmaceuticals have been strengthening, so he has been moving clients into the
closed-end fund Hambrecht & Quist Healthcare Investors Fund (HQH), which offers
a 7.87 percent dividend.

Where homebuilder stocks are concerned, Grant said he wouldn't "touch them with
a 10-foot pole" because he's nervous that they can't sustain their accelerating
earnings. Some other advisers share his concern.

"Residential real estate may be a bigger bubble than the stock market was in
1999 because higher interest rates will mean fewer people can afford
higher-priced properties," warned Louis Stanasolovich, certified financial
planner and chief executive of Legend Financial Advisors in Pittsburgh. "In
addition, there will be a need for liquidity among baby boomers, who will want
to sell their homes and downsize as they retire."

Intermediate and longer-term bonds are a "formula for abysmal returns" over the
next decade, Stanasolovich cautioned. Since he isn't enthusiastic about U.S.
stocks either, he's shifting client money into alternatives such as the
arbitrage funds Leuthold Core Investment (LCORX), Metropolitan West Strategic
Income (MWSIX) and PIMCO Commodity RealReturn Strategy Fund (PCRAX).

Familiar corporate names dominate the midyear recommendations of these
investment pundits.

PepsiCo Inc. (PEP), the second-largest producer of carbonated soft drinks, and
Medtronic (MDT), maker of medical implants such as pacemakers and
defibrillators, are Johnson choices. Cripps recommends shares of semiconductor
firm Texas Instruments Inc. (TXN), world's largest retailer Wal-Mart Stores
(WMT) and farm equipment manufacturer Deere & Co. (DE).

Shares that Grant likes include Wendy's International Inc. (WEN), the
third-largest hamburger chain; Alcoa Inc. (AA), one of the world's largest
aluminum producers; Wabtec Corp. (WAB), manufacturer of brakes for freight
trains that should benefit as an extensive upgrade of trains begins; and Dow
Chemical Co. (DOW), the world's largest chemical firm.

In funds, Grant recommends large value mutual fund Van Kampen Comstock (ACSTX),
as well as exchange-traded funds S&P 400 SPDRS (MDY) and iShares Dow Jones
Select Dividend Index Fund (DVY).

Make any changes in moderation.

"If you've had a well-structured portfolio, there's no real need to make midyear
changes except to be a little more optimistic," said Alfred Goldman, chief
market strategist with A.G. Edwards & Sons in St. Louis. "You've got a mature
economy and a mature market which, while not on a resuscitator, is changing in
personality."

Taking a more conservative stance and moving into better-quality stocks are now
appropriate moves, Goldman believes. The dollar is doing better, oil may have
made a short-term top, and it would be a "really pleasant surprise" if the
Middle East moves further toward democracy, Goldman said. Andrew Leckey answers
questions only through the column. Address questions to Andrew Leckey,
"Successful Investing," P.M.B. 184, 369-B Third St., San Rafael, Calif.
94901-3581, or by e-mail at andrewinv@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                              526 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            March 21, 2013 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

$500M bioenergy program cut as questions mount; Redford says budget shortfall
led to decision

BYLINE: Darcy Henton, Calgary Herald

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


The discontinuation of a $500-million Alberta bioenergy program has raised
questions about its role in furthering the province's climate change agenda with
industry bemoaning its loss and critics calling it a colossal waste of money.

The program, which attracted criticism from the auditor general in 2012, will
cost Alberta nearly $100 million this year and another $230 million over the
next two, despite the March 7 budget decision to close the program to new
applicants.

Critics from all opposition parties slammed the program, saying there are better
and cheaper ways to meet greenhouse gas emission targets.

"Look at what it is costing us - $500 million," said Wildrose critic Rob
Anderson. "It's just an obscene amount of money to what amounts to corporate
welfare."

The purpose of the program, according to the Alberta Energy website, was to
encourage investment in bioenergy production capacity to reduce reliance on
fossil fuels and create value-added opportunities with economic benefits.

Discontinuing the program at a time when the province is trying to demonstrate
to the U.S. it is reducing its carbon footprint was necessary because of a
$6-billion shortfall in resource revenues this year's budget, Premier Redford
said Wednesday.

"We needed to make sure that we are investing in initiatives that were
economically viable at the end of the day," she said.

"From the perspective of Finance and the Department of Energy we've seen some
very good success there, but we can't fund everything all the time for all
days."

Energy Minister Ken Hughes said he wanted to "reflect upon the success" of the
program before putting additional money into it.

"What we want to do is ensure if we're doing anything like that in the future,
we're doing it in a way that maximizes our greenhouse gas footprint
contribution," he added.

Alberta Energy spokesman Mike Feenstra said the government saved $63 million by
not extending the program. However, the costs will continue to ramp up over the
next three years because the credit is linked to volumes of production - and as
volumes increase, so does the grant.

The $98 million this year covers 31 grants approved in rounds one and two of the
program, Feenstra said. Bioenergy producers will receive credits on their
production of liquid biofuels, electricity from biomass or heat from biomass.

There are four biodiesel facilities and three ethanol plants now either
operating or under construction in the province, Feenstra said.

The program was first established in 2006 in support of standards that require
five per cent of gasoline and two per cent of diesel to be comprised of
renewable fuels. Alberta expected to cut greenhouse gas emissions by one million
tonnes annually - the equivalent of removing 200,000 cars from provincial roads.

Another component of the program involves producing electricity from wood chips
and manure.

In 2010, former energy minister Ron Liepert said the initial $150 million the
province invested had leverage $2 billion in investments from the private
sector.

But Ben Thibault, a Pembina Institute policy analyst, said the program wasn't an
efficient way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and it may not have been
meeting the province's economic development and value-added objectives either.

"The program has not been defensible as cost-effective, at least on greenhouse
gas grounds," he said. "As best as I can tell they must have made the same
assessment with respect to their other objectives."

Liberal critic Kent Hehr applauded the decision to end the program.

"I don't know if the taxpayers or the environment got good value out of this
program," he said.

NDP critic Rachel Notley noted Alberta's auditor general raised concerns about
the program in his October 2012 report, pointing out five of the six grant
recipients audited had not reported to the government on energy product
produced, production capacity, greenhouse gas emissions or other required
information.

"Here we have another half-billion dollar investment," Notley said. "What do we
have to show for this? I don't know."

But Paul Tiege, a scientist for sustainable agriculture and biofuel at Olds
College Centre for innovation, said the program was instrumental in getting some
biodiesel manufacturing facilities going.

The province currently imports 300 million litres of biodiesel annually from the
United States because of the lack of facilities here, he said.

"By shutting down a producer credit you are really taking away any incentive
there is for Alberta companies to make biodiesel, which means we will continue
to import our biodiesel from outside our borders," he said.

Kelsey Prenevost, president of Kyoto Fuels Corp., said the incentive was
invaluable in the development of the company's 66-million-litre-per-year
biodiesel production facility, opening this year in Lethbridge.

"In the case of our company, Kyoto Fuels, the Alberta incentives were
instrumental in attracting private sector investment," he said.

Incentive programs have enabled Alberta industry to develop the largest
biodiesel producer capacity in Canada, Prenevost said. The 330 million litres of
annual production coming on stream will be about half of the total Canadian
production, he added.

Ian Thomson, president of Western Canada Biodiesel Association, said the Alberta
program has been "a bridge to enable a new industry to take root and grow."

"We'll see several plants start producing this low carbon fuel on a large scale
in the next six months."

Canadian Renewable Fuels Association president W. Scott Thurlow encouraged all
levels of governments to take advantage of the "proven environmental and climate
benefits of biofuels."

Although the Alberta program has been discontinued, he said the association is
pleased the province is honouring its existing commitments for companies already
participating in it.

dhenton@calgaryherald.com

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Calgary Herald, Files/;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2013 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              527 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        The Balochistan Times (AsiaNet)

                           September 15, 2009 Tuesday

Innovative methods used for industrial development

LENGTH: 739  words


As part of its initiative to support industrial development through innovative
methods, the Competitiveness Support Fund (CSF) is poised to expand its Matching
Grants operations with new projects, including a Mango Pack House in Multan.

The CSF is a joint initiative of the Ministry of Finance, Government of Pakistan
and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), established
to reposition Pakistan's economy on a more global footing, says a statement
issued by the CSF here today.

The Mango Pack House, a collaborative effort of CSF and the Progressive Mango
Growers' Group, Multan is to be developed for processing and packing of fresh
mangoes (EurepGAP certified) for export to Europe and the United States.

According to plan, a blast chiller/cold storage facility will be established at
the site where mangoes will be treated to improve their quality and shelf life
before being shipped out.  Pakistan produces over 1.6 million tons of mangoes
annually.  Despite this, there is currently no proper facility for washing,
de-sapping, grading, and removal of field heat of mangoes.  The planned Mango
Pack House will also be used for processing of citrus and fresh vegetables other
than mangoes in the off season.  This facility will be the first of its kind in
Pakistan and will greatly help boost exports.

The purpose of CSF's Matching Grant is to provide co-financing for a project
that is innovative and increases efficiency through lower costs, increase output
or quality and generates jobs.  By doing so, a grassroots level enhancement is
made possible through close collaboration between local clusters (at district
level), academic institutions, and government agencies, thereby employing CSF's
triple helix approach.

Currently, countrywide there are 10 projects in operation.  CSF's Matching
Grants projects are the Common Laboratory for Drug Formulation in Nowshera, the
Common Facility Centre for Cutlery Polishing and Finishing in Wazirabad, the
Value Addition in Milk Supply Chain in Balochistan, which is based in Quetta,
Pishin and Kuchlak, Gems Processing Centre in Chitral, Common Facility Centre
for Marble Processing in Mohmand Agency, Solar Kilns for Leading Clusters of
Furniture Sector in Islamabad, Karachi, Chinoit, Gujrat and Lahore, Medicinal
Berries and Fruit Processing Unit in Ghizer, Northern Areas, Automotive
Simulation Design Training and Service Centre,

Lahore, Meat Farm and Abattoir in Pattoki and a Mango Pack House in Multan.It is
estimated that over 11,000 jobs will be generated through these projects of
which more than 600 are for men and about 5000 for women. CSF's investment in
these projects is $1,051,259 which will bring in a perceived new investment of
$10,470,000.

The Nowshera Laboratory for Drug Formulation provides services to pharmaceutical
units for drug testing and quality control in compliance with Current Good
Manufacturing Practices (CGMP).  The facility is equipped to evaluate physical,
chemical, biological, micro-biological and trace metals in multi-vitamins and
mineral drugs preparation.

The objective of the Wazirabad Common Facility Centre for Cutlery Polishing and
Finishing is to establish a modern tableware grinding and polishing unit to
increase efficiencies in finishing processes, increase sales to major retailers
and to introduce its own brand within the local market.

CSF's leading partner in this project is the Pak Cutlery Consortium which is a
coalition of six tableware manufacturers in the cutlery industry. Similarly, the
Value Addition in Milk Supply Chain in Balochistan is designed to empower
farmers by providing market access and support for the establishment of a high
quality milk supply chain.

The Dairy Strategic Working Group (SWOG) in Balochistan proposed the project to
link under-privileged producers, mainly women, from rural areas, of Kuchlak and
Pishin.  The project objective is to create an integrated cooperative structure
that ensures farmer control through the value chain of milk procurement,
processing and marketing. It progressively links producers with consumers,
thereby maximizing farmer profit and productivity. It is one of the better
solutions for rural poverty alleviation.

USAID's support for CSF is part of the $2.8 billion aid that the US Government
has provided to Pakistan since 2002 to improve economic growth, education,
health, and governance and to reconstruct the earthquake-affected areas.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 The Balochistan Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              528 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 21, 2016 Thursday

Minnesota: MDA awards Value Added Grants to 24 Minnesota organizations

LENGTH: 334  words

DATELINE: New York



 Saint Paul: The Department of Agriculture, Minnesota has issued the following
news release:



 Twenty-four Minnesota agricultural producers and processors have been awarded
funding from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture's (MDA) Value Added Grant
program. The Value Added Grant program supports projects that will increase the
sales of Minnesota agricultural products through added processing, marketing or
manufacturing.





 The sale of value-added products supports entrepreneurship and helps
agriculture-related businesses succeed and grow. The MDA's Value Added Grant
Program is intended for new or established for-profit businesses to stimulate
development of value-added agriculture.



 "Not only did this grant help us this year, but the enhancements we put in
place will continue to support us as we grow," said Kirstin van den Berg, past
Value Added Grant recipient and owner of Sawtooth Mountain Maple Syrup Company.
"As a result of this grant, we look forward to many years to come of successful
maple sap processing and increased maple syrup sales."



 Awardees for the first round of 2016 Value Added Grants will use funds to
purchase equipment and broaden their current markets or enter new ones. The
projects will increase the value and sales of a wide range of Minnesota
agricultural products including hogs and poultry, dairy, produce, barley, maple
syrup and more. A total of $903,758 has been awarded in this round, with
individual project awards ranging from $2,461-$133,547.The MDA anticipates
awarding up to $1,000,000 for each of the two rounds of 2017 Value Added Grants.
Equipment purchases or physical improvement projects may be eligible, and up to
25% of the total project cost may be reimbursed with a maximum grant award of
$150,000 and a minimum grant award of $1,000. Applications for the 2017 Value
Added Grant program will open at the end of July





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com







LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              529 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 20, 2016 Wednesday

Minnesota: MDA awards Value Added Grants to 24 Minnesota organizations

LENGTH: 334  words

DATELINE: New York



 Saint Paul: The Department of Agriculture, Minnesota has issued the following
news release:



 Twenty-four Minnesota agricultural producers and processors have been awarded
funding from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture's (MDA) Value Added Grant
program. The Value Added Grant program supports projects that will increase the
sales of Minnesota agricultural products through added processing, marketing or
manufacturing.





 The sale of value-added products supports entrepreneurship and helps
agriculture-related businesses succeed and grow. The MDA's Value Added Grant
Program is intended for new or established for-profit businesses to stimulate
development of value-added agriculture.



 "Not only did this grant help us this year, but the enhancements we put in
place will continue to support us as we grow," said Kirstin van den Berg, past
Value Added Grant recipient and owner of Sawtooth Mountain Maple Syrup Company.
"As a result of this grant, we look forward to many years to come of successful
maple sap processing and increased maple syrup sales."



 Awardees for the first round of 2016 Value Added Grants will use funds to
purchase equipment and broaden their current markets or enter new ones. The
projects will increase the value and sales of a wide range of Minnesota
agricultural products including hogs and poultry, dairy, produce, barley, maple
syrup and more. A total of $903,758 has been awarded in this round, with
individual project awards ranging from $2,461-$133,547.

 The MDA anticipates awarding up to $1,000,000 for each of the two rounds of
2017 Value Added Grants. Equipment purchases or physical improvement projects
may be eligible, and up to 25% of the total project cost may be reimbursed with
a maximum grant award of $150,000 and a minimum grant award of $1,000.
Applications for the 2017 Value Added Grant program will open at the end of July






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com





LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              530 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 BusinessWorld

                            January 27, 2012 Friday

Popular Economics;
Taxes and the economy

BYLINE: Bettina Faye V. Roc

LENGTH: 797 words


TAXATION is one of the most complicated policy instruments because there are
usually many laws governing such imposition - whether on people, organizations,
goods, or services, and others.

Taxes affect every one, even in daily undertakings. Meals, things bought from
the department store, transportation-all this are, in one way or another,
affected by taxes. Most governments use taxes to raise revenue to fund public
projects for the development of their respective countries, like improving
infrastructure, bankrolling a health care system, or beefing up national
defense. Taxes are also used to regulate markets.

There are several kinds of taxes. In the Philippines, some examples are income
tax, real property tax, corporate tax, the value-added tax (VAT) or the tax on
goods and services, and tariffs. The administration of taxes comes with its own
advantages and disadvantages. One important concern is tax incidence, or who
shoulders the burden of taxation.

Cid L. Terosa, senior economist at the University of Asia and the Pacific, said
VAT affects the government, the consumers, and the producers in both good and
bad ways. It helps the government gain revenues but also raises prices of goods
and services. "The burden of the VAT depends on the responsiveness of consumers
and producers to the added costs. If consumers are more responsive to the added
costs relative to producers, producers will bear the burden of the VAT," he
explained.

One can also look at taxes in terms of economic welfare, which refers to the
quality of the living standards of people within an economy. Policies can have
positive or negative welfare implications, which have corresponding effects on
the market.

Because of the many sides to the practice of taxation, the Philippines has
extensive laws detailing who or what things are subject to duties, why, and how
these taxes are administered. Included in these laws are some provisions for
exemptions from taxes for certain goods and services and also organizations. For
example, tariffs are usually levied on imports and, sometimes, exports. However,
some goods and services are exempted from duties.

The Florence Agreement enforced by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, of which the Philippines is a signatory, waives
duties on "educational, scientific, and cultural materials," such as books and
newspapers. This exemption is meant to promote the value of reading and to make
it easier for anyone who wishes to acquire more books and materials to do so.
Last December, the Department of Finance issued a definitive clarification to
support the duty-free importation of books for personal use.

Imported goods are taxed mainly to protect local industries and police the entry
of gods coming into the country. Meanwhile, goods for export are taxed either
minimally or are totally exempted.

"VAT on imported goods is advantageous because it encourages purchase of
domestically produced goods, and at the same time it generates revenues for
government," said Mr. Terosa. "VAT on imported goods, however, can have negative
welfare implications in terms of the inability of consumers to purchase goods at
lower prices."

Some organizations are also exempt from the tax on corporations mandated by law,
according to Section 30 of The National Internal Revenue Code of the Philippines
(Republic Act No. 8424). Some examples are: non- profit labor, agricultural, or
horticultural organizations; cemeteries; religious, scientific, athletic, or
cultural non-stock corporations or associations; and educational institutions,
among others.

Fiscal incentives are also employed by governments to attract foreign
investments. These incentives include tax holidays, exemptions from tariffs, and
tax credits, among others. The proposed Investment and Incentives Code of the
Philippines (House Bill 4935) seeks to grant tax breaks to enterprises with 70%
of production for export. It also proposes to grant perks to strategic domestic
enterprises and those located in the poorest provinces in the country.

In a World Bank paper published in 2003, economist Jacques Morisset said: "[The]
effectiveness of tax incentives is likely to vary depending on a firm's activity
and its motivations for investing abroad." He wrote that firms operating in
several markets, "such as banks, insurance companies, and Internet-related
businesses," benefit from such incentives more than other kinds of companies. He
also noted that export-oriented enterprises are the ones likely to make
investment decisions based on a country's tax policies.

The paper noted that there are costs in granting tax incentives, such as lower
fiscal revenue, the risk on a country's economic welfare, and the difficulty of
ensuring that tax policies are correctly implemented.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              531 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                              June 3, 2013 Monday

Burundi - Value Chain Development Programme

LENGTH: 272  words


Total cost: US$73.8 million
Approved DSF grant: US$39.6 million
Cofinancing: OPEC Fund for International
Development (US$11.9 million),
World Food Programme (US$9.1 million)


Duration: 2010-2019
Directly benefiting: 77,500 households
The Value Chain Development Programme is designed to facilitate greater
professionalization and organization among smallholder agricultural producers
within viable agricultural value chains, and to help reduce the country%s grain
and dairy deficit. The project  s goals are to:    Reduce poverty and improve
food security in rural areas through the development of agricultural value
chains.    Empower smallholder farmers to play a central role so that they can
achieve maximum value added in their production and increase their income. The
project will:    Assist public and private institutions, civil society and
organizations of rural poor people in forming quality partnerships to promote
two main value chains (rice and milk) and six other secondary value chains.
Build the human, physical and technical capacity of poor smallholder farmers to
enable them to protect their productive assets, increase their production of
rice and milk and raise their incomes in a sustainable manner.    Allow
producers   organizations to make the most of the value added to their produce
through better market access. The programme will directly reach 77,500 rural
family farm households, or approximately 387,000 people. Around 262,000 people,
as well as hundreds of grassroots associations, economic interest groups and
services providers, will also benefit indirectly from the programme.

country :Italy
Ltd.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2013 Tenders Info
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              532 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                            August 4, 1992, Tuesday

SUBSIDIZED SALE OF US PORK SETS PROGRAM PRECEDENT

BYLINE: Wire and Staff Reports

SECTION: COMMODITIES, Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 507 words


The first subsidized sale of pork to the Commonwealth of Independent States, an
action long sought by U.S. grain and pork producers, could lead to greater use
of the government's Export Enhancement Program for value-added products,
industry officials said.

The U.S. move, announced over the weekend, permits the former Soviet epublics to
buy up to 30,000 tons of U.S. subsidized pork.

The initiative marked the first time that pork had been offered under the Export
Enhancement Program, which has been used in the past mainly to promote wheat and
rice sales abroad.

The Bush administration called the decision to authorize pork sales "pro-
farmer, pro-jobs and pro-trade as it fights unfair foreign competition."

Along with its immediate benefits of boosting U.S. sales abroad, the
announcement sets a precedent for further U.S. exports of value-added
commodities. These agricultural products, including pork, require processing,
packaging and labor in the United States before shipment, which boosts the U.S.
economy.

"The pork EEP decision is a signal to the world that the United States is not
going to take a backseat on exports of value-added agricultural products, such
as pork," said National Pork Producers Council President Tim Rose, who hailed
Mr. Bush's decision.

Mr. Rose said U.S. pork producers are the lowest-cost producers of pork in the
world, "yet subsidized competition from the European Community and others has
stymied U.S. exports.

President Bush's groundbreaking EEP announcement not only launches the U.S. pork
industry into the former Soviet Union, "it sets the precedent for our moving
into more markets around the world and sharpens our competitiveness against
subsidized exports from other countries," Mr. Rose said.

Mr. Rose, a Kansas pork producer, also said the U.S. subsidy program is ''good
for U.S. pork producers, good for the American economy and it's good for the
people of the former Soviet Union."

The former Soviet Union has made virtually all of its purchases of U.S. food
with U.S. loan guarantees and has used up outstanding credits authorized by the
Bush administration.

The pork sale will have a total impact of about $ 125 million on the U.S.
economy said Glenn Grimes, a University of Missouri agricultural economist.

Benefits for U.S. hog producers include the consumption of 3.7 million bushels
of corn for animal feed, 600,000 additional bushels of soybeans, and the
increase in live hog prices by an estimated $ 1 to $ 1.25 a hundred pounds (as
much as $ 3.13 a hog).

NPPC and the U.S. Meat Export Federation submitted an EEP proposal to the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Nov. 13, 1991, after NPPC received a request for pork
from the official Soviet buying agency, Prodintorg. In addition, NPPC led
ongoing efforts to present the case for use of an EEP on pork through meetings
with administration officials, Russian leaders and many members of Congress.
Until Mr. Bush's announcement, the United States had never granted an EEP on
U.S. pork or beef.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1992 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              533 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              March 3, 2017 Friday

In Mozambique, Promoting Value Chains in Tourism and Agriculture is Starting to
Pay Off

LENGTH: 1561  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington, D.C: World Bank Group has issued the following news release:





   All signs seem to be pointing to strong economic progress in Mozambique:
Economic growth averaged 7.9% per year between 1993 and 2014; foreign direct
investment increased significantly between 2005 and 2013, peaking in 2013 at
more than $6 billion; and  progress has been made in reducing poverty; the
country's poverty rate decreased from 68% to 52% between 1997 and 2009. The
capital city, Maputo, has seen luxury hotels and skyscrapers starting to dot the
skyline, as the government's efforts to cater to tourists and foreign investors
have borne fruit.





 But for the rest of the country beyond Maputo, the story is more complex. While
Maputo has reduced its poverty rate to 10% over the last decade, progress has
not been as strong in other provinces. Life for people in many rural areas has
seen little progress: Two provinces - Zambezia and Nampula - are home to 38% of
the country's population but account for almost half of its poor.



 A recent World Bank Group project in Mozambique - the Competitiveness and
Private Sector Development project - sought to energize economies outside Maputo
province by promoting broad-based growth; by focusing investment on specific
agricultural products; and by developing workers' skills to expand employment
opportunities in the promising tourism sector.



 Through a $25 million credit, the six-year project that began in October 2009
achieved noteworthy progress in three distinct activities:



     It set up a matching-grant program that provided 847 grants for technical
assistance and training to Micro and Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise (MSME)
owners with an average value of US$4000 per grant;

     It promoted the tourism sector in Inhambane province by developing
tourism-related skills (e.g. financial accounting, management) for more than
1,300 people (nearly 900 of whom were from the private sector) and trained
subsistence-level horticulture farmers on how to get their products to market;

     It established the National Fruits Training Center in Nampula, where 695
residents were given practical training and development services in
tropical-fruits business operation.



 The Nampula center provided small-business owners with general training on
business management, quality and logistics, and provided farmworkers and
supervisors with product-specific training in the production of bananas,
pineapples, mangoes and papayas. It also hosted a demonstration farm where local
producers could observe modern farming techniques and apply them to their own
plots.



 "Without a sustained focus on developing specific sectors of the economy, the
rural areas of Mozambique seemed destined for continued stagnation," said David
Bridgman, Practice Manager for the World Bank Group's Trade & Competitiveness
Global Practice in Africa. "By taking a concentrated approach in key sectors -
agriculture and tourism - and in specific geographic areas that have potential
in those sectors - Nampula and Inhambane - we felt the economy would be able to
unleash some of its untapped potential."

 " The project supported my participation in attending trade fairs in Brazil and
China. This led to expanding my women's product line and introducing the men's
product line. With all this support, I feel that I was able to realize my dream
for my business.  "

 Cacilda Correira

 Bride and Groom Costume Store, Maputo Province



 The MSME Matching Grant Program



 Capacity remains a serious challenge for small businesses in Mozambique, and
the project aimed to tackle this by utilizing grants that connected
entrepreneurs with much-needed business services. The Government of Mozambique
identified three high-priority groups for the grant program: manufacturing,
women-owned businesses, and enterprises located outside the Province of Maputo.



 The program reached 363 unique firms and supported 847 total grants with an
average grant size of $4,000 - primarily for the purpose of improving such
business practices as marketing, promotional materials, website development, and
the training of employees. Half of the enterprises reached by the program were
located outside of Maputo, and 27% were run by women. Enterprises in a variety
of sectors, including services, hotels and tourism, industrial, ICT, and
agro-processing received grants.



 Businesses benefiting from the program saw, on average, a 23.5% greater
increase in sales by revenue compared to the control group of MSMEs that did not
benefit from the program. This outcome is above the target set of 10%.



 "In the first phase, the project supported the design of publicity materials
and catalogues and provided training on customer service," said Cacilda Correira
of the Bride and Groom Costume Store in Maputo Province. "In the second phase,
the project supported my participation in attending trade fairs in Brazil and
China. This led to expanding my women's product line and introducing the men's
product line. With all this support, I feel that I was able to realize my dream
for my business."



 Tourism in Inhambane



 Despite the region's natural beauty and appeal to value-conscious tourists,
Inhambane lacked trained personnel to work in the tourism industry. The
Competitiveness and Private Sector project contributed to overcoming this
vocational-skills gap by training people through more than 40 courses and
workshops in tourism-related skills. Cumulatively, the project trained more than
1,300 people and certified 800. Upon graduation from the program in November
2015, 74% of those certified went on to gain employment in the province's labor
market.



 According to Mazen Bouri, World Bank Group Senior Financial Sector Specialist
and project lead, "The training offered in Inhambane was of very high quality,
and it prepared participants well for employment in the region's labor market."



 "The project supported training to our employees on management and financial
accounting," said Joao Sotho of the Massala Beach Resort in Gaza Province. "This
led to increased productivity and efficiency.  Our gross margin improved
substantially."



 The project also created an opportunity to link tourism with local agriculture
and horticulture by training local subsistence farmers - primarily women - to
use greenhouses to improve the quality and production of local produce. With
improved produce, these local farmers were better equipped to supply the
businesses that cater to tourists with fresh, local tropical fruits. That helped
the farmers increase their household incomes, while strengthening their capacity
to produce more fruits and vegetables with fewer losses. A total of 78 linkages
were established between newly trained farmers and tourism-related business
which helped subsistence level farmers bring their goods to market.



 In addition, as a result of increased capacity, producers were also able to
begin exporting their fruit to new markets abroad.



 "The project support helped us obtain the necessary quality certification in
order to export our fruit produce to Europe," said Christoph Cicarelli of C&C
Agro-Alimentar in Inhambane Province. "There were some additional costs attached
with meeting the quality standards, but it was well worth it, given the increase
in our sales and new markets that were opened."



 Nampula Fruits Center



 The Nampula Fruits Training Center, established as part of the project as a
public institute, aimed to offer experience-based training and development
services in the tropical fruit industry. The Center has trained 695
participants, to date, through seminars and other training events.





 Training offered by the Center helped battle malnutrition, with many of the
trainees going on to plant their own farms based on what they learned at the
Center. As a result of the training center, fruit available for family
consumption is expected to increase from 50 tons to 150 tons per year (valued at
US$40,000 and US$120,000).



 In addition, specific training provided to 24 local producers is expected to
result in US$3,900 in annual sales for a single producer - which amounts to
US$325 per month, or about five times the established minimum wage (US$66 per
month) for Mozambique's agriculture sector.



 With increasing interest from both the public and private sectors to invest in
fruit production, it is expected that there will be more efforts to promote the
expansion of this industry in other regions of the country. To prepare its labor
force for these opportunities, the government is aiming to replicate this
approach with additional training centers.



 "The project helped me to brand my various products," said Judite Celeste of
WISSA Tipicamente Mocambicana in Nampula Province, "and this helped me overcome
a major obstacle and allowed me to compete with imported products."



 "Mozambique has a great deal of untapped agricultural potential, but it is a
country facing many complex challenges," said Bouri. "This project was
successful because it adopted an integrated approach - with applied training,
community outreach, partnership with existing agribusiness investments, and
adoption of technologies for the local context. It should also be emphasized
that this is a long-term endeavor, and a continued partnership between the
public and private sectors is essential to ensure the sustainability of the
results attained."

















LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              534 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              July 22, 2016 Friday

Minnesita: MDA awards Value Added Grants to 24 Minnesota organizations

LENGTH: 324  words

DATELINE: New York



 Saint Paul: The Department of Agriculture, Minnesota has issued the following
news release:



 Twenty-four Minnesota agricultural producers and processors have been awarded
funding from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture's (MDA) Value Added Grant
program. The Value Added Grant program supports projects that will increase the
sales of Minnesota agricultural products through added processing, marketing or
manufacturing.





 The sale of value-added products supports entrepreneurship and helps
agriculture-related businesses succeed and grow. The MDA's Value Added Grant
Program is intended for new or established for-profit businesses to stimulate
development of value-added agriculture.



 "Not only did this grant help us this year, but the enhancements we put in
place will continue to support us as we grow," said Kirstin van den Berg, past
Value Added Grant recipient and owner of Sawtooth Mountain Maple Syrup Company.
"As a result of this grant, we look forward to many years to come of successful
maple sap processing and increased maple syrup sales."



 Awardees for the first round of 2016 Value Added Grants will use funds to
purchase equipment and broaden their current markets or enter new ones. The
projects will increase the value and sales of a wide range of Minnesota
agricultural products including hogs and poultry, dairy, produce, barley, maple
syrup and more. A total of $903,758 has been awarded in this round, with
individual project awards ranging from $2,461-$133,547The MDA anticipates
awarding up to $1,000,000 for each of the two rounds of 2017 Value Added Grants.
Equipment purchases or physical improvement projects may be eligible, and up to
25% of the total project cost may be reimbursed with a maximum grant award of
$150,000 and a minimum grant award of $1,000. Applications for the 2017





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com







LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              535 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                             July 16, 2016 Saturday

Crofter training£20,000 boost

BYLINE: Gemma Mackenzie

SECTION: BUSINESS; FARM/FOOD; News; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 206 words


The Scottish Crofting Federation (SCF) has secured £20,000 funding to run
training courses for producers in remote areas.

The funding was awarded to the crofters body by The Prince of Wales' rural
charity The Prince's Country Fund, which has awarded £410,000 to Scottish
project since its inception six years ago.

SCF projects manager Maria Sholton said: "This fantastic grant will help us to
offer diversif-ication training to small-scale producers in very remote areas of
Scotland.

"The main stumble for our crofters is infrastructure and travelling for courses
is prohibitively expensive. So with this grant, we will bring the courses to
them.

"Expert butchers and charcuterie makers will train groups of crofters, helping
them to add value to their produce and be able to sell locally. This is very
strengthening for the local economy, and also serves asan exciting meeting place
for crofters to share ideas and to network."

Prince's Countryside Fund director Claire Saunders said: "The big challenge for
crofting is the need to attract more new entrants and young people.

"It is vital that everyone with an interest in crofting works together to
achieve this, to safeguard the future of crofting and ensure it thrives in the
years to come."

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PJ


                      Copyright 2016 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              536 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                          September 18, 2008 Thursday
                                  All Editions

Committee reviews proposals to boost value of agriculture

BYLINE: SHARON KILEY MACK OF THE NEWS STAFF

SECTION: Pg. B1

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: AUGUSTA


Maine has been a leader in agriculture policy and legislation, setting the
national pace on dairy legislation, environmental regulations, animal welfare
and proactive farming management practices.

Members of the state's Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
continued that work Wednesday at the first of three mandated meetings to study
agriculture's impact on the Maine economy and to determine how to keep it vital
and growing.

Legislators began a review of the Agriculture's Creative Economy Study, which
revealed a vibrant but often invisible economic sector.

The ACES report also proposed 10 initiatives and dozens of actions which, if
fully funded and supported, would improve farm profitability and in turn boost
the state's overall economic health.

"Nationally, we are viewed as having done some very, very creative work with
small farm businesses," said Rep. John Piotti, D-Unity, agriculture committee
member. But, he added, the ACES group is all-volunteer and a coordinator could
be invaluable.

"Awareness of the value of Maine's agriculture economy is critical to the
state's future," Piotti said. "Farming is our future in this state and, with the
ACES information, we will be poised to build on that."

Some of the ACES suggestions include creating a master database of wholesale
producers and specialty food producers; providing funds to increase food storage
capacity; increasing labor pay and benefits for food service personnel; working
to change federal laws and rules on the procurement of locally produced foods;
and amending the state constitution to allow for reduced assessments of farm
buildings and agricultural storage and processing facilities.

Marge Kilkelly, former state senator, is a goat farmer and director of the
Northeast States Association for Agricultural Stewardship. She proposed the
five-year ACES plan in the last legislative session.

Kilkelly said that when the state had lean financial years, the Maine Department
of Agriculture's budget was the first to be cut, but those cuts were never
restored in good years.

The loss of value-added products means "lost jobs, lost money and lost
opportunities." She said Maine's animals are sent to Pennsylvania for slaughter,
fleeces are sent to Michigan for processing, and grain is sent to Canada to be
milled.

The ACES study was conducted over the past year. The coming Legislature would be
charged with approving and funding any of the recommendations. An assessment of
the approved recommendations would be conducted during the next three years.

Karen Nadeau-Drillen and Elizabeth Cooper, legislative analysts, outlined each
of the ACES proposals and what action would be needed.

Priority areas include market access, education, research, technical assistance
and education, access to resources and access to government regulation.

Recommended investments include:

.  $520,000 in grants to develop a consumer word-of-mouth market initiative;
$160,000 from the state's General Fund to develop a formal farm-to-school
program.

.  $200,000 from the General Fund to increase support to the University of
Maine's Cooperative Extension and Research Center.

.  $1 million in grant funds to create shared-use kitchens to develop in-state
food processing companies and local food distribution infrastructure.

.  $70,000 from the General Fund to improve labor sourcing and training.

.  A $6 million bond to improve access to capital through the Agriculture
Marketing Loan Fund.

ACES also recommended taking funds from tax incentive programs to re-evaluate
existing state regulations on agriculture and create "freedom to farm" economic
incentive zones and programs.

"The end product of ACES is not going to be a report," Nadeau-Drillen said. "It
will be possible legislation."

The next meeting of the ACES group and the agriculture committee has been set
for Oct. 15.

bdnpittsfield@verizon.net

487-3187

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2008 Bangor Daily News


                              537 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          Bush Telegraph (Queensland)

                                  May 19, 2015

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 336  words

More support for rural families

YOUTHS from rural and regional families will be better supported through their
transition from school to further study through generous means testing for
payments, the Federal Government says.

"Removing the asset test will enable around 4100 additional dependent Youth
Allowance recipients to qualify for the first time, accessing average annual
payments of more than $7000 a year," Minister for Social Services Scott Morrison
said.

"A further 1200 people receive Youth Allowance for the first time as well as
increase payments for around 4860 existing students by approximately $2000 a
year.

"The changes will mean farming families will not have farm assets counted toward
the test."

Drought payment cap increased

AGFORCE has welcomed the State Government's announcement of an increase in the
annual cap on the Drought Relief Assistance Scheme for some of the hardest hit
producers.

General President Grant Maudsley said almost two-thirds of Queensland's primary
producers believe the current drought gripping the state is the worst in living
memory, according to a recent AgForce survey.

Mr Maudsley was speaking from Longreach where he will join Queensland Senator
Barry O'Sullivan and State Agriculture Minister Bill Byrne to meet with
drought-affected producers and community members ahead of tomorrow's annual
show.

Funding boost for MLA

MEAT and Livestock Australia has been awarded almost $5million in funding to
lead two new research and development projects granted through the Australian
Government's Rural Research and Development for Profit Programme.

The research projects, to be led by MLA over three years, will focus on the
long-lasting benefits of weed biological control; and identifying market and
consumer insights to drive value chain innovation and growth in export markets.

MLA Managing Director Richard Norton welcomed the grants, acknowledging that
these two areas of research would offer significant long term benefits to
producers and the wider agricultural industry.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WBT


                    Copyright 2015 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              538 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Deming Headlight (New Mexico)

                            March 12, 2008 Wednesday

Economic growth in rural New Mexico

BYLINE: By Ryan Gleason

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 682 words


As the State Director of USDA Rural Development, I have the great privilege to
travel to the far reaches of New Mexico and spend a lot of time in some of our
more rural communities. In making these journeys, I've seen a large number of
towns and villages in which good things are happening. I've also seen that there
are some communities that are having a tougher go of it.

Regardless of which side of this equation a community happens to be on, there is
an almost universal desire to increase the level of economic activity, if for no
other reason than to give the local kids an opportunity to find a job and buy a
home in the town where they grew up. Most of us also instinctively understand
that if we're not growing, we're dying (this seems to be true in our individual
lives as well as the life of our community).

We're fortunate at Rural Development (RD) to administer several programs on
behalf of the US Department of Agriculture in support of increasing economic
activity. Since I joined this agency in May of 2006, I've seen firsthand how RD
can use these programs to help provide financial support to expand business
opportunities - in even the smallest communities in New Mexico.

If you don't believe me, look for Solano on your map of New Mexico. For those of
you who need a hint, Solano is located about halfway between Roy and Mosquero in
Harding County. By anybody's definition, Solano qualifies as "small". In fact,
if the population of the entire county lived in Solano, it would still qualify
as "small" (according to the US Census Bureau, Harding County had 810 people in
2000). Yet we were able to provide financial assistance to equip a welding
manufacturing plant in Solano. This plant is now leased by Hartley Construction
which has created twelve jobs.

Farther south, we awarded an RD grant to the Pecos Valley Bio-Mass Cooperative
which has initiated a feasibility study on how to convert cow manure into
energy. Creating new energy sources like this has been successful in other parts
of the country and I firmly believe that some day soon we will see an energy
producing plant in Chaves County which will both create numerous jobs and
produce a critical source of electricity.

Now is the time to take advantage of the various financing programs offered by
USDA Rural Development. Application deadlines are fast approaching for some of
our business development programs:

March 31 is the deadline to apply for the Value Added Producer Grant (VAPG)
program which allows farmers and ranchers to earn more revenue by turning their
commodities into other higher valued products.

March 31 is also the deadline for the Rural Business Opportunity Grant (RBOG)
which is available to public bodies, non-profits and Native American tribes to
finance training and technical assistance for business development.

Finally, March 31 is the deadline for the Rural Economic Development Loan
(REDLG) program. Through this program we provide zero-interest loans to Rural
Development utility program borrowers (Electric and Telephone Coops). They in
turn re-lend the money to local entities to promote economic development and job
creation projects.

April 8 is the impending deadline for the Rural Cooperative Development Grant
which is used to finance cooperative development centers that promote the
cooperative form of business and for the Small Minority Producer Grant program.
This program benefits cooperatives or associations of cooperatives with at least
75 percent minority representation among their membership and/or governing
board. It also provides technical assistance to small, minority agriculture
producers.

As you can see, we haven't been given much time to get these applications in so
I urge anyone living in rural New Mexico who would like more details on these
programs to contact your nearest local RD office, our State Office at (505)
761-4953, or visit our Web site at http://www.rurdev.usda.gov as soon as
possible.

We look forward to the opportunity to work with you to keep rural New Mexico
alive and vibrant.

Ryan Gleason is USDA Rural Development State Director

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ryan Gleason

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2008 Deming Headlight, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              539 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 21, 2016 Friday

Minnesota: 2016 Todd County Area Goat Workshop

LENGTH: 220  words

DATELINE: New York



 Todd: Todd County of Minnesota has issued the following news release:





 You are invited to the 2016 Todd County Area Goat Workshop. This workshop is
intended for both dairy and meat goat producers who are interested in learning
about overall goat nutrition, production, and management of goats. Ag businesses
who work with dairy and meat goat producers are also welcome to attend.









 Speakers & Topics



 Basic Goat Nutrition & Energy Requirements--Dr. Michael Schlegel, Purina Sr.
Nutritionist



 Purina's Small Ruminant Research-- Dr. James D. Caldwell, Purina Small Animal
Research Scientist



 Evaluating Goat Production Costs--  Dr. Travis Hoffman, Uof M & NDSU Extension
Educator



 Raising Youngstock-Newborns and Beyond-- Amanda Long, NDSU Master's Degree
student



 Organic Trace Minerals-- Dwight Kickhafer, Zinpro Key Account Manager-Northern
Prairie



 Veterinary Feed Directive Update-- Jim Lunemann, Purina Livestock Production
Specialist



 Preparing Your Farm for the Next Generation--Brenda Miller, U of M Extension
Educator



 Livestock Investment Grant & Value-Added Grant--Kelly Anderson, MN Dept of Ag,
Livestock Specialist



 SARE Farmer-Rancher Grant--Wayne Martin, Uof M Extension Educator





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              540 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 21, 2016 Friday

Minnesota: 2016 Todd County Area Goat Workshop

LENGTH: 220  words

DATELINE: New York



 Todd: Todd County of Minnesota has issued the following news release:





 You are invited to the 2016 Todd County Area Goat Workshop. This workshop is
intended for both dairy and meat goat producers who are interested in learning
about overall goat nutrition, production, and management of goats. Ag businesses
who work with dairy and meat goat producers are also welcome to attend.









 Speakers & Topics



 Basic Goat Nutrition & Energy Requirements--Dr. Michael Schlegel, Purina Sr.
Nutritionist



 Purina's Small Ruminant Research-- Dr. James D. Caldwell, Purina Small Animal
Research Scientist



 Evaluating Goat Production Costs--  Dr. Travis Hoffman, Uof M & NDSU Extension
Educator



 Raising Youngstock-Newborns and Beyond-- Amanda Long, NDSU Master's Degree
student



 Organic Trace Minerals-- Dwight Kickhafer, Zinpro Key Account Manager-Northern
Prairie



 Veterinary Feed Directive Update-- Jim Lunemann, Purina Livestock Production
Specialist



 Preparing Your Farm for the Next Generation--Brenda Miller, U of M Extension
Educator



 Livestock Investment Grant & Value-Added Grant--Kelly Anderson, MN Dept of Ag,
Livestock Specialist



 SARE Farmer-Rancher Grant--Wayne Martin, Uof M Extension Educator





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              541 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                           January 22, 2015 Thursday
                                 First Edition

Australian wine export values jump to highest level in a decade

BYLINE: Julie-anne Sprague

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 578 words


The value of wine exports has risen for the first time since 2007, driven by
rising sales of premium wines.

Figures from Wine Australia show sales of ultra premium wines, or wines priced
above $50 a bottle, hit a record during 2014, helping boost the average value of
Australian bottled wine exports by 7 per cent to $4.85 a litre, its highest
level in a decade.

Australian Grape and Wine Authority's acting chief executive Andreas Clark said
there was an increase in wine exports across all premium price segments last
year, which are priced from $7.50 a bottle and over.

"It's encouraging to see the value of Australian wine exports in positive growth
for the first time since 2007 and increasing demand for our premium wines was a
major contributing factor to that growth," Mr Clark said.

Wines selling for more than $50 a litre only account for a tiny proportion of
exports. But increasing sales is a positive sign for the industry because the
while accounting for just 0.5 per cent of export volumes the segment accounted
for 8 per cent of the value of Australian bottled wine exports.

Overall, Australian wine exports grew 1.9 per cent to 700 million litres. The
average selling price, which includes bulk and bottled wine, remained steady at
$2.60 a litre, valuing exports at $1.82 billion, the first rise since 2007.

The average value of Australian bottled wine exports rose to its the highest in
a decade, lifting 7 per cent to $4.85 a litre.

But the wine industry has been warned: the good times will not be enjoyed by all
of the nation's 2573 producers.

Rabobank senior analyst Marc Soccio said retail consolidation was making it
tougher for smaller producers, even if they were making premium wines.

"The high volume off-premise channel, particularly the major grocery retail
chains, is growing more and more influential in determining which products find
their way to consumers," Mr Soccio said.

"That has been limiting space for smaller producers. That's why we are seeing
bigger more commercial players like Casella and Accolade making investments at
the premium end.

"They are the ones that can unlock the value in those companies and brands
whereas on their own they have been struggling to do so."

Last month Casella Wines bought Barossa Valley producer Peter Lehman while
Accolade, the nation's biggest producer by volume, agreed to buy Grant Burge
Wines.Image problems

West Australian winemaker Larry Cherubino, who makes wines under his eponymous
label as well as for Robert Oatley, said Australian winemakers need to work hard
to repair exports markets including the US, where many producers fled in the
face of a higher dollar.

"A lot of people got out when it was difficult and there was no margin to be
had," Mr Cherubino said. "Those that stuck with it are now making inroads."

Mr Cherubino, who exports about 20 per cent of his wines, said the lower
Australian dollar was improving conditions for winemakers.

But he said the industry had to work harder at home and abroad to improve the
image of Australian wine.

Mr Soccio said the lower dollar would help producers but Australian winemakers
needed to also improve their reputation in the US, where large retailers were
also becoming more influential.

"It's [lower dollar] not necessarily a panacea and not going to solve their
problems overnight," Mr Soccio said.

"You look at where we are seeing these trends where they are most distinctive
like the US and Canada and Australian wine is really still on the nose."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              542 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)

                           February 9, 2000 Wednesday
                                  City Edition

State senators go to bat for bills promoting rural economic growth

BYLINE: MARTHA STODDARD Lincoln Journal Star

SECTION: B; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 443 words


Spreading the good economic times from urban areas to the rural corners of
Nebraska means supporting small and innovative businesses, members of the
Legislature's Agriculture Committee heard Tuesday.

"That's how we make money in rural communities -- we start our own business,"
said Sen. Matt Connealy of Decatur. "How do we know what company is the next
Cabela's?"

Connealy was one of several people who spoke in support of a pair of bills aimed
at promoting rural economic development.

First up was LB1222, sponsored by Sen. Floyd Vrtiska of Table Rock. It would
provide grants of up to $50,000 a year for Nebraska-based projects to add value
to raw agricultural products.

The $1 million program could support projects ranging from livestock processing
cooperatives to small businesses that turn grapes into wine and jellies. Grants
would be offered only in counties with labor pools of 10,000 people or fewer.

The second proposal was LB1348, sponsored by Sen. Roger Wehrbein of Plattsmouth.
It would put a total of $7 million into three economic development programs.

Some of that money would increase the funds available to help microenterprises;
the state currently has $250,000 for such help. Microenterprises account for 70
percent of the new jobs in rural Nebraska, according to a recent study.

The measure also would create community opportunity grants and agricultural
opportunity grants. Those programs would help local organizations do research,
offer technical assistance, keep local businesses going and undertake other
economic development activities.

Wehrbein, chairman of the Appropriations Committee, acknowledged the bill
carried a high price tag. But he said conditions in rural Nebraska warranted a
significant commitment.

"This is more aggressive than the other plans, but if we're not aggressive now,
when will we be aggressive?" Connealy asked.

The kinds of grants envisioned in both bills are vitally important to helping
Nebraska's agricultural producers, said Stan Rosendahl of Creston, past
president of the Nebraska Pork Producers Association.

John Bailey of the Center for Rural Affairs agreed. Rural Nebraska has higher
levels of poverty and lower household incomes than urban parts of the state, he
said.

The two bills presented Tuesday would target the small, entrepreneur-driven
businesses that can be most successful in rural areas. Bailey said the bills
would work well together.

The Agriculture Committee took no action Tuesday. Both bills have been named
priorities, increasing their chances of being considered by the full Legislature
if they get out of committee.

Martha Stoddard can be reached at 473-7251 or mstoddard@journalstar.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2000 Lincoln Journal Star,
                              All Rights Reserved


                              543 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                 The Morning Bulletin (Rockhampton, Queensland)

                             June 6, 2015 Saturday

Funding not enough for farmers;
CATEGORY D: Growcom says federal funding won't fully cover Marcia's trail of
destruction

BYLINE:  Michelle Gately

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 383  words


A CENTRAL Queensland farm lost 1200 mango trees and its entire crop of avocado
and lychees when Cyclone Marcia tore through the region in February.

Another lost an entire orchard of macadamia trees, which was established 45
years ago.

Horticultural organisation Growcom believes Federal Government funding to date
is not enough to help these struggling producers, and many others like them, get
back on their feet.

Growcom CEO Pat Hannan said that despite the massive damage to infrastructure,
trees, plants and crops, the government had not offered Category D loans of up
to $650,000 interest free with a $50,000 grants component.

"With the amount of severe damage in the area, Growcom had expected that the
Federal Government would provide similar levels of support as that provided to
farmers following Tropical Cyclone Yasi," Mr Hannan said.

"Sadly, despite the Queensland Government's best efforts, the Federal Government
has chosen only to approve $27.75million in total under the Natural Disaster
Relief and Recovery Arrangements, compared to the estimated $198.5million needed
to help the recovery of Central Queensland.

"There has been an allocation of $750,000 to deploy Industry Recovery Officers
in the region, for which we are grateful, but the value of these officers is
significantly reduced by the length of time it has taken to release the funds
and the reduced funding directly available to growers."

Flynn MP Ken O'Dowd, who worked with Capricornia MP Michelle Landry to secure
Category D funding, yesterday said there was a "significant amount of assistance
for farmers and primary producers".

This includes direct damage concessional loans of up to $250,000 and up to
$25,000 reimbursement to farmers for the cost of recovery.

"I want to emphasise that these grants were only made available for victims of
Cyclone Marcia, because of the severity and wide-ranging impact it had on
farmers," he said.

"These grants are not made available for all disasters, but we understand the
great loss to income and personal property.

"New "~loss of income' concessional loans are also available to support farmers
who may not previously have qualified for any assistance, despite losing
significant income."

The Morning Bulletin could not reach Ms Landry's office for comment late
yesterday afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RMB


                    Copyright 2015 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              544 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      East African Business Week (Kampala)

                               November 10, 2012

Arusha Farmers to Earn From U.S. $8 Million Grant

BYLINE: David Muwanga

LENGTH: 487 words

DATELINE: Arusha


Arusha coffee farmers are among the 85,000 smallholder farmers who are set to
benefit from a $8m grant that by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, an
official has said.

This follows an announcement by the German development finance institution DEG -
Deutsche Investitions- und Entwicklungsgesellschaft mbH of the launch of the
Coffee Partnership for Tanzania (CPT), a partnership bringing together Tanzanian
smallholder coffee farmers, DEG plus its private sector partners.

"Coffee farmers from Arusha, Tanga, Manyara and Kilimanjaro regions are going to
benefit from the partnership's goals and its planned activities that are fully
aligned with the Tanzanian coffee industry's Development Strategy that we have
formulated in the sector's Task Force Committee," said the Tanzania's Permanent
Secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Security and Cooperatives Mohamed
Muya.

Muya explained the partnership provides a great opportunity for smallholder
farmers and is expected to help government to increase the sector's overall
production volumes over the next four years.

He told the media the four-year project aims to increase the net income of
85,000 female and male smallholder coffee farmers in Tanzania, largely by
doubling their yields and by improving the quality of produced coffee, thereby
providing a better livelihood for up to 510,000 Tanzanian.

"The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation will support the project with a grant of $8
million with three major implementing partners including two coffee traders
Armajaro Trading Ltd. and Ecom Agroindustrial Ltd and Hanns R. Neumann Stiftung
while strategic partners such as Hivos, Solidaridad and Café Africa will support
the partnership.

The Coffee Partnership for Tanzania (CPT) will substantially support 85,000
Tanzanian smallholder farmers from 2012 - 2016.

"The partnership's goal is to enable farmers to take full advantage of the
opportunities arising from the production of coffee and additional products,
helping producers to increase their incomes and improve their livelihood," says
Ian Lachmund, DEG Project Director for the partnership.

He explained that the implementing partners undertake capacity-building measures
to promote the empowerment of smallholder coffee producers within the global
coffee value chain.

The project activities include promotion of the organization of well-governed
farmer groups, training of farmers in basic business and agronomy skills,
improvement of farmers' access to finance, and facilitation of producers'
affiliation to certification schemes - thereby increasing the overall
productivity and quality of the coffee production and meanwhile improving
smallholders' access to stable export markets.

Additional activities in the areas of gender, seedling multiplication and
distribution, renewable energy as well as livestock and food production further
promote the environmental and social sustainability of the partnership.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              545 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois)

                            March 9, 2005 Wednesday

FARM BRIEFS

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 535 words


Bull sale results

Ninety-five bulls sold for a record average of $2,659 at the recent Illinois
Performance Tested Bull Sale at the Illinois State Fairgrounds in Springfield.

The previous record was $2,218 set in 2004. An Angus bull produced by the
University of Illinois brought the highest price, and a record, of $6,900 paid
by George Ginder of Rochester. The previous individual bull record price was
$5,600 in 2000.

A local bull in the sale, an Angus February yearling, was sold by Lemenager
Cattle of Hudson for $3,800 to Thomas Brooks of Louisville.

Angus made up the largest breed, with 76 bulls selling for an average of $2,788.
A group of Simmental bulls rounded out the sale with an average price of $2,279
and a top price of $3,300.

Ag week winners

When National Agriculture Week rolls around March 20-26, Livingston County
residents will eat restaurant meals on the winning artwork of students.

Briana Krawczkowski, a first-grader at Tri-Point Grade School in Cullom, and
Rachel Schoener, a third-grader at Flanagan Elementary School, won the recent
Livingston County Soil and Water Conservation District's annual place-mat design
competition. The theme was "Celebrate Agriculture."

In a separate coloring contest for kindergarten students, Clarissa Mueller of
Meadowbrook Elementary School bested 169 other entrants.

Tree, fish sale

Woodford County Soil and Water Conservation District members are selling fish
for pond stocking, and trees and shrubs for windbreaks and landscaping.

Most trees and shrubs will be potted, but evergreens will come in bare root
bundles. For more information, call (309) 467-2308, Ext. 3.

Summer ag institutes

Teachers of preschool children through high school students can apply for 40
summer agricultural institutes being offered throughout the state.

Applications are available at the Livingston County Soil and Water Conservation
District as well as the Livingston County Farm Bureau in Pontiac.

Applications are due April 15 with scholarships available from the Farm Bureau.
Call (815) 844-6127, Ext. 3, or (815) 842-1103.

The summer institutes will be based on the theme of "Sprouting Success in the
Classroom." Sessions will focus on integrating available resources and hands-on
activities about agriculture and the environment into existing classroom
curriculum.

Value-added grants

U.S. Department of Agriculture officials are offering farmers, producer groups,
cooperatives and producer-based businesses $14.3 million in grants for value
-added projects.

Priority will be given to projects that have at least 51 percent of their costs
dedicated to bioenergy. Grant money can be used for planning activities, such as
feasibility studies, and to acquire working capital.

Applications are due May 6. Details may be viewed at www.rurdev.usda.gov.

Fish, trees sold

McLean County Soil and Water Conservation District members are selling trees
through April 15 and fish through April 8.

Tree pickup will be April 23 at a location to be announced. Grass carp must be
ordered by March 29 with all other fish species ordered by April 8. Pickup will
be at 1 p.m. April 12 at the SWCD office at 402 N. Kays Drive, Normal.

For more information, call (309) 452-0830, Ext. 3.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2005 The Pantagraph


                              546 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             January 1, 2017 Sunday

In Dixon, federal funds fuel innovation

BYLINE: Staci Matlock, The Santa Fe New Mexican

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1481 words


Jan. 01--DIXON -- "You are literally sitting in a miracle," local artist Shel
Neymark told a crowd gathered in the bright, book-lined Embudo Valley Library
and Community Center.

This nationally recognized library, started entirely by community volunteers and
once housed in an old two-room building, is among eight projects in Dixon -- an
unincorporated Northern New Mexico village of 930 residents -- to benefit from
the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Rural Development funds since 2009. The
agency recently celebrated Dixon's success in winning federal funds and said it
is a model for other towns in the state that are trying to boost their
communities.

A cooperative grocery store, a vineyard, a construction company and an organic
farm producing fresh apple cider and a blue corn atole mix are among the other
projects that won grants and loans from the USDA's rural economic development
program. Those funds have led to an estimated 30 new jobs in an area
hard-pressed for work.

"At a time when so many New Mexico communities are looking for solutions, for
how to do things better and how to get access to federal funding, we're trying
to hold up Dixon as an example where that's worked," said Terry Brunner, the
USDA's state director for rural development.

"What's unique about Dixon is there is a lot of community involvement and
leadership," Brunner added. "They never seem to run out of ideas and things they
want to do and ways to innovate."

Dixon is a quaint village of small farms just off N.M. 68, the low road winding
along the Rio Grande to Taos. Rocky, juniper-covered hills cup verdant river
land in the valley and a collection of old adobe homes, trailers and newer
houses along the one road through town.

Dixon is home to artists, small-business owners and people who commute to work
in Los Alamos, Taos and Santa Fe. It's near the site of a 13th-century pueblo
ruin. Spanish land grant settlers called it El Puerto del Embudo de Nuestro
Señor San Antonio until it was renamed Dixon, after a school teacher, around
1900.

The town made headlines in the 1940s and caused a decadeslong rift between
Protestants and Catholics in New Mexico after a Presbyterian in the town filed a
lawsuit against the state to prevent Catholic nuns from teaching religion in
publicly funded schools. It made the news again in 1999 when the two churches
chose the village as the site for a formal reconciliation.

The new Embudo Valley Library is across the street from the Dixon Elementary
School and next to the Dixon Cooperative Market. A Dixon school kid can leave
class, head across the street to do homework at the library and pick up a snack
at the deli on the way.

Leaders in Dixon learned that federal funds have advantages over private loans
for rural communities. Federal loans have low interest rates and are sometimes
available for extended payback periods, with little to no money down. Grants
don't have to be paid back.

In 2002, Dixon residents and library supporters raised $200,000 to buy the acre
and a half and the old adobe building that became the market. A few years later,
the library qualified for a $115,000 USDA loan and matching grant to build a new
library, expand its book collection and triple the number of computer stations
to 12. The library had 18,000 visitors last year from communities stretched
along the valley, Neymark said.

A USDA rural business enterprise grant helped the village repair the Dixon
Market's roof, upgrade the restroom and install plumbing for running water.
Another grant helped the village add a deli. "Once something like that is
successful, it breeds more success," said Nelson Rhodes, a general manager at
the market. "People gain confidence in the ability to get grants and complete
projects. It inspires them to think of what they can do next."

In an example of innovative financial thinking, the library rents the building
to the cooperative market for 2 percent of the grocery store's sales. "The money
goes to support the library," said Neymark, chairman of the library board. "The
better the co-op does, the better the library does."

In 2015, the Embudo Valley Library was named one of the five best libraries in
the nation by the Institute of Museum and Library Services.

Past Dixon a couple of miles and down a rough, dirt road is La Mesa Organic
Farm, owned by Mesa and Molly Ruiz. The couple worked for two early summer
months -- "when we should have been planting," they said -- on the application
for their $49,500 USDA Value Added Producer Grant.

The money will help the couple expand their family farm with an apple cider
processing facility and to hire two or three people to help increase the market
for their apple cider, blue corn atole and blue corn chocolate elixir. "We've
been finding a lot of positive response to these products at the farmers
markets," said Mesa Ruiz.

Ruiz said the grant was worth the extra effort, and he credits Brunner's staff
with helping them finish it when they were ready to give up. "The grant is
structured really well," he said. "It forces us as a business to use that money
in the community to hire new employees."

The blue corn products are a niche. Ruiz said a blue corn mash that is used to
make a hot cereal has been well received by locals. His blue corn elixir mixed
with chocolate and chile is another experimental product.

Since Ruiz isn't yet selling to stores, in order to get the USDA grant he had to
get customers to write letters saying they would buy the products.

Winning the grant award didn't immediately put cash in the Ruizes' pocket. They
have to pay for their equipment, supplies and employees' wages up front, then
submit the receipts to the USDA to get reimbursed.

Like other small-scale New Mexico farmers, Ruiz has taken advantage of federal
grants when he can apply for them. In 2013, he obtained a grant from the Natural
Resources Conservation Service to build a high tunnel greenhouse where he raised
vegetables commercially. He's now thinking about experimenting with the tunnel
to grow fruit trees.

Not far from Ruiz's farm is Vivác Winery, another business that's tapped into
the USDA grants. Brothers Chris and Jesse Padberg, Dixon natives, opened Vivác
Winery 14 years ago. "Each year, we grow a little bit and we do a little
better," Chris Padberg said.

But it hasn't been easy going. "Many times over the years, we weren't sure we
were going to make it through the winter," he said.

The Padbergs have kept at it, and now they've invented a small keg in which to
store and distribute their red and white wines to restaurants. "It cuts our
production costs by half. We pass that savings on to restaurants, and they pass
that savings on to their customers," Chris Padberg said.

The USDA Value Added Producer Grant they've been awarded will help them double
in size over the next three years, he said. They plan to add three more
employees to their seven-person staff to help with distribution.

Brunner said wineries and craft breweries are among the fastest-growing
industries in New Mexico and do the best job of utilizing USDA programs. Santa
Fe Brewing Co. and Taos Mountain Brewing also have recently received Value Added
Producer Grants for their beer.

In other USDA awards to Dixon, Los Ebanistas construction company tapped into a
USDA rural energy program to pay for part of a solar energy system that will
offset its power costs.

Brunner said supporting "local small businesses is essential to the state's
economic development. We see a lot of job growth around one-on-one
small-business development efforts where you take a small two-, three-
four-person business and add two or three jobs."

"More than 90 percent of businesses in New Mexico are small," he said.

Finally, one resident in the valley received a grant to refurbish her old house
in Dixon where she raised 14 children. The grant helped her pay to repair the
roof and install a handicapped-accessible ramp and a shower stall, install a
water closet and fix walls.

USDA Rural Development loan specialist Samantha Jo Soto said the grant is one
type of financial help the agency can provide to people in rural communities. In
2015, a total of 64 New Mexico families received grants or loans totaling
$483,000 to repair their homes. Another 84 residents received low-interest loans
from the USDA to buy qualifying homes.

Brunner expects support of the USDA rural development program to continue under
a Republican-controlled White House and Congress. "USDA is one of those rare
agencies that has bipartisan support from Congress. I think that will continue.
Whether you are on one side or another, you support rural communities."

Contact Staci Matlock at 505-986-3055 or smatlock@sfnewmexican. Follow her on
Twitter @stacimatlock.

___ (c)2017 The Santa Fe New Mexican (Santa Fe, N.M.) Visit The Santa Fe New
Mexican (Santa Fe, N.M.) at www.santafenewmexican.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170101-SF-In-Dixon-federal-funds-fuel-innovation-0101-20170101

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SF


                    Copyright 2017 The Santa Fe New Mexican


                              547 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                              July 4, 2014 Friday

Asociatividad para la conservacion de nuestros bosques y ríos, y para la
producción de cacao fino de aroma de manera orgánica, en Tsatsayaku (Association
for the preservation of our forests and rivers, and to the production of fine
cocoa aroma orga

LENGTH: 344  words


Start Date : 11/2013
End Date : 1/2015
Country : Ecuador
Status : Currently under execution
Project Number : ECU/SGP/FSP/OP5/COMDEKS/13/06
Grant Amount : US$ 50,000.00
Area Of Work : Biodiversity
Operational Phase : Phase 5
Grantee : Asociación de Productores de Cacao Fino de Aroma de Carlos Julio
Arosemena Tola
La Asociación de Productores y productoras de Cacao Fino de Aroma de Carlos
Julio Arosemena Tola  Tsatsayaku  pretente con este proyecto contribuir a la
conservación del biocorredor Akllak Sacha, mediante la conservación de los
recursos naturales, dando valor agregado al cacao fino de aroma y convertirlo en
producto del canton, aportando a mejorar la economía de los productores.


Para lograr la conectividad ecológica, la asociación conjuntamente con las
comunidades asociadas aportará a la conservación del área de amortiguamiento del
Parque Nacional Llanganates y se realizarán acciones de reforestación de
microcuencas. Se fortalecerá e implementarán paisajes productivos con cultivos
socioecológicos de cacao fino de aroma y otros cultivos asociados.
(The Association of Manufacturers and producers of Cacao Fino de Aroma of Carlos
Julio Arosemena Tola "Tsatsayaku" even attempt this project contribute to the
conservation of biocorridor Akllak Sacha, by conserving natural resources,
adding value to the fine cocoa aroma and turn in canton product, contributing to
improve the economy of producers.
To achieve ecological connectivity, the association together with the associated
communities contribute to the conservation of the area%s buffer Llanganates
National Park and reforestation of micro will be made. It will strengthen and
implement socio-ecological production landscapes with fine crops flavor cocoa
and other associated crops.)
Project completion date : 2015-01-31 12:00:00
Major organization : SGP THE GEF SMALL GRANTS PROGRAMME

Address : Av. Amazonas 2889 y Av. La Granja, piso 10
Quito, Pichincha, 1703-4731

Country :Ecuador
Email : anamaria.varea@undp.org

Financier : Global Environment Facility Small Grants Programme (SGP),

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2014 Tenders Info
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              548 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                 The Morning Bulletin (Rockhampton, Queensland)

                             June 6, 2015 Saturday

Funding not enough for farmers;
CATEGORY D: Growcom says federal funding won't fully cover Marcia's trail of
destruction

BYLINE:  Michelle Gately

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 386  words


A CENTRAL Queensland farm lost 1200 mango trees and its entire crop of avocado
and lychees when Cyclone Marcia tore through the region in February.

Another lost an entire orchard of macadamia trees, which was established 45
years ago.

Peak horticultural group Growcom believes Federal Government funding to date is
not enough to help these struggling producers, and many others like them, get
back on their feet.

Growcom CEO Pat Hannan said that despite the massive damage to infrastructure,
trees, plants and crops, the government had not offered Category D loans of up
to $650,000 interest free with a $50,000 grants component.

"With the amount of severe damage in the area, Growcom had expected that the
Federal Government would provide similar levels of support as that provided to
farmers following Tropical Cyclone Yasi," Mr Hannan said.

"Sadly, despite the Queensland Government's best efforts, the Federal Government
has chosen only to approve $27.75million in total under the Natural Disaster
Relief and Recovery Arrangements, compared to the estimated $198.5million needed
to help the recovery of Central Queensland.

"There has been an allocation of $750,000 to deploy Industry Recovery Officers
in the region, for which we are grateful, but the value of these officers is
significantly reduced by the length of time it has taken to release the funds
and the reduced funding directly available to growers."

Flynn MP Ken O'Dowd and Capricornia MP Michelle Landry yesterday said there was
a "significant amount" of assistance for farmers and primary producers.

This includes direct damage concessional loans of up to $250,000 and up to
$25,000 reimbursement to farmers for the cost of recovery.

"I want to emphasise that these grants were only made available for victims of
Cyclone Marcia, because of the severity and wide-ranging impact it had on
farmers," Mr O'Dowd said. "These grants are not made available for all
disasters, but we understand the great loss to income and personal property.

"New "~loss of income' concessional loans are also available to support farmers
who may not previously have qualified for any assistance, despite losing
significant income."

Ms Landry said Growcom should be asking questions of the State Government's
level of support. The Bulletin is seeking a response from the State.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RMB


                    Copyright 2015 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              549 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Southland Times (New Zealand)

                            March 22, 2014 Saturday

Vineyards expect top-notch fruit

BYLINE: John Edens

SECTION: NEWS; NATIONAL; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 551 words


AT A GLANCE CENTRAL OTAGO WINE REGION

Four distinct climate sub-regions: Alexandra basin, Cromwell basin, Wanaka and
Gibbston.

Total producing hectares: 1909 (1356ha pinot noir)

Production tonnage: 8400

Percentage of NZ production: 2.4

Source: New Zealand Winegrowers (2013 figures)

--------------------

Harvesting is just around the corner for Central Otago wine producers but any
national over- supply is unlikely to hit the regional market.

The industry is anticipating a bumper crop, which can lead to over-supply and
price fluctuations, but Central Otago normally escapes the vagaries of the
market because output is small and quality consistently high.

Over-supply in previous years hit growers and producers of white wine,
especially sauvignon blanc, whereas Central Otago produces mainly pinot noir.

Central Otago growers and producers are aiming to harvest about Easter, with
some a little earlier or later depending on sub- region climate.

Valli vineyard owner and winemaker Grant Taylor said yesterday that he was
expecting a lighter than normal crop at his 3.6-hectare pinot noir block in
Gibbston.

Grapes were small this year because of fewer sunshine hours during summer, he
said.

"January was hardly summer and is the main month when the grapes get bigger. The
berries are smaller, there's a much higher ratio of skin to juice."

Because the bunches were smaller grapes were not as tightly packed and were
therefore less susceptible to rot.

Smaller grapes also meant more flavour.

Hawkdun Rise in Alexandra, a small 2ha, high-end producer that grows pinot noir
and gewurztraminer, is run by husband and wife John and Suzanne Grant.

Mr Grant said the harvest was likely about Easter, a little earlier than
previous years, with an average size crop and excellent fruit.

Winemakers normally described the Cromwell basin pinot noirs as big and bold
while the Alexandra produce was more subtle and elegant.

"The fruit looks good. In our situation we aim for the top end of the market.
The market's improving along with the economy."

Maori Point Vineyard in Tarras produces pinot noir and pinot gris from a 6.5ha
block.

Owner John Harris said the winery was also aiming to harvest around Easter and
benefited from a spell of fine, sunny weather.

"Everything's looking fine, we have got a very nice balanced crop. It's been a
wonderful summer and autumn apart from a couple of frost alarms."

Maori Point focuses on the regional and South Island markets although there was
some concern nationally about the potential for over-supply.

Grape brokers, mainly sellers of white varietals, were also having difficulties
finding winemakers in Canterbury because plant including tanks were damaged by
earthquakes.

This meant the spot market for excess crops could be a bit saturated, he said.

"There's a balance between Central Otago production and the big national
companies who buy grapes and make wine."

The grape harvest has already started in other wine-growing regions and runs
until May.

New Zealand Winegrowers chief executive Philip Gregan said he expects this
year's vintage to reach record export value of $1.3 billion by the end of the
financial year.

john.edens@stl.co.nz

--------------------

CAPTION:

Lighter crop: Valli owner and winemaker Grant Taylor at the Gibbston pinot noir
block.

Picture: JOHN EDENS/ FAIRFAX NZ 629147152

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2014 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                              550 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                              July 12, 2015 Sunday

Women in agribusiness discuss funding opportunities, successes

LENGTH: 416 words

DATELINE: FREEPORT


- Maine's first female State Director of USDA Rural Development, who comes from
three generations of farmers in Aroostook County, and a local farm and food
processing company leader were among those at the recent Women in Ag panel
discussion, held at Wolfe's Neck Farm in Freeport.


USDA Rural Development Director Virginia Manuel introduced the panel, comprised
of all women farmers.


"This panel created a valuable opportunity to bring together experts and
decision-makers to discuss the robust future for women farmers in Maine, and the
vital programs, such as those offered by USDA Rural Development that supports
them in their renewable energy and energy and energy-efficiency projects and
value-added producer and food processing activities," Manuel said.


The panelists, joined by over 70 people, discussed access to capital, marketing,
growing competition and distribution of their products as being among the
challenges of operating a farm or agricultural business in Maine today.


Serving on the panel was Marada Cook, co-owner of Crown O' Maine Organic
Cooperative and Northern Girl in Van Buren, who has seen her farm products
benefit from USDA Rural Development funding. Northern Girl recently received
$350,000 to construct a new vegetable processing facility.


"Our food-safe processing facility was built through the support of Rural
Business Development Grant funds and the Town of Van Buren," Cook said. "We hold
a long-term lease with the Town of Van Buren. This facility and its location
close to our growers allow us to create jobs in Northern Aroostook and buy more
Aroostook County crops."


Cook continued, "Without this program it is unlikely as a start-up that we could
have constructed a facility to meet today's food safety standards."


There is a growing number of farms in Maine -- 8,173 farms, up from 7,196 in
2002 -- and 29 percent of Maine's farmers are women, up from 25 percent in 2007,
panelists learned. The panel discussion was hosted by Rep. Chellie Pingree and
included USDA Deputy Secretary Krysta Harden in her first trip to Maine.


"We want to make sure the programs work, are flexible, are creative enough and
are there for folks who need them," Harden said. "There is a new awakening for
women (in farming)."


To learn more, interested farmers or agribusiness owners should contact Chery
Pelletier, Rural Energy for America Program, at 764-4157 or
Cheryl.pelletier@me.usda.gov, or Brian Wilson, Value Added Producer Grant
program, at 990-9168 or brian.wilson@me.usda.gov

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 Bangor Daily News


                              551 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                              July 12, 2015 Sunday

Women in agribusiness discuss funding opportunities, successes

LENGTH: 416 words

DATELINE: FREEPORT


- Maine's first female State Director of USDA Rural Development, who comes from
three generations of farmers in Aroostook County, and a local farm and food
processing company leader were among those at the recent Women in Ag panel
discussion, held at Wolfe's Neck Farm in Freeport.


USDA Rural Development Director Virginia Manuel introduced the panel, comprised
of all women farmers.


"This panel created a valuable opportunity to bring together experts and
decision-makers to discuss the robust future for women farmers in Maine, and the
vital programs, such as those offered by USDA Rural Development that supports
them in their renewable energy and energy and energy-efficiency projects and
value-added producer and food processing activities," Manuel said.


The panelists, joined by over 70 people, discussed access to capital, marketing,
growing competition and distribution of their products as being among the
challenges of operating a farm or agricultural business in Maine today.


Serving on the panel was Marada Cook, co-owner of Crown O' Maine Organic
Cooperative and Northern Girl in Van Buren, who has seen her farm products
benefit from USDA Rural Development funding. Northern Girl recently received
$350,000 to construct a new vegetable processing facility.


"Our food-safe processing facility was built through the support of Rural
Business Development Grant funds and the Town of Van Buren," Cook said. "We hold
a long-term lease with the Town of Van Buren. This facility and its location
close to our growers allow us to create jobs in Northern Aroostook and buy more
Aroostook County crops."


Cook continued, "Without this program it is unlikely as a start-up that we could
have constructed a facility to meet today's food safety standards."


There is a growing number of farms in Maine -- 8,173 farms, up from 7,196 in
2002 -- and 29 percent of Maine's farmers are women, up from 25 percent in 2007,
panelists learned. The panel discussion was hosted by Rep. Chellie Pingree and
included USDA Deputy Secretary Krysta Harden in her first trip to Maine.


"We want to make sure the programs work, are flexible, are creative enough and
are there for folks who need them," Harden said. "There is a new awakening for
women (in farming)."


To learn more, interested farmers or agribusiness owners should contact Chery
Pelletier, Rural Energy for America Program, at 764-4157 or
Cheryl.pelletier@me.usda.gov, or Brian Wilson, Value Added Producer Grant
program, at 990-9168 or brian.wilson@me.usda.gov

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 Bangor Daily News


                              552 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 6, 2014 Saturday

Montana, USDA Award Nearly $1 Million in Specialty Crop Block Grants

LENGTH: 506  words

DATELINE: Helena


Montana University System has issued the following news release:

The Montana Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
have selected the recipients of the 2014 Specialty Crop Block Grants. Overall,
eleven entities involved with specialty crops met the grant qualifications and
will receive some $986,000 in grant funds to help advance agriculture in
Montana. Specialty crops are fruits and vegetables, culinary and medicinal
herbs, horticultural, and nursery crops, including floriculture. Plants must be
intensively cultivated and used by people for food, medicinal purposes and/or
aesthetic gratification. Eligible projects must solely enhance the
competitiveness of specialty crops in either domestic or foreign markets. More
information on specialty crops and eligibility is available on the department's
website .

"With the growth in specialty crops like lentils and dry peas, the state tripled
the amount of grant funding available from USDA. We are excited to get this
money out the door and on the ground to help advance Montana agriculture," said
Montana Department of Agriculture Director Ron de Yong.

2014 Specialty Crop Block Grant Awardees: Montana State University , Schutter
Diagnostic Lab, Detection of Fungicide Resistant Ascochyta Blight $95,710.

Montana State University, Montana Seed Potato Certification, evaluating
generation resistance to potato virus Y in potatoes $126,008.

Montana State University, Western Agricultural Research Center, evaluation of
Montana-grown "Superfood" fruits $119,10.

Lake County Community Development Corporation: Mission Mountain Food Enterprise
Center, food safety trainings for Group Gap $136,157.

Montana State University, Lewis & Clark County Extension Identification,
Preservation, and Propagation of Heritage Orchards in Montana $127,680.

Headwaters RC&D Area Inc ., Meeting Montana's Food Safety Education Needs
$57,327.

Montana State University, Missoula County Extension, Montana Sustainable
Strawberry Initiative $55,017.

Montana State University, Flenniken Lab Montana Bee Viruses: Identification and
Transmission $65,000.

Montana State University, Department of Plant Sciences & Plant Pathology
Northern Plains Vegetable Variety Testing $30,056.

Montana Nursery & Landscape Association, Plant Something: Montana-Grown
Awareness Campaign $52,380.

SCBG, Management & Compliance $121,792.

For the last two year's Montana has been one of the leading producers of lentils
and dry peas according to USDA National Agriculture Statistics Service. In
addition, crop diversification with specialty crops and other crops have been a
part of the 51 percent increase in the value of agriculture over the last five
years.

The Montana Department of Agriculture's mission is to protect producers and
consumers, and to enhance and develop agriculture and allied industries. For
more information on the Montana Department of Agriculture, visit
http://www.agr.mt.gov

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              553 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Tasmanian Country (Australia)

                             April 29, 2016 Friday
                               TasCountry Edition

Big changes in sight for meat grading

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 161 words


Value-based pricing for meat producers is a step closer thanks to a $4.8 million
Federal Government grant.

The funding is part of a joint project with Meat and Livestock Australia to
develop new technology in meat processing.

Some of the technology to be investigated includes X-ray and 3D digital imaging
for accurately measuring live animals and carcasses.

This could help pave the way for value-based pricing based on known meat yield
and eating quality.

MLA managing director Richard Norton said the technology would enable producers
to be paid on the objective measurements of the product, allowing better
compliance to pricing grids, targeting of markets and ma-ximised profits.

"The funding of this project will deliver a quantum leap in the development and
adoption of technology because it leverages the capacity of 19 research and
industry partners," Mr Norton said.Three measurement technologies will be
developed for use on-farm and within the processing sector.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: Tasmanian Country


                   Copyright 2016 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              554 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 30, 2015 Friday

Missouri: Gov. Nixon visits Buchanan County farm to announce competitive USDA
grant to reduce erosion, improve water quality

LENGTH: 549  words

DATELINE: Jefferson


Jay Nixon of Missouri has issued the following news release:

Gov. Jay Nixon today visited the farm of Doug and Vicki Hickman in DeKalb with
Department of Natural Resources Director Sara Parker Pauley, Department of
Agriculture Director Richard Fordyce, and J.R. Flores from the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service to announce a $6 million competitive federal
grant to help reduce soil erosion and improve water quality in communities
throughout the state.

"Less erosion means more productive land; it means cleaner streams, rivers and
lakes, and it means healthier, more prosperous rural communities across our
state," said Gov. Nixon. "As a result of this competitive grant, farmers will
have more tools to keep Missouri's land productive and fertile, and our
communities will benefit from efforts to reduce soil runoff into Missouri
streams. It's a win-win for everyone."

Under the proposal, the $6 million federal grant will be matched with $15.6
million from public and private partners including the Missouri Association of
Councils of Governments; University of Missouri Extension; Missouri Corn Growers
Association; Missouri Soybean Association; Lincoln University; Women, Food and
Ag Network; and the Missouri Department of Conservation.

"RCPP puts our partners in the driver's seat. Projects are led locally, and
demonstrate the value of strong public-private partnerships that deliver
solutions to tough natural resource challenges," said J.R. Flores, Missouri
State Conservationist for the USDA's Natural Resources Conservation Service.

State, local and regional partners will join with agricultural producers to
study and implement farm practices that will result in more productive soils and
cleaner water.

"Environmental stewardship and the protection of the state's agricultural land
are shared goals of the Department of Natural Resources and the state's
agriculture producers," said Missouri Department of Natural Resources Director
Sara Parker Pauley. "This project maximizes efforts by both groups to protect
Missouri's soil and water resources, and demonstrates the effectiveness of
established runoff reduction practices."

"Promoting and enhancing stewardship of our lands will not only improve
environmental quality, but will also preserve and maintain a strong and
profitable agricultural industry in this state for generations to come," said
Missouri Department of Agriculture Director Richard Fordyce.  "This project,
which provides a great opportunity for Missouri's producers, will have a
positive impact on the environment, our food supply and on our local and state
economies."

Missouri has long been a leader in reducing soil erosion. Since 1984, when
Missouri voters first approved a sales tax for soil and water, these projects
have prevented more than 178 million tons of soil from being eroded.  Reducing
erosion makes soil more productive and improves water quality by preventing
runoff into streams, rivers and lakes.

In his State of the State address last week, Gov. Nixon said his administration
would intensify its efforts to ensure Missouri communities have access to clean,
abundant water resources for recreation, industry and agriculture.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              555 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            July 11, 2001 Wednesday

Farmer builds business on a better egg;
Taps into existing networks to market;
low-cholesterol poultry products

BYLINE: JOHN SOUTHERST, Special to The Globe and Mail

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: MANAGING; Pg. M1

LENGTH: 924 words

DATELINE: ABBOTSFORD, B.C.


Chicken farmer Frank Born sells millions of eggs a year, but employs only one
person - himself.

Through contracts with feed companies, distributors and other farmers, he
manages to keep tight control of his own brand - a low-cholesterol egg sold
under the Born 3 banner - while keeping his capital investment to a minimum.

The result is the agricultural version of the virtual corporation. "It's very
unique for the agricultural sector," says Peter Whitlock, manager of the B.C.
Egg Producers, a provincial marketing agency. Managing the brand, rather than
producing the eggs himself, has become Mr. Born's business. "He's done a lot of
work to promote the concept and gone out and sold it."

Born 3 eggs have 23 per cent less cholesterol than regular eggs, and contain
artery-cleansing omega-3 fatty acids and vitamin E. This is achieved by using a
special, flax-based chicken feed, developed by Mr. Born, that contains no animal
byproducts.

"I've done away with anything to do with meat and animal fat," he says. "People
are concerned about what they're eating these days."

With distribution through major Western grocery chains such as Overwaitea,
Safeway and IGA, Born 3 has achieved a solid 7 per cent of the B.C. egg market
since launching in 1994. Sales last year totalled $3.5-million.

Mr. Born began his chicken odyssey about 10 years ago, when the egg business was
on a perilous downward roll. Consumers had heard that cholesterol was bad - and
that eggs were full of it. Frustrated that eggs' nutritional value was being
discounted, Mr. Born looked for solutions.

As a part-time chicken feed salesman at the time, he met producers and
nutritionists who were tinkering with feed mixes to alter the content of eggs.
Inspired, he began a quest for a good egg.

Mr. Born, founder and chief executive officer of Born 3 Marketing Corp.,
designed the research protocol and raised the test chickens at his Abbotsford
chicken farm. With help from David Kitts, a food science professor at the
University of British Columbia, he obtained a grant from the National Research
Council to pay for scientific testing.

The results confirmed that he had a unique product. His low-fat formula knocks
down an egg's cholesterol content (a regular egg contains 1.6 grams of saturated
fat, a Born 3 egg, only 1.1 grams) and adds omega-3 (believed to keep blood thin
and arteries clear of heavy fats) and vitamin E.

With his niche established in British Columbia, Mr. Born is now gathering funds
to expand south - he's eyeing San Francisco and Seattle. Meanwhile, he's already
working with a chicken grower near Harrisburg, Penn., and has test-marketed a
low-cholesterol chicken, raised on the same special feed, in Boston and New
York.

Mr. Born faces Canadian competition in the omega-3 market from Ontario producers
Burnbrae Farms Ltd. and Gray Ridge Egg Farms, as well as from some smaller
producers in Alberta, Quebec and the Maritimes.

But with a strong regional brand, a flexible business model and the conviction
of a sales zealot, Mr. Born believes he's on the verge of a breakthrough.

"What I've learned over the last 10 years prepares me to build my market," he
says. "I'm saying chicken is not just a commodity. I can prove that if you feed
it differently, you get a higher quality functional bird."

Thus, simple commodities such as eggs and chicken become value-added specialty
products sold at a premium. Unlike conventional chicken feed, his does not
contain additives to promote growth, and his chickens are not inoculated.

For food producers and retailers, adding tangible value to farm products is the
Holy Grail in the effort to free themselves from the tight margins and
volatility of commodity markets.

"I can get distribution, no problem," says Mr. Born, 40. "They waltz me right
into head office at the supermarket chains. Over a few years, I got into every
major grocery store chain in B.C., and minor ones, too. I'm adding value to the
product and to their businesses - and to the consumer's plate."

His strategy depends on building the Born 3 brand without overextending his own
resources. A flexible production system enables him to do this.

He buys production capacity from individual farmers, and works directly with
grading stations and their existing customer contracts, providing a value-added
product rather than competing directly against them. This way he avoids the cost
of expanding his own facilities. He also contracts with the local feed company
to provide his special feed directly to the farmers using his system.

Mr. Born currently has 12,000 laying chickens on his own farm and 70,000 with
six other B.C. farmers, as well as one in Manitoba. At any given time, only a
portion of the chickens are producing Born 3 eggs. That's because Mr. Born sells
only large eggs, which chickens produce for only 30 weeks.

The eggs are then sent to grading stations for packing and distribution - either
Golden Valley Foods in Abbotsford or Countryside Farms in Steinbach, Man. These
packagers sell Born 3 eggs to their regular customers.

"The way I've set up production, with many farmers producing under my system for
a single brand, 5,000 birds can quickly become 50,000" through new contracts,
says Mr. Born. "I source out all the work I need, whether it's accounting, egg
processing or marketing. With Golden Valley, for example, I gain access to all
the stores they already supply."

Mr. Born is now working on producing and distributing a low-cholesterol chicken,
which he plans to have in stores this fall.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2001 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              556 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      The Financial Post (Toronto, Canada)

                     March 31, 1995, Friday, DAILY EDITION

JUMP IN PRICES BRINGS SOME CHEER TO OIL PATCH: Derivatives play adding
volatility to market

BYLINE: Sydney Sharpe

SECTION: SECTION 1, NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: Calgary, Alta.


Canada's petroleum producers are watching oil and gas prices snap back from a
prolonged slump, helped along by a movement from the industry's traditional link
to seasonal demand.

The price for benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude oil yesterday hit
US$19.22, its highest level since August 1994, before falling to close at
US$19.15. Natural gas reached a 1995 high of US$1.65 in the U.S., up US30 cents
from a low of US$1.35 in February.

''We always have to be pleased when prices go up,'' said Grant Billing, chairman
of the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, which held its annual dinner
in Calgary last night.

The TSE index of oil and gas producers, after hitting a 52-week low of 3783 on
Jan. 13, closed yesterday at 4361.90, up about 15%.

The higher prices have had a major impact on share values of strong producing
companies. ''Nearly everything is up,'' said one industry analyst.

The share price of Canadian Natural Resources Ltd. (CNQ/TSE), an aggressive oil
and gas producer, has risen to $15 7/8 from $11 1/4 on Jan. 31.

Rennaissance Energy Ltd. (RES/TSE), one of the biggest industry success stories
of the 1990s, has jumped to $29 1/8 from $25 5/8 at the end of January.

Even Grant Billing's Norcen Energy Resources Ltd. (NCN/TSE), after announcing a
1994 net loss of $114.8 million earlier in the week, saw its stock close
yesterday at $17 3/8, up more than $2 since Jan. 31.

Analysts say these increases have been propelled in part by price hikes that are
no longer fully tied to supply and demand.

''The futures market and commodity derivatives are changing the seasonality of
oil and gas prices,'' says Wilf Gobert, managing director of research for Peters
& Co. Ltd.

The trend runs counter to the usual cycle of high prices during the peak-demand
winter months, and fading prices during the spring.

Some dealers say the market has become unpredictably volatile.

''I'd be better off just to close my eyes and buy around March every year,'' one
Houston trader said. ''Last year we moved from US$14 (a barrel) in late March to
US$21 by June, without much substance in the soup.

''I doubt we'll see a US$7 move this year, but I tend to expect a price of US$20
to US$21,'' he added.

''The speculation doesn't significantly hurt the industry because it provides
liquidity,'' said Billing.

But Gobert cautions producers and investors to be aware that derivatives
speculation is a growing factor in oil and gas pricing.

In the text of his speech to CAPP last night, Billing said one of the industry's
major problems is lack of transportation capacity for both gas and oil.

''Our companies can produce the oil and gas,'' he said. ''But we must have the
corresponding capacity to move it to markets.''

Several companies have shut in gas recently because of price weakness and
transmission problems.

There was a discouraging development this week, as Foothills Pipe Lines Ltd.
said it may have to delay opening its Wild Horse pipeline to the Montana border.
The line was due to connect with Altamont's proposed U.S. extension in November
1996.

Billing also welcomed Alberta's Special Places plan, which will provide clear
rules for explorers working in wildnerness areas. ''Our industry . . . cannot
tolerate confrontations over every discrete activity undertaken,'' he said.


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Graph: Datastream / OIL PRICE: West Texas intermediate crude: Nearest
contract, per barrel: March 30 close: US$19.15 -0.07: (See print copy for
complete graph)

Photo: NORCEN'S GRANT BILLING: 'We always have to be pleased when prices go up.'

TYPE: CHRONOLOGY

                       Copyright 1995 Financial Post Ltd.


                              557 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             Waterloo Region Record

                              May 26, 2015 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

Queen's Tavern in Ayr fit for a King

BYLINE: Jeff Hicks, Record staff

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 693 words


Weirdness coats the time-in-a-blender interior of the old Queen's Tavern in Ayr.

Golden Elvis busts. A barber's chair throne fit for a monarch in a mullet. Eddie
Shack autographed nose-for-value photos. A "Dirty Harry" pinball machine. An
alas-poor-Yorick skull. A copy of a copy of a copy of an Andy Warhol print of a
hidden naked dude. Hawaiian-style leis with garlands of bottle caps linked
together in pop-top chains.

Look hard. Drink in each twisted talisman. The eclectic mix is electric.

"It's shock value," said Mary Ann Melnychuk, whose family has owned the
160-year-old bar for 36 years.

"I try to do shock without offending anyone."

Yes, shock value is the quietly disquieting vibe in this shining anachronism.

Maybe that's why producers of the new Stephen King time-travel miniseries
"11.22.63" appear poised to rent out this quaint, but quirky Stanley Street
establishment - an old speakeasy where packs of university students have been
known to launch DUSTED (Drink Unsuspecting Small-Town Establishment Dry) raids
of Tommyknocker mischief.

Melnychuk says she will close down her place briefly for a few days for the
cameras on June 7.

The timeless bar, with all its random silliness and needful things temporarily
removed, will revert to the late-'50s, early-'60s settings of King's 2011
bestselling what-if book focused on the date of the Kennedy assassination.

The set designers, who appeared by the busload last Wednesday, will be busy.

The Queen's will reopen for business on the night of June 12.

A production publicist and assistant location manager contacted via email
provided no confirmation. But Melnychuk is preparing her bar for a big star.

It is known that James Franco is the lead. Surely, he'll appear out of the mist
along the Nith River, she says.

The A-list Hollywood actor with the fire-starter grin might even appear in
scenes that may be shot in Hespeler's tiny downtown next month. Hespeler
business association executive director Karen Grant isn't giving out any coveted
details.

"I've been told not to reveal anything," Grant said in an email Friday.

But King, the great master author of mystery and misery, could make a cameo at
the Queen's Tavern. The producers have been mum on the matter with Melnychuk.

Will the "Running Man" himself show up?

"They can't say either way," Melnychuk said. "Why wouldn't he be an extra in a
bar, if that's his shtick? It's the perfect spot."

Four weeks ago, the production team came to Ayr seeking settings for the
nine-hour series about time portals hidden in diners, era-hopping schemes to
foil the Kennedy assassination and the perils of tinkering with history.

Melnychuk saw the location scouts scouring the town's green mile, their faces
drawing thinner with growing desperation. The skeleton crew so out of place with
their clipboards and awkwardly-held cameras. She had to approach them.

"Of course, I'm a nosy parker," she said.

She asked them what was going on and invited them into the Queen's. They got
hooked.

"They just fell in love with the bar," she said. "They popped in and went, 'Oh,
my goodness. This bar is better than the one we picked in Hamilton.'"

So eat your palpitating heart out, Hamilton. Froth at the mouth like a rabid St.
Bernard, if you like. The Queen's Tavern in Ayr apparently won the gig of going
back in time.

And the old Ice House just down the street? That crumbling dark tower and
one-time creamery just might become a time portal in disguise. Step inside and
you might lose yourself in a fictional dead zone, Melnychuk muses.

The Queen's is no stranger to visiting stardom.

Sharon Stone shot a thriller here a decade ago. Dr. Ho, the Canadian back pain
relief guru, strolled in one Halloween.

Now, Franco and Stephen King may take a stool below a rainbow-coloured row of
eight-track cassettes lined up across the bar like tiny headstones in a crowded
pet cemetery.

Even better, Melnychuk will make a cauldron of cash to indulge this television
time trip.

A payday of $112,263 would be a fitting sum, right?

"Not that much," she said. "But it's worth my time to be closed."

And fooling with time - and its bloody toll - is what this horror show is all
about.

jhicks@therecord.com

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Metroland Media Group Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              558 of 998 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright (c) 2006 Fordham Intellectual Property, Media &
                           Entertainment Law Journal
            Fordham Intellectual Property, Media & Entertainment Law
                                    Journal

                                  Summer, 2006

                16 Fordham Intell. Prop. Media & Ent. L.J. 1081

LENGTH: 5101 words

SYMPOSIUM: Licensing Restrictions and Appropriating Market Benefits from Plant
Innovation

NAME: Jay P. Kesan*

BIO: * Professor & Director, Program in Intellectual Property & Technology Law,
University of Illinois College of Law. M.S., Ph.D. University of Texas at
Austin; J.D., Georgetown University School of Law. This article is an edited
transcript of the author's remarks made at the Fordham Intellectual Property
Symposium on November 18, 2005. John Richards et al., Panel I: Monsanto v.
Scruggs: The Scope of Downstream Licensing Restrictions, 16 Fordham Intell.
Prop. Media & Ent. L.J. 1025 (2006).

LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ...  Some products require a great deal of technical innovation, but once
acquired, they can be reproduced perfectly and then used or sold by the consumer
without additional cost. ... Monsanto is an agricultural firm involved in seed
production and agricultural biotechnology, including the production of
genetically modified seeds. ... Even with the bag-tag license, genetically
modified seed is enormously popular: seventy percent of the soybean grown in the
United States is genetically modified. ...  If a farmer buys a bag of soybean,
then he can continue planting the soybean and producing perfect samples, almost
digital copies, of the genetically modified seed simply by planting it. ...
However, if they buy an article that is governed by a "bag-tag" or "seed-wrap"
license, then the producer's licensed right is exhausted, but other rights are
not. ...  For articles governed by a license, the producer usually charges a
lower amount; the consumer can pay a lower amount for an incomplete set of
rights. ...  Mark Patterson cautions us that in regards to price discrimination,
the welfare effects are ambiguous. ...  For example, if a farmer owns more than
150 acres, then he has to pay the seed producer; he cannot unconditionally save
seed. ... Other countries are experimenting with having other people in the
value chain pay the seed producers, other than the farmer. ...

TEXT:
 [*1081]

   Recent patent cases have come under fire with producers accused of seeking to
maximize profits by undermining consumers' rights of sale. n1 Yet in the case of
agricultural biotechnology, its reliance on patent law is more complex because
of the unique reproductive qualities of its products. Some products require a
great deal of technical innovation, but once acquired, they can be reproduced
perfectly and then used or sold by the consumer without additional cost. At the
same time, certain licensing agreements now prohibit farmers from carrying out
long-standing practices on their farms. These issues have come to the forefront
of patent law, because of cases brought forth by agbiotech firm Monsanto. n2
This talk addresses intellectual property concerns posed by licensing
restrictions associated with the sale of seed and the problem of appropriating
market benefits from plant innovation. Among some 1,200 cases that Monsanto has
filed against infringers of its patent claims, only two have progressed
significantly to the Federal Circuit: Monsanto v. McFarling n3 has been heard in
district court and Federal Circuit opinions, and  [*1082]  Monsanto v. Scruggs
n4 is still in litigation. In the case of McFarling, the Court of Appeals for
the Federal Circuit upheld Monsanto's licensing agreements against Homan
McFarling, a Mississippi farmer. n5

   Monsanto is an agricultural firm involved in seed production and agricultural
biotechnology, including the production of genetically modified seeds. Seed
producers, like Monsanto, have different contractual relationships with
different types of farmers: those who use the seed for food and feed and those
who plant it. For farmers who are seed producers, they enter straight-up, output
contracts, in which Monsanto purchases all the output the farmers produce. They
typically do not involve any patent issues. For farmers who use the seed
primarily for food and feed, they are held by express license restrictions on
seed bags, often referred to as a "bag-tag license" or a "seed-wrap license."

   Monsanto has brought cases against farmers it believes have violated its
bag-tag licenses. n6 These licenses cover a bag of genetically modified seed
that is insect-resistant, herbicide-resistant, or salinity-resistant. The
particular gene in the seed that is susceptible to these factors has been
modified. This genetically modified seed is then sold in a bag with a label,
specifying that this seed can be used to produce food and feed, but cannot be
used to grow more seed for planting. Farmers can plant the seed, but after
harvest they must sell the leftover seed as food or feed; they cannot replant
it.

   Even with the bag-tag license, genetically modified seed is enormously
popular: seventy percent of the soybean grown in the United States is
genetically modified. n7 Take, for instance, the specific example of Roundup
Ready seeds from the Monsanto cases. n8 These seeds have been genetically
modified to resist a particular type of herbicide. If a farmer plants these
seeds in the  [*1083]  ground and sprays the farm with herbicides, then the
herbicides kill all the weeds, but not the seeds. The seeds remain unaffected by
the herbicides, because geneticists have located and inhibited the particular
enzyme (EPSPS enzyme) in the seed that is susceptible to it. Roundup Ready seeds
and the herbicide effectively rid the farm of weeds. Farmers benefit because
yields increase. Studies have been done that show the many benefits of using
Roundup Ready seeds. Therefore, it is not surprising that farmers behave
rationally and want to buy these seeds.

   Despite all these benefits, a problem emerges on the producer side. These
Roundup Ready soybeans are self-pollinating; they breed true and, therefore,
replicate perfectly. If a farmer buys a bag of soybean, then he can continue
planting the soybean and producing perfect samples, almost digital copies, of
the genetically modified seed simply by planting it. He is limited only by his
ability to keep the seed clean and dry during the off-season; in other words,
his ability to store it properly. Hybrid crops, on the other hand, act
differently. If a farmer buys a bag of a genetically modified hybrid seed, such
as corn, he might be able to use it a second time with some loss, but the third
or fourth time, the crop yield will drop significantly. Hybrid seeds are not
self-pollinating; they have built-in protection for the producer. Therefore,
when producers sell self-pollinating seeds like soybeans, they will have to act
to minimize replanting in order to achieve the same levels of protection that is
built into hybrid seeds. It follows that producers will price the
self-pollinating seed differently taking into account a certain number of
replanting activities.

   In the case of genetically modified seed, such price mechanisms accounting
for "brown-bagging" may well result in pricing the seed too high for farmers.
Monsanto, therefore, relies on the bag-tag licensing restrictions. Nonetheless,
consumers are selling saved seed among themselves in direct infringement of the
licenses. There are roughly 85 million acres of corn and soybean in the United
States, and they are roughly equal to each other. Taking into account the
differences between the amount of seed that is used in corn and soybean, the
amount of soybean sold is considerably lower - many times lower - than corn. We
have to assume that a significant amount of so-called "brown-bagging"  [*1084]
takes place to explain the difference. By the way, "brown-bagging" refers to
farmers selling saved-seed because they sell it in plain, brown bags.

   Does Monsanto have a right to prevent brown-bagging? Turning to the
precedents, we find that the Federal Circuit decided in the 1992 case of
Mallinckrodt that if a patentee goes beyond the physical or temporal scope of
the patent grant, then that is impermissible. n9 Later in the 1997 case, Braun
v. Abbott Labs, the Federal Circuit provided a few examples of impermissible
restrictions, such as using a patented product to try to control an un-patented
product and going beyond the term of the grant. n10 In the case of genetically
modified seed, we have to look at the restriction itself and decide whether it
is within or outside the patent grant. n11 Looking at the patent grant complies
with some old Supreme Court cases, like the 1938 case of General Talking
Pictures. n12

   Patent rights only apply to that which is described and claimed in the
patent. n13 Once we determine the limits of the statutory patent grant, then we
can determine infringement, because the crucial point is that farmers cannot
practice the patent claims. That means farmers cannot make, use, sell, or offer
to sell a patented invention without a license. They may buy an article that is
patented. If they buy an article with no restrictions whatsoever (i.e., an
unconditional sale), then they have paid for it and they have an "implied"
license stating that they have obtained the purchased good free and clear of any
restrictions. n14 However, if they buy an article that is governed by a
"bag-tag" or "seed-wrap" license, then the producer's licensed right is
exhausted, but other rights are not.

   Consumers often have a choice to buy the product with or without a license.
For articles governed by a license, the producer  [*1085]  usually charges a
lower amount; the consumer can pay a lower amount for an incomplete set of
rights. In the Lexmark case, the price for re-usable printer cartridges that
were governed by a license requiring the consumer to refill it through Lexmark
was around 20 percent lower than the price of a printer cartridge that was not
governed by a license. n15 If the consumer wants all the rights, then the
consumer can have an unconditional sale and pay a higher price. Whether or not
this price discrimination makes economic sense, the producers are alienating a
different set of property rights. Therefore, they should be able to price
differentially. Differential pricing allows many more transactions to clear in
the marketplace than is the case if only unconditional sales were allowed.

   What happens if we do not enforce licenses? Then we force producers to charge
higher prices, and then many transactions simply do not take place. Mark
Patterson cautions us that in regards to price discrimination, the welfare
effects are ambiguous. n16 The welfare effects of price discrimination become
ambiguous only if we do not properly monitor or control for the baseline.
Consider the situation without price discrimination, when producers sell seed
unconditionally at supra-competitive prices. Taking that to be the baseline,
allowing price discrimination across different markets and products permits us
to reduce some deadweight losses leading to an increase in social welfare. When
the supra-competitive price is higher than the competitive price, those
transactions between the competitive price and the supra-competitive price fail
to clear. For example, in an unconditional sale, if the competitive price in a
market for pencils is two dollars and the patented price is five dollars, then
transactions between two and five dollars do not take place. In new markets with
price discrimination, the product can be sold for a whole variety of prices
corresponding to different uses; a number of new transactions can take place; a
number of new markets are  [*1086]  created; and the welfare effects are
positive when compared with the alternative.

   One may also ask, in the case of seeds, why not permit seed saving? This is
the "God-made-germplasm" argument. The simple problem is that it is just not
true. The value chain in the modern food sector is enormously complicated. It
begins with start-up agbiotech companies performing a great deal of research and
development in genetics. University departments of agricultural-science and
agricultural engineering have moved away from germplasm breeding toward work in
genetics. These start-up agbiotech companies and universities provide their
technologies to large life-science companies and large agriculture-equipment
companies. By the time we arrive at a farmer, we are much farther along in the
value chain. He takes advantage of all the genetically modified technologies
that the start-up agbiotech companies, universities, and large-life science
companies have worked on, and the benefits that accrue to him do not derive from
his labor, innovation, or investment alone. In addition to genetically modified
crops, the farmer uses new technologically advanced equipment, which further
contributes to his higher yield. For example, these large agriculture-equipment
companies build combines that are fitted with global positioning system (GPS)
equipment. This equipment allows the farmer to plot crop yields - the width of
the combines times four feet: six-foot-by-four-foot plots that allow the farmer
to gauge precisely what the crop yields are. A complicated value chain continues
downstream from the farmer: it goes to the grain elevator; from there, it goes
to a food processor and so on; then it finally ends up with buyers/consumers.

   We need a system where parties in the value chain in the modern food sector
can share in the risks and benefits of R[D] then they can coordinate their
activities as the product goes through the value chain, rather than enabling a
system where one player takes all the risk, and another receives all the
benefits. Allowing the farmer to save seed goes back to a simple principle: he
is trying to reap where he did not sow. He is not the only person who has
contributed to the enhanced yield. There are a number of other players who have
done their part and have a right to get paid and have a right to benefit. We can
argue about  [*1087]  whether the benefit to producers and others is
commensurate with their innovation or not. This is exactly where the debate
should be. For instance, what is covered by the patent claim at issue and what
is not covered by the patent claim?

   This rationale may be exclusive to agricultural biotechnology. The same
protection extended to Monsanto may not apply to other companies, such as
Lexmark. In my opinion, the patent issues in the Lexmark case, involving the
illegal reconstruction of printer cartridges, were not squarely presented. n17
Certain questions arise: Is this cartridge patented? What, exactly, is patented?
What is the scope of the claim? But in the case of seeds, it is quite different:
you have wholesale reproduction. There is no question that there is perfect
replication. Distinguishing between legal repair and illegal reconstruction is
less problematic when a consumer can re-create the whole genetically modified
seed perfectly. Even in cases such as Aro I and Aro II, the U.S. Supreme Court
continues to uphold that full-scale reconstruction is illegal. n18

   Licensing restrictions, likewise, may not work as well for other industries.
Different industries and technological sectors rely on the patent system to
varying extents to appropriate benefits from their innovations. Some industries
use other means, other than licenses, to reap the benefits of their innovation.
Certain industries employ the first-mover advantage or they rely on network
effects to appropriate benefits from their innovation. Certain software products
lock the consumer in, because the cost of changing to new software is too high.
They may also appropriate benefits through other means, such as reputational
capital, bundling sales and services, and so forth. These practices, however, do
not work for seed companies. In the case of genetically modified crops that are
self-pollinating, it is as if you bought a CD containing some software, and the
CDs were replicating at night! The software industry, with their shrink-wrap
licenses, would never allow that, and they have network effects and other
practices to help them prevent customers from doing so. The producers of
genetically modified seeds have no such protection. Hybrid crops, on the
[*1088]  other hand, have built-in protection. Therefore, when dealing with
certain kinds of industries (such as agbiotech) and certain kinds of products
(such as self-pollinating crops), producers are dependent on utility patent
protection and enforcement to prevent free-riding and brown-bagging.

   Before I conclude, I want to discuss contractual issues and intermediaries
involved in the Monsanto cases. n19 Then, I will turn to the role of the
legislature in solving these complications and solutions proposed in other parts
of the world. I have glossed over some contractual issues, in part, because seed
producers are perfecting their notice requirements and contracts. They have
learned from not providing proper notice in the past. Nevertheless, there are
contractual issues, and conflicts have arisen over bag-tag licensing with
intermediaries, like JEM Ag Supply, in the JEM v. Pioneer case. n20 In JEM v.
Pioneer, the litigation came about because there were thousands and thousands of
Pioneer seed bags that were found in JEM Ag Supply, and every one of these bags
has a unique number to it, and based on those numbers, they found that JEM Ag
Supply had not paid for them. n21 Therefore, the relationship between some of
these retailers and agbiotech firms, like Monsanto and Pioneer, is strained.

   It is common in patent law for producers to sue intermediate players for
contributory infringement and for actively inducing infringement - Sec. 271(b)
and Sec. 271(c) - instead of going after the direct infringer, because the
direct infringer is very often a customer. The enforcement of licenses becomes
problematic for producers, because it involves suing customers. Most seed
producers admit that they do not want to sue farmers. They are their ultimate
customers, and they have longstanding relationships with them. Indeed, some of
them, such as DuPont-Pioneer, as a matter of policy, refuse to do so. They may
sue seed companies, but they do not sue farmers. However, Monsanto has gone
after direct customers whereas DuPont-Pioneer has not. n22 In short, there
[*1089]  are other non-patent issues such as customer relations and public
relation concerns that become relevant.

   Before turning to solutions proposed in other parts of the world, let's
consider the role of Congress in determining the validity and limits of the
intellectual property rights of genetically modified seeds. Sexually reproduced
plants are protected by this sui generis, legislatively created IP regime called
the Plant Variety Protection Act (PVPA). n23 The interface between PVPA and the
Utility Patent Act n24 has caused some confusion. The PVPA protects only the
plant as a whole and, unlike utility patents, allows exceptions, like the
breeding exception and the saving-seed exception. Utility patents protection, on
the other hand, is more robust: it also covers individual components of the
plant and the methods involved in plant innovation, like the actual
transformation method and how the gene is introduced into the seed. Compared to
the Utility Patent Act, the PVPA provides a narrow scope of protection.

   Despite these differences between the PVPA and the Utility Patent Act, it has
been urged, relying on a preemption argument, that Congress has acted in this
area through the PVPA to provide IP protection, as in the argument made in
J.E.M. v. Pioneer that went before the U.S. Supreme Court in 2001. n25 J.E.M.
claimed that plant protection had already been provided by the PVPA and,
therefore, utility patents should not be granted for plant innovation - a
preemption argument. n26 Yet the argument did not succeed. n27 Instead, the
Supreme Court held that utility patent protection is also available for plant
innovation. n28 Perhaps Congress will have to revisit this issue to clearly
establish what the PVPA covers and what it does not and how these two regimes
work together. At present, we find state legislatures becoming involved and
seeking to pass legislation to regulate contractual practices between seed
producers and farmers.

    [*1090]  Other solutions have been proposed in the United Kingdom and South
America that might provide some insight into how to reward innovators in R&D.
n29 Peter Carstensen made an interesting suggestion about applying the U.K. PVPA
in the U.S. n30 He explained how the U.K. regime allows farmers to save seed by
charging them a fee through the seed cleaner. n31 Most farmers would like the
U.K. regime; however, the U.K. saving-seed regime only applies to small farmers,
i.e., farmers who own less than a fixed acreage, say less than 150 acres. n32
For example, if a farmer owns more than 150 acres, then he has to pay the seed
producer; he cannot unconditionally save seed. Therefore, all the big farmers
have to pay and the small farmers do not. Looking at the suits Monsanto has
brought against farmers, we find that Mr. Homan McFarling was farming 8,000
acres, n33 and Mr. Scruggs was farming several thousand as well. n34 McFarling
was saving 1,500 bushels of soybean - not a small amount. n35 Even under the
U.K. regime, Montano could sue both of these farmers. n36 The PVPA, n37 which is
based out of the international UPOV convention, n38 has certain compulsory
exceptions and certain optional exceptions; hence these differences between
countries emerge. Each country can tailor the UPOV legal regime according to its
needs by choosing or opting out of the optional requirements. n39

   Other countries are experimenting with having other people in the value chain
pay the seed producers, other than the farmer. Argentina, for example, is the
mirror image of the United States in the Southern Hemisphere, where northern
Argentina looks like the southern United States. The crops that grow in northern
Argentina  [*1091]  are the same as those grown in the southern United States.
Argentina is the second and third producer of soybean and corn in the world,
respectively. n40 They were one of the few countries that embraced GM crops in
the early 1990s. To ensure that the large life-science companies are paid in
this arena, they are experimenting with imposing taxes on farmers' crops. n41 We
can argue about whether using taxes makes economic sense or not, but the purpose
is not to impose the burden on the farmer and instead make others further down
the value chain compensate the seed producers. Brazil is experimenting with
payments from elevator operators - that is, other people, besides the farmer,
who benefit from the higher yields of seed. n42 The purpose is, once again, to
establish mechanisms so that innovators are rewarded by others who are in a
better position perhaps to bear the burden.

   Whatever the outcome, a tremendous amount of activity is likely to be
forthcoming in this area, perhaps in the legislatures, and definitely in the
courts. The key issue remains how do you create a system where you can promote
innovation; where you can share in the risks and benefits of R[D] and, at the
same time, try to create new markets and permit the ability to alienate these
much sought after products throughout society?


Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
GovernmentsAgriculture & FoodProduct QualityPatent LawInfringement
ActionsGeneral OverviewPatent LawOwnershipGeneral Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  See, e.g., John Richards et al., Panel I: Monsanto v. Scruggs: The Scope of
Downstream Licensing Restrictions, 16 Fordham Intell. Prop. Media & Ent. L.J.
1025 (2006).





n2.  See, e.g., Monsanto Co. v. Scruggs, 117 Fed. Appx. 729 (Fed. Cir. 2004);
Monsanto Co. v. McFarling, 363 F.3d 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2004).





n3.  363 F.3d 1336.





n4.  117 Fed. Appx. 729.





n5.  McFarling, 363 F.3d at 1338.





n6.  See, e.g., Scruggs, 117 Fed. Appx. 729; McFarling, 363 F.3d at 1340.





n7.  Genetically Modified Crops in the United States, Pew Initiative on Food and
Biotechnology, Aug. 2004,
http://pewagbiotech.org/resources/factsheets/display.php3?FactsheetID=2 (last
visited July 22, 2006).





n8.  Scruggs, 117 Fed. Appx. 729; McFarling, 363 F.3d 1336.





n9.  Mallinckrodt, Inc. v. Medipart, Inc., 976 F.2d 700, 704 (Fed. Cir. 1992).





n10.  B. Braun Med. Inc. v. Abbott Lab., 124 F.3d 1419, 1426 (Fed. Cir. 1997).





n11.  Id.





n12.  General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Elec. Co., 305 U.S. 124 (1938).





n13.  See 35 U.S.C. 132(a) (2000).





n14.  Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co. (Aro II), 377 U.S. 476,
484 (1964).





n15.  Ariz. Cartridge Remanufacturers Ass'n v. Lexmark Int'l, Inc., 421 F.3d
981, 983 (Fed. Cir. 2005).





n16.  John Richards et al., Panel I: Monsanto v. Scruggs: The Scope of
Downstream Licensing Restrictions, 16 Fordham Intell. Prop. Media & Ent. L.J.
1025 (2006) (Mark Patterson, panelist).





n17.  Lexmark Int'l, 421 F.3d at 983.





n18.  See Aro II, 377 U.S. 476; Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co.
(Aro I), 365 U.S. 336 (1961).





n19.  Monsanto Co. v. Scruggs, 117 Fed. Appx. 729 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Monsanto Co.
v. McFarling, 363 F.3d 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2004).





n20.  J.E.M. Ag Supply, Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred Int'l, Inc., 534 U.S. 124
(2001).





n21.  Id. at 124.





n22.  See, e.g., Scruggs, 117 Fed. Appx. 729; McFarling, 363 F.3d 1336.





n23.  7 U.S.C. 2321-2372 (2000).





n24.  35 U.S.C. 1-376 (2000).





n25.  534 U.S. 124.





n26.  Id. at 125.





n27.  Id.





n28.  Id.





n29.  See, e.g., Plant Varieties Protection Act, 1997, Ch. 66, 10 (U.K.).





n30.  Richards, supra note 16 (Peter Carstensen, panelist). See also Peter
Carstensen, Post-Sale Restraints via Patent Licensing: A "Seedcentric"
Perspective, 16 Fordham Intell. Prop. Media & Ent. L.J. 1053 (2006).





n31.  Carstensen, supra note 30.





n32.  See Plant Varieties Protection Act 1997, Ch. 66, 10.





n33.  Monsanto Co. v. McFarling, 363 F.3d 1336, 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2004).





n34.  Monsanto Co. v. Scruggs, 117 Fed. Appx. 729 (Fed. Cir. 2004).





n35.  McFarling, 363 F.3d at 1339.





n36.  See Plant Varieties Protection Act, 1997, Ch. 66, 10 (U.K.).





n37.  7 U.S.C. 2321-2372 (2000).





n38.  International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants,
1961, Paris.





n39.  International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants,
1961, Paris.





n40.  Agribusiness, Argentine Republic Investment Promotion Agency,
http://www.inversiones.gov.ar/sectors_invest.htm (last visited July 22, 2006).





n41.  U.S.-Latin Accord on GM crops a timely warning for Australia, The
Guardian, Mar. 10, 2004, available at
http://www.cpa.org.au/garchve04/1174gm.html (last visited July 22, 2006).





n42.  Rachel Melcer, Monsanto Sees Sales Rise 22%; Posts Loss of $ 97 Million,
St Louis Post-Dispatch, Jan. 8, 2004, available at
http://www.mindfully.org/Industry/2004/Monsanto-Loses-US$ 97M7jan04.htm (last
visited July 22, 2006).


                              559 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                  The State Journal-Register(Springfield, IL)

                            February 4, 2000 Friday
                              Correction Appended

Budget is Ag friendly ;
 Funding included for value-added grants, venture capital

BYLINE: CHARLYN FARGO AGRIBUSINESS EDITOR

SECTION: Pg. 27

LENGTH: 542 words


A new state Agriculture Assembly would be modeled on the successful Conservation
Congress, under Gov. George Ryan's proposed agriculture budget for the next
fiscal year.

Illinois Agriculture Director Joe Hampton said Thursday Ryan's budget recognizes
farming as the No. 1 industry in the state.

The proposed agriculture budget, at $128.8 million, is up $4.2 million over this
year's, or 3.4 percent. It includes funding for value-added matching grants,
legal assistance for farmers and creation of the Agriculture Assembly.

"This budget will help Illinois farmers who have been hit hard by continued low
commodity prices," Ryan said during his budget address Wednesday. "The value
-added grants will help our producers generate more profit from their products.
At the same time, we want to assist farmers facing legal challenges due to a
loss of income."

The budget includes:

$800 million in venture capital for a new post genomics (biotech) institution at
the University of Illinois.

"This is the real jewel of the whole program," said Hampton.

A $3 million program that will provide 50 percent matching grants to farmers for
new and expanding agribusinesses.

" This is designed to help new-generation cooperatives," said Hampton.

$350,000 in legal assistance for Illinois farmers in conjunction with the
Illinois State Bar Association. Participating attorneys will provide reduced
hourly rates to farmers in need of legal assistance due to the depressed farm
economy.

$250,000 for the Agriculture Assembly. The idea is to bring together commodity
groups, farm organizations and others to discuss issues affecting the
agriculture industry.

$400,000 to increase premiums for the Illinois State Fair, up from $2 million.
The 20 percent increase will not be equally spread among all areas.

"We have areas such as pies and cakes where the premium doesn't even cover the
cost of ingredients," Hampton said. "We'll look at areas in need."

$1.3 million for soil and water conservation district funding under the
Conservation 2000 initiative.

$1.1 million to computerize the meat and poultry inspection process. Along with
a federal matching grant, the funds will supply 140 field inspectors and
supervisors with laptop computers, eliminating the need to carry and process
dozens of paper forms.

$15 million to CFAR, the Illinois Council on Food and Agricultural Research, to
fund Illinois research projects related to agriculture.

On other issues, Hampton said Thursday no decision has been made on approving a
large dairy farm in Stonington.

" January 14 was the target date, but we're asking for more information," he
said. "We're not yet satisfied in several areas including the aquifer. We've not
yet received a construction plan, and approval also hinges on that."

Hampton said his visit to the Illinois Pork Producers Association convention in
Peoria indicated the mood in agriculture seems to be turning around.

"Just getting in the black again is helping everyone," he said. " For a good
while, everyone wondered if they'd have enough equity to pull through. Now we're
seeing some optimism."

Charlyn Fargo can be reached at 788-1521 or charlyn.fargo@sj-r.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



CORRECTION: The newspaper apologizes for any confusion.
The $800 million in venture capital in Gov. George Ryan's proposed state
agriculture budget will be used to invest in new technology. Part of that
allotment will include money for a new post genomics (biotech) institution at
the University of Illinois. A story in Friday's State Journal- Register didn't
make the breakdown clear.

CORRECTION-DATE: February 5, 2000 Saturday

                   Copyright 2000 The State Journal-Register


                              560 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 Yorkshire Post

                                January 21, 2003

Diversification brings farmers taste of success

SOURCE: Yorkshire Post

LENGTH: 248 words


Businesses in rural Yorkshire won praise last night for benefiting consumers
while boosting their incomes.



The companies - a spring water bottling enterprise, a food distribution network,
a new multi-species abattoir and a farmhouse potato bakery business - were a
among a number from across the country taking part in the Foodwise 2003 event at
the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs headquarters in London.

With the help of Defra's Rural Enterprise Scheme and Processing and Marketing
Grant awards they have all generated new income through diversification.

Food and Farming Minister Lord Whitty said: Food producers are facing tough
times at the moment, but it is gratifying to see that diversification and adding
value to their products can help make a big difference to their fortunes.

The spring water enterprise, Springhill Pure Spring Water, is run by R Blomfield
and Son, at Fylingdales, near Whitby. It received two Rural Enterprise Scheme
grants of [#163]4,350 and [#163]24,528.

A food distribution network in North Yorkshire is now linking producers with
outlets thanks to Nigel Brotherton receiving a Rural Enterprise Scheme grant of
[#163]60,000 to help establish the business, Moorfresh, at Pickering.

Rob Bannister, of Farmhouse Potato Bakers at Carnaby Industrial Estate,
Brid-lington, received a Processing and Marketing Grant of over [#163]215,000 to
fund a major expansion of production facilities to produce new lines.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003

                       Copyright 2003 Johnston Press Plc


                              561 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   The Record-Eagle (Traverse City, Michigan)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            April 20, 2016 Wednesday

Rove Estate Vineyard and Winery to open early May

BYLINE: Danielle Woodward, The Record-Eagle, Traverse City, Mich.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 575 words


April 20--TRAVERSE CITY -- The Rove Estate Vineyard and Winery is slated to open
in early May, following months of construction and a few minor setbacks from
mother nature.

The tasting room at 7007 E. Traverse Highway is perched atop an 1,100-foot
elevation that overlooks acres of Leelanau countryside. Owners Creighton and
McKenzie Gallagher began building Rove Estate in November, aiming for a
springtime opening that would allow customers to take full advantage of its
sprawling views.

"It's gorgeous and it has definitely exceeded our hopes and dreams," McKenzie
said. "We can't wait for the public to see a slice of our family farm heaven."

The 2,000-square-foot boutique winery will have a modern barn feel, she said. It
will offer Chardonnay and Riesling wines grown on the couple's vineyards, along
with a few simple food options. Customers will even be able to taste wine
outdoors, on the tasting room's wraparound deck.

"We'll have an outdoor service permit, so customers can enjoy the beautiful
views while they drink," McKenzie Gallagher said.

The tasting room's permit through the Michigan Liquor Control Commission is
pending, along with its license from the Michigan Department of Agriculture and
Rural Development. The winery will undergo its final inspection to receive both
soon, McKenzie said.

"Everything is going very well," she said. "We're shooting for a May 4 opening."

The Gallaghers had hoped to open the winery by the end of April, but a few
weather delays slowed the process. Late bouts of snow delayed painting of the
winery's exterior, and its well recently was struck by lightning.

"There's no way to prepare for something like that," McKenzie said. "Those
unexpected expenses are probably the most challenging part."

Unexpected expenses, combined with the initial lack of revenue, can quickly suck
up an entrepreneur's capitol. McKenzie estimated the project cost $50,000 more
than what the couple expected to spend.

"Managing that flow of cash flow before you are able to have revenue from your
wine and products can make you feel in limbo," she said.

But a grant from the United States Department of Agriculture helped cushion the
financial blow. The Gallaghers received $250,000 in matched funding through the
USDA's Value Added Producer Grant.

"It truly is a phenomenal program that helps make your capital last twice as
long during the initial startup period," McKenzie Gallagher said.

The grant is meant to help agricultural producers with ventures that can
generate new products, create and expand marketing opportunities and increase
producer income. The USDA will host a workshop on April 26 from 1:30 to 3:30
p.m. at the Traverse City Michigan Works Center, 1209 South Garfield Ave., for
those interested in applying. Contact the Small Business Development Center at
231-922-3780 or sbdc@networksnorthwest.org for more information.

"It's far from a handout because you really have to know what you're doing and
put most of the work in beforehand," Gallagher said. "It's perfect for people
that are really serious about their business."

The couple is already planning to expand their tasting room to include a
winemaking facility in the next 3-5 years. Rove Estate currently uses the
winemaking facilities at Brys Estate Vineyard and Winery, 3309 Blue Water Road.

___ (c)2016 The Record-Eagle (Traverse City, Mich.) Visit The Record-Eagle
(Traverse City, Mich.) at record-eagle.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160420-ZK-Rove-Estate-Vineyard-and-Winery-to-open-early-May-0420-20160420

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZK


                        Copyright 2016 The Record-Eagle


                              562 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                           October 22, 2005 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITION

AIRPORT USAGE CONTINUES TO LAG

BYLINE: State Journal staff, wires

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D12

LENGTH: 442 words


Despite new destinations added this year, passenger traffic at the Dane County
Regional Airport continues to lag behind last year. Through September, 1.22
million passengers used the airport, down about 2.5 percent from last year. In
September, 131,730 passengers came through the airport, down 5.3 percent from
2004. The airport lost about 3,200 passengers a month in January when Chicago
Express ended its Madison flights.

Alliant downgrades Brazil investments

Alliant Energy Corp. will downgrade the value of its floundering investments in
Brazil again, this time by roughly $50 million, and withdrew its third-quarter
earnings estimate, the company announced Friday.

The Brazil investments, which were worth an estimated $285 million on June 30,
have been one of the major drivers of losses posted this year, as Alliant's
other interests have performed well.

The company also said it will retire $75 million in debt, bringing its total
debt reduction for the year to $379 million.

Madison makes list of fastest' cities

Madison is one of the 10 "Fastest Cities in America," according to a the
November issue of Fast Company magazine that will be released Sunday.

The list highlighted cities with the fastest population growth among the
so-called "Creative Class." Those are the young professionals, scientists and
artists who are touted by some as critical to economic success.

Mead & Hunt buys Brookfield firm

Mead & Hunt, an engineering and architectural firm based in Madison, has
acquired Heartland Engineering, a firm with eight employees in Brookfield. Mead
& Hunt, recently named by a magazine as one of the 20 fastest growing Midwestern
firms, has 300 employees and a dozen offices nationwide.

Area producers receive dairy grants

Several local dairy producers are among those tapped to receive a total of
$88,882 in Grow Wisconsin Dairy Team grants. The grants are intended to
modernize production and increase profitability.

Area farmers receiving grants were Lavern Davis of Wisconsin Dells, $6,988;
Peter Roecker of Reedsburg, $5,000; Dan Benish of Lodi, $5,000; Jim Reilly of
Darlington, $5,000; Tom Seely of Boscobel, $3,780; and Steve Carpenter of
Darlington, $1,315.

Oil prices rise as traders stay wary

Crude-oil futures rose as traders kept a wary eye on Hurricane Wilma heading
into the weekend. But prices ended the week down 3 percent because forecasters
expect it to miss oil and gas facilities in the Gulf and because there are signs
that supplies are building.

Oil rose 61 cents to settle at $60.63 a barrel. Oil's slide reflects diminishing
concerns about supply after earlier hurricane damage to oil and gas platforms in
the Gulf, traders said.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Digest

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Madison Newspapers, Inc.


                              563 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                            February 15, 2004 Sunday

Judge encourages Iowa farmers to speak up; Agriculture secretary says the state
needs livestock production

BYLINE: JOHN EVERLY

SECTION: Agriculture; Pg. b4

LENGTH: 492 words


What would Iowa be like without livestock farms?

Some people would gladly entertain that thought, but Iowa Secretary of
Agriculture Patty Judge was in Maquoketa last week to say Iowa needs livestock
production. She encouraged farmers to speak up for their livelihoods.

"We are about agriculture, and sometimes I think people like to forget that,"
Judge said. "This state was founded on production agriculture. It's what we do.
The wealth of this state is the soil and the ability to produce crops."

Speaking to members of the Jackson County Farm Bureau, Judge said not everyone
in Iowa sees agriculture that way. For all the talk in Iowa of economic
development, feeding grain to livestock is still the fastest, more efficient way
to add value to farm commodities, she said.

"The mentality that that is a bad thing is wrong and we need to resist that,"
she said.

Some people will say it's bad because hogs, cattle and sheep smell. Judge said
environmental regulations and technologies have reduced livestock odors and
protected water quality.

"This is a working landscape, and I don't quite understand why we would expect
that there would not be some sights, sounds or smells that go with our
industry," she said.

Iowa Farm Bureau President Craig Lang, who also spoke to farmers, said the
organization is lobbying lawmakers on farmers' behalf.

"We believe that livestock in Iowa can be owned by local families in the next
few years if we change the way we do business," he said. "We have to reduce the
liability that farmers feel. And we have to give some incentives to young,
beginning farmers so that they can get back into the livestock industry."

Other people, though, have a vision for Iowa that does not necessarily include
farming, Judge said.

"We have to be vigilant, and we have to be able to stand up and say very clearly
that we need to raise livestock here," she said.

While in Maquoketa, the agriculture secretary made a pitch for the new Iowa
Agricultural Innovation Center. The center was created with a $$ @1 million
grant from the United States Department of Agriculture. The center will provide
assistance to Iowa producers in the production, processing, development and
marketing of value-added agricultural commodities.

"We have not paid enough attention, in my mind, to developing industry in rural
Iowa," Judge said.

Services the center provides include general business planning; marketing
materials; workshops and conferences; Web site design; newsletter information;
feasibility studies; producer grants and technical assistance. While some
planning services are free, financial assistance will require a match dollar for
dollar from the producer. For more information, go to the center's Web site at
www.aginnovationcenter.org.

Everly, a Telegraph Herald reporter, was farm director of Dubuque radio station
KDTH for nearly 10 years. His e-mail address is jeverly@wcinet.com.


LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: mug: Patty Judge

                  Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                              564 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                             January 2, 1995 Monday

LENGTH: 507 words


MINOT (AP) -- State agriculture officials say farmers' cooperatives have taken
off in recent years, despite U.S. Department of Agriculture figures that show
they are actually on the decline in North Dakota. Between 1983 and 1993, the
number of farmer cooperatives in North Dakota dropped from 396 to 302, and the
number of co-op members fell from 163,221 to fewer than 146,671 during the same
period, according to the USDA's Rural Development Administration. But those
numbers are misleading, said Randall Torgerson, assistant administrator of
cooperative services with the RDA.

""The numbers follow the long-term trend that we've seen in production
agriculture across the country. We've seen a rather consistent decline in the
number of producers. We've seen consolidation take place among cooperatives,''
he said. ""Those two trends kind of parallel each other.'' ""It's not that
co-ops have failed, it's simply a change in technology,'' said David Cobia,
director of the Quentin Burdick Center for Cooperatives in Fargo. ""Farmers can
drive further to do business. Each co-op can be bigger, and have lower costs. We
simply don't need as many co-ops today as we did yesterday.'' Torgerson said the
total business volume of farmer cooperatives in North Dakota increased from $1.8
billion in 1983 to $3.1 billion in 1993. Farmer-owned cooperatives are nothing
new in North Dakota. Cobia said marketing, supply, and service co-ops have been
around ever since farmers felt a need to keep transportation costs down and to
protect themselves from monopolies. He said value-added processing co-ops are
just the newest wave. The Aug. 9, 1990, meeting at which the Dakota Growers
Pasta Co. got its start is ""the birth date of co-op fever in North Dakota,''
said Bill Patrie, director of the Cooperative Development Center in Mandan.
""Dakota Growers is showing it can be done,'' he said. ""People are looking for
this opportunity now, when before they never would have thought about it.''
State Agriculture Commissioner Sarah Vogel said the impetus for value-added
co-ops was Growing North Dakota I, an economic development package that passed
the 1991 Legislature. The effort included $200,000 in grant money to provide
technical grants to developing co-ops. Vogel compared North Dakota with South
Dakota and other states that have little value-added processing.""The difference
is public policy,'' she said. ""You wouldn't have a pasta co-op or a bison co-op
without some of those programs.'' About 40 groups in the state are in various
stages of planning a co-op, Patrie said. Many are value-added co-ops, but Patrie
said he doesn't think the state is moving away from the supply and marketing
co-ops that have played a key role in the success of agriculture in North
Dakota.

CUTLINE ASSOCIATED PRESS Gary Price of Minot checks out some of his garlic
harvest on Thursday. Price and his wife, Clara Sue, own one of the approximately
40 garlic-producing farms in the state, and hope to band those producers
together into a specialty crop association.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 1995 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              565 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                            October 1, 1987 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

THE WEST

SECTION: WEST AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS WEEK; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 777 words


HOLMES A COURT'S GAINS: Following the carve-up of the Fairfax media empire, Mr
Robert Holmes a Court has walked away with the Macquarie radio network, The
Australian Financial Review, Times On Sunday, and the National Business Review(a
New Zealand daily). The final figure paid out by the Bell group for its share of
the Fairfax media assets was $475 million. However it is not yet known if Mr
Holmes a Court will merge the Fairfax assets into the Bell operations or
completely reorganise his media interests.

BOND WINS HEILEMAN, AT A PRICE: Mr Alan Bond has finally won the battle for
G.Heileman Brewing Co, but at the higher price of $US40.75 a share along with a
number of significant concessions. Heileman chairman and chief executive, Mr
Russell Cleary, has extracted a promise of a seat on the board of Bond Corp.
Bond also agreed to honour Heileman's labour and supply arrangements and to
maintain Heileman's Wisconsin operations for three years. But the way is now
open for Bond to recoup part of the takeover costs through the sale of
Heileman's non-brewing assets. Bond, ranked the fourth largest brewer in the
world following the merger, is tipped to be the third largest within five years
through lifting Heileman's output to full capacity.

BREWER CLOSES IN ON ATLAS: In a push to expand the Bond Corp's resources
interests, Mr Bond is close to completing a $340 million deal with a consortium
of international banks which will give him a substantial holding in Atlas
Consolidated. Atlas, a large Philippines mining group, has the potential to be
Asia's leading copper and gold producer. The company has been traditionally
controlled by the Soriano family of Manila. The Sorianos are closely associated
with the brewing giant, San Miguel, which has been subjected to many bids,
including ones from the Bond Corp, Elders IXL and Ariadne Australia.

BARRACK CHASES PEAK HILL: The Barrack Mines Group has set its sights on the half
share held by Grants Patch Mining Ltd in the Peak Hill joint venture. Only a
month after dropping plans for a full offer, Barrack has declared itself a
bidder for all of Grants' issued capital of 85.1 million 20 shares. Terms of the
takeover bid have not been announced but sharemarket analysts say the offer
price would have to be near the year's high of $1 to be a complete success. The
Peak Hill mine is expected to begin production in April next year and contribute
up to 25,000 ounces a year to Grants Patch's gold output. Grants Patch and
Peko-Wallsend recently decided to build a 500,000 tonne a year gold treatment
plant at Peak Hill.

BACK TO BRITISH: Cockburn Cement Ltd looks like returning to British hands
following a bid by the company's parent, Rugby Portland Cement of the UK, for
the 15 per cent of Cockburn it does not own. The bid of $3 per share values the
company at $90 million. The bid has been made possible because the Federal
Government has relaxed foreign ownership rules. Full control of Cockburn would
allow considerable cost savings in administration and tax and give Rugby full
control of its subsidiary's cash flow.

PESTICIDE SCANDAL HITS HOME: The contaminated beef scandal is starting to hit
home at the local level with some producers' properties placed in quarantine.
The south-west towns of Manjimup and Pemberton have been hard hit since export
abattoirs placed a ban on these prime beef growing areas. Paddocks with high
levels of pesticide residue could remain contaminated for up to 10 years,
according to the Department of Agriculture. Local producers are not too happy as
they had followed the Department's advice in the first place when applying the
pesticides. In another development, the Federal Government cancelled the export
licence of Western Australia's biggest meat exporter, E.G.Green and Sons, after
the second discovery of high pesticide levels in the company's beef shipments to
the United States. The company's 300 workers have been given a week's notice and
several tonnes of meat are stranded at Fremantle as a result of the Federal
decision.

TRUST IN THE WILDERNESS: The launching of Western Australia's first wilderness
trust got of to a shaky start this week with only one of seven parcels of land
being sold at auction. Coodamurrup went under the hammer for $350,000 to an
anonymous buyer. The remaining lots are expected to sell in the next few days.
However it was hinted that the purchasers would not be Australian. The patron of
the D'Entrecasteaux Wilderness Trust, Mrs Janet Holmes a Court, said she was
concerned that companies were destroying wilderness areas for profit. She hoped
the auction would be the first of many to help save this shrinking resource.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1987 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              566 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                The Taber Times

                            March 15, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Businesses to receive bioenergy funding

BYLINE: J.W. Schnarr, Taber Times

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C12

LENGTH: 522  words


Three local businesses are among 31 bioenergy companies set to receive new
short-term funding to support the low-carbon industry.

Bioenergy is low-carbon energy or fuel made from agricultural products such as
crops and livestock waste.

The $60-million Bioenergy Producer Program will support 500 direct jobs, and is
part of a larger effort to help companies succeed in Alberta's low-carbon
future.

"It was really important to us that we were able to make sure the existing
businesses are viable, but also that we were able to have new entrants into the
program," said Shannon Phillips, Minister of Environment and Parks.

"That was something the previous government was not able to succeed in. In the
long term, we want to make sure that we are targeting these resources to
creating new companies, new jobs, and supporting this industry just as we
support energy industries whether they be in solar, wind, oil and gas, or
elsewhere." Alberta's bioenergy industry powers the equivalent of 200,000 homes
using wood pellets, biogas and liquid biofuels.

The industry contributes about $800 million to Alberta's economy.

The short-term funding will keep operations going while a third-party adviser
and other stakeholders advise government on new policy options to support the
industry and build on a program begun in 2006. A report is expected by the end
of March. Of the facilities getting money, three are under construction, meaning
new jobs and over $200 million in new investment to the province.

The grants will help keep 1.5 megatonnes of emissions out of the air.

The three local companies receiving support include Lethbridge Biogas, Grow The
Energy Circle and Invigor.

"Those are really important contributions to the Lethbridge economy," Phillips
said.

"And they mean that what we are doing is taking our great strengths in
agriculture and converting that to strengths in renewable energy. That's the
kind of innovation that we want to see coming about as a result of re-investing
the carbon levy." The grant recipients all produce biofuels, electricity, heat
or wood pellets that help make real greenhouse gas reductions in Alberta.

The grants are production-based, meaning money is provided based on how much
bioenergy each company generates. All types of bioenergy are funded at the same
rate.

"The beauty of bioenergy is that it takes something that was previously seen as
waste and sees it as a resource," Phillips said.

"That's really important as we move forward. It's good for companies, it's good
for feedlots, agricultural producers, value-added producers, in that they are
taking something and reducing their costs, via something that was previously
seen as waste. We're also reducing pollution and creating jobs by re-investing
the carbon levy into communities like Lethbridge and around the province."

"We are excited to hear that bioenergy's role in the fight against climate
change is recognized," stated Stefan Michalski, Director of Operations,
Lethbridge Biogas in a news release.

"This money is important to support biogas facilities like ours and to keep
Albertans working as we build a self-sustainable, lower-carbon future."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 The Taber Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              567 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                            October 30, 2012 Tuesday

Putting a high value on own-brand

BYLINE: CONOR POPE

SECTION: FINANCE; Pricewatch ; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1862 words


Irish consumers have less money to spend on food and less time to shop but they
still want to get quality   even when buying own-label products

LAST THURSDAY more than 100 Irish food producers and suppliers gathered in the
Aviva stadium in Dublin to stare into a crystal ball. What everyone in the room
overlooking the sodden grounds wanted to know was what consumers here and abroad
want from them and what those consumers will want five, 10 and 20 years from
now.

The conference was organised by accountancy firm Grant Thornton and before the
doors opened it did what such firms do best: it looked at statistics and
crunched some numbers.  Understanding how core purchasing decisions are shaped
by relative prices, incomes, ages, preferences and technology will be the  new
normal  in which clever data capture and analysis will be as important as the
manufacturing process of the product itself,  said Ciara Jackson, the author of
a report given to delegates, opening the event.

Jackson pointed to trends that she believes will help producers to keep their
heads above water in increasingly choppy seas.

So, what do we want? We want a more varied diet and we want it for less. She
said the key things the 21st century consumer is looking for is  value,
convenience, health and wellness, and provenance .

The seminar focused first on the global marketplace and as jolly music played,
some very unjolly facts were outlined in a slickly produced video. About 30 per
cent of the food produced around the world. The amount of food lost or wasted
each year equates to more than half the world s annual cereals crop. It is
hardly surprising that people in the developed world are the most wasteful. In
fact, those in the first world waste nearly as much food each year (222 million
tonnes) as is produced in sub-Saharan Africa (230 million tonnes).

Much of the food that we are not wasting we are using wrongly. About half of the
world s corn and 90 per cent of the soybean crop is used to feed livestock.
Millions of acres of arable land is being used to grow animal feed, which means
there is less land available to grow the wide variety of staple crops,
vegetables and fruits necessary to give humans a balanced diet.

After that damning assessment of our profligacy, Jackson identified four
distinct generations of Irish shopper and gave them fittingly foodie names:
Kerrygold, Smash, Marathon bar and Red Bull.

The Kerrygold generation are born in the 1950s and 1960s. They spend a higher
percentage of their income on food and are more likely to buy private label
brands than branded goods. They display this frugality despite the fact that
they are wealthier, live longer and have more time to spend money than any other
generation characterised in the report.

The Smash generation are those born in the 1970s and 1980s. Unsurprisingly, much
of this cohert are in negative equity and spend more on housing-related costs
than on food and drink. Because of their property woes, they have less
discretionary expenditure and are increasingly frugal. They are also
increasingly buying own-label products. They are cash- and time-poor, so value
and convenience matter more than anything else when it comes to shopping.

The Marathon generation were born in the 1980s and 1990s. They are unemployed,
in university or have emigrated. If they still live in Ireland, there is a very
good chance they live at home with their parents. They are cutting back on going
out or to restaurants and having nights in or takeaways instead. They are a tech
savvy, instant-access generation, likely to be influenced by social media and to
buy online. While their income levels are low they are not heavily indebted and
are less likely to part with cash as impulsively as in the past.

Then we have the Red Bull generation are those born after 2000. Ireland has been
experiencing a baby boom since 2006. The number of children aged under 14 has
risen by more than 115,000 and now accounts for more than 21 per cent of the
population.

Many of the Red Bull generation have no business drinking Red Bull and certainly
have no money   what with being infants and everything. Their parents have money
and, while they are buying own-brand for themselves they are still likely to
purchase branded goods for their kids.

The kids have been brought up with the internet and embrace technology
smartphones, using m-technology and social media. They have also been reared on
discount culture and peer reviews and those with money are savvier than other
generations in purchasing decisions.

One of the key trends Grant Thornton found was that the perception of value has
changed among Irish consumers. As a result of the recession, as well as the
increasing strength of private-label brands, consumers have been content to
trade down to lower-priced offers, often store economy ranges. Consumers still
expect quality even when trading down however. They are much more savvy and
aware, and seek value, even in premium products and ranges.

The amount of money spent on food as a proportion of total household spend has
been on a downward trend for 30 years. The results of the latest Household
Budget Survey (HBS) 2009-2010 reflect a worrying tend for the food industry in
Ireland: many households are saddled with a multitude of household expenses
which are limiting the percentage of income they can spend on food, alcohol,
restaurants and hotels. Consumers want things to be cheaper and are becoming
more frugal and fastidious with their purchasing decisions.

Despite food price inflation, shoppers are managing their shopping budgets by
trading down to private labels, shopping around, shopping to a budget and
planning in advance. Four out of five shoppers now believe it is imperative that
they shop around. As a result we are making more shopping trips, but average
spend per trip has fallen by 3.7 per cent.

The winners of this drive for value have been own-label retailer products. More
than 30 per cent of what consumers put in their supermarket basket is now
own-brand rather than more established names. According to Kantar, retailers
own-label sales increased 1.9 per cent in just 12 weeks up to the middle of
July, and Aldi, Tesco and Lidl continue to gain market share.

Sales of private-label/own-brand products are worth an estimated EUR 3 billion
in Ireland, with many of the lines produced by well-known manufacturers and sold
under supermarket labels. In fact, many manufacturers are choosing to supply
private-label products.

Some of the suppliers were at the conference. Killowen yoghurt sells its premium
product under its own name and also under Aldi s Specially Selected label. While
it undercuts its own prices in Aldi, it has avoided cannibalising its brand and
both are trading strongly.

Grant Thorton recognises the delicate balancing act such producers perform when
considering producing an own-label brand:  Conversely, the private label market
is potentially attractive. Most multiples and discounters have highly developed
channels for exporting; being guaranteed a space on a multiple s shelves in
existing and new high growth markets may be too difficult to resist,  it
concludes.

Another trend to emerge from the report was that health is still a key driver of
growth in the Irish food sector. There has been a rapid growth in demand for
nutritional products ranging from  one of your five a day , to more functional
ingredients that reduce the risk of a number of health-related issues including
diabetes, heart disease and obesity. Increasingly, changing nutritional
guidelines are leading to a re-engineering of reduced salt, fat and sugar
products in the marketplace.

An ageing population demands products that provide real discernible health
benefits. Longer working lives and a strong interest in maintaining a healthy
active lifestyle is leading to the creation of more products tailored to the
needs of these consumers. Over 55s are willing to spend their money on age
defence products and energy supplements, and will expect these products to be
advertised in a modern and inclusive way.

Consumers want high-quality healthy food, which is also convenient. There s no
doubt that everyone is feeling the  pinch . This means consumers are no longer
cash rich, time poor  but are mainly  cash poor, time poor ,  the report says.

BUYING OWN BRAND, THE TWITTER VIEW:

Hell yes! All basics are own-brand now with the exception of meat and eggs.
Ciara McDonnell

Aldi easily makes up bulk of shopping now.  Susan Cullen

My wife and I were talking about this the other day. More Aldi/Lidl brands.
Except for Fairy Liquid, which nobody does better.  Brendan Strong

I buy way more own-brand products. The quality of own-brand has improved
markedly in recent years to offer a real alternative.  Jack Cantillon

Is Aldi counted as own-brand? Do 90 per cent of it there. Otherwise I buy Tesco
Value stuff outside of it.  Simon Pierse

Buying way more own-brand stuff. Some good (Aldi bread), some great (Tesco
wipes), some awful (coffee).  Cian OConnor

Fairy Liquid, McCambridge s Brown Bread and Green Giant corn are the only major
brands I ve been unhappy to replace.  Tom Gleeson

I now do all my shopping at Aldi except Kellogg s Rice Krispies Weetabix,
own-brand just isn t the same on these two items.  Kelly Slattery

PRODUCT LAUNCH APPS AND QUICK RESPONSE CODES: SAVVY PRODUCERS BRING TECHNOLOGY
TO BEAR:

Food producers are creating apps around product launches, and creating quick
response (QR) codes that provide information on the provenance of their
products, the carbon miles used to get the product from farm to supermarket, how
fresh the product is and the story behind the farm the product originated at.

In subways in South Korea, Tesco consumers can scan the products they want on
virtual aisles. At Gatwick Airport tired travellers can use their smartphones to
scan QR codes next to the product images on walls, enabling the delivery of
products to their homes, often by the time they return home from the airport.

On smartphones, customers can download grocery apps to add to their shopping
lists and select items at any time. It automatically synchronises with their
online shopping basket, allowing them to check-out from any connected device.

The rapid growth of mobile commerce and online shopping is creating an
additional sales channel for suppliers. Known as crowd-shopping, sites such as
Groupon provide a new means to sell directly to customers at a discounted price,
enabling suppliers to capture market data on customers. In the future, online
sales channels may provide an alternative to the traditional supplier-retailer
sales model.

Consumers are increasingly demanding to know where their food comes from. They
want to buy Irish, and are increasingly interested in the story behind the food.

As a means of dealing with the dual challenges of recession and food price
inflation, shoppers  coping strategies have involved purchasing on promotion and
switching to private label.

Consumers trading down, coinciding with retailers de-stocking some third party
lines while investing in the further development of their own brand, has also
led to a dramatic shift in the fortunes of own-labels.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2012 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              568 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Deming Headlight (New Mexico)

                             March 31, 2013 Sunday

USDA seeks applications for renewable energy improvement projects

BYLINE: For the Headlight

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 502 words


WASHINGTON, D.C. - Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced that USDA is
seeking applications to provide assistance to agricultural producers and rural
small businesses for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects.

Funding is available from USDA's Rural Energy for America Program (REAP). The
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) remains focused on carrying out
its mission, despite a time of significant budget uncertainty.

The announcement is one part of the Department's efforts to strengthen the rural
economy.

"The Obama Administration continues its commitment to help our nation become
more energy independent by partnering with agricultural producers and rural
small businesses as they build renewable energy systems and reduce energy
usage," said Vilsack. "These investments will not only help our farmers and
rural small businesses reduce energy costs, but also provide a new potential
revenue source and stabilize their operations' bottom lines."

REAP, authorized by the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, (Farm Bill)
is designed to help agricultural producers and rural small businesses reduce
energy costs and consumption and help meet the Nation's critical energy needs.
USDA is accepting the following applications:

Renewable energy system and energy efficiency improvement grant applications and
combination grant and guaranteed loan applications until April 30, 2013;

Renewable energy system and energy efficiency improvement guaranteed loan only
applications until July 15, 2013;

Renewable energy system feasibility study grant applications through April 30,
2013.

Since the passage of the 2008 Farm Bill and through the end of Fiscal Year 2012,
REAP has funded nationwide over 6,800 renewable energy and energy efficiency
projects, feasibility studies, energy audits, and renewable energy development
assistance projects.

Rural Development State Director Terry Brunner said, "The REAP program offers a
lot of flexibility in the types of energy projects that can be funded including;
renewable energy projects that involve wind, solar, geothermal, and anaerobic
digesters. It also funds energy efficiency projects where we'll help pay for
replacing, boilers, heaters, insulation, agricultural pumps and other types of
equipment for more efficient ones."

USDA's investments in rural communities support the rural way of life that
stands as the backbone of our American values. President Obama and Agriculture
Secretary Tom Vilsack are committed to a smarter use of Federal resources to
foster sustainable economic prosperity and ensure the government is a strong
partner for businesses, entrepreneurs and working families in rural communities.

More information on how to apply for funding is available in the March 29, 2013
Federal Register, pages 19183-19190 or by contacting, Ms. Jesse Monfort Bopp,
USDA Rural Development's Albuquerque office at: jesse.bopp@nm.usda.gov, or
505-761-4952, or by contacting Rural Development's area offices in Las Cruces;
575-522-8775. Ext. 122.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2013 Deming Headlight, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              569 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             London Community News

                            September 7, 2012 Friday
                                  ONT Edition

$1M in arts funding announced

SECTION: Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1340  words


By Sean Meyer/London Community News/Twitter: Newswriter22

London West MPP Chris Bentley called it "magic money" while Clark Bryan,
executive director of Aeolian Hall, said it is one way to overcome "the fear"
everybody is facing.

Both men were referring to the provincial government's ongoing funding of the
arts community through the Ontario Arts Council (OAC). In 2011-12, the OAC
funded 1,681 individuals and 1,125 organizations in 216 communities to a total
of $52.8 million.

During an announcement made at Museum London on Friday (Sept. 7) Bentley and
London North Centre MPP Deb Matthews helped announce that over the past year the
OAC had provided $985,389 in funding to 59 professional artists and arts
organizations in London. Their works include poetry, literature, visual art,
musical performances and theatre.

In speaking before a group of OAC recipients at the announcement, Bentley said
the funding is more than just financial assistance, calling it "a celebration"
of what artists - and the arts in general - does for everyone.

"Over the past fiscal year, to the tune of almost $1 million, which tends to be
broken down into tiny little pieces, $1,000 here, $1,500 there, $3,000 in
another place," Bentley said. "It is that magic money that can make a
performance happen, can make an exhibit come to life, can help a
singer/songwriter actually finish the production and be able to get on a stage
and perform."

During difficult economic times, Bryan said it is vital the provincial
government continues to find value in supporting the arts community. For the
Aeolian Hall, which received a $6,000 grant, Bryan said the funding allows the
facility to continue offering programming to the city and the region.

And while it will help keep the "the four walls of the Aeolian up and the roof
healthy," Bryan said funding of the arts helps to inspire people to make a
difference in the lives of the broader community.

"I think it is the most important thing we can do right now, which is to invest
in who we are as a people. Arts are definitely all about who we are, where we
have been, where we are going, and how we can bring joy into our lives," Bryan
said. "Everybody acts in fear during these times, fear means withholding energy,
withholding money. If we can keep on the cusp with the arts, we will be fine;
will find our way out of this fear."

Matthews brought the ideas Bryan shared down to a personal level as she pointed
out how the arts affect her life on a daily basis. Whether it is her efforts as
a mother and grandmother or that of the Minister of Health, Matthews said the
OAC recipients should be thanked for enriching the lives of everyone.

"We all give everything we can to our work, to our families, but we need to
recharge every now and then, build up that reserve of energy. Where I get great
joy is in the arts," Matthews said. "Whether it is music or reading or movies or
visual arts, for me personally, that recharges my batteries, gives me the energy
to get up in the morning."

Brian Meehan, executive director and chief curator of Museum London, which
received $159,000, said the announcement was all the more important when
considering the current economic climate. While the grant will help the museum
with its exhibition program, children's classes and other programs, Meehan said
it also helped spread the message about the value of art.

For example, Meehan pointed to grant that allowed the organization to fund an
exhibit that is now travelling the country, raising the profile of the artists
involved, but Museum London as well.

That kind of use of funding is exactly what Bryan said makes a real difference
in the quality of people's lives.

"You think about Europe, you go there for the cultural beacons. You don't go
there to see how lovely their transportation system is, you go to see museums,
operas, palaces, all the things that beautiful art has brought together," Bryan
said. "Those are the things people think of. If we can continue to invest that
way in London, Ont., we will have those things as well."

It was a point Matthews agreed with.

"I know a career in the arts, for the vast majority of people, isn't the most
lucrative possible. But it is what you were called to. You need to do it, you
need to share your soul with the rest of us and we are all the richer for it,"
Matthews said. "Thank you for showing people that creativity matters, that ideas
matter. The arts, at the end of the day, are what lives us our society."Ontario
Arts Council Grants to Organizations and Individuals 2011 - 2012

OrganizationsGrantProgram

Aeolian Hall Musical Arts Association, London $6,000 Presenter/Producer

Amabile Choirs of London Canada, London $23,550 Choirs & Vocal Groups

Artist-Run Centres and Collectives of Ontario, London $29,000 Arts Service
Organizations

Canadian Association of Fringe Festivals, London $9,300 Arts Service
Organizations

Centre communautaire régional de London, London $6,317 Aide à la diffusion
artistique

Forest City Gallery, London $26,000 Visual Arts Artist-Run Centres and
Organizations

The Grand Theatre, London $225,000 Theatre Organizations

Home County Folk League, London $20,000 Presenter/Producer

Insomniac Press, London $22,973 Block Grants to Book Publishers

London Clay Art Centre, London $17,575 Visual Arts Artist-Run Centres and
Organizations

London Fringe Theatre Festival, London $18,000 Theatre Organizations

London Pro Musica, London $10,175 Choirs & Vocal Groups

McIntosh Gallery, London $29,500 Public Art Galleries

Museum London, London $159,000 Public Art Galleries

Museum of Ontario Archaeology, London $9,000 Multi-Arts Projects

Orchestra London Canada Inc., London $202,000 Orchestras

Six Vocal Ensemble, London $6,000 Popular Music

Brassroots, London $3,000 Presenter/Producer

Brick Books, London $26,091 Block Grants to Book Publishers

Brick Books, London $6,000 Compass

Fanshawe Chorus London/Gerald Fagan Singers, London $8,500 Choirs & Vocal Groups

London Lesbian Film Festival, London $8,000 Media Arts Projects

Poetry London Reading Series, London $3,000 Literary Festivals and Organizations

IndividualsGrantProgram

Thomas Benner, London $15,000 Visual Artists: Established ($15,000)

Marla Botterill, London $3,010 National and International Residency

Bob Bozak, London $1,000 Exhibition Assistance

Paul Cavanagh, London $12,000 Writers' Works in Progress

Liza Eurich, London $750 Exhibition Assistance

Sky Glabush, London $500 Exhibition Assistance

Jin Won Han, London $4,854 Craft Projects . Creation and Development

David Hickey, London $2,000 Writers' Reserve

Joseph Hubbard, London $1,000 Exhibition Assistance

Jesse Jacobs, London $5,000 Visual Artists: Emerging ($5,000)

Kelly Jazvac, London $1,000 Exhibition Assistance

Brian J. Lambert, London $500 Exhibition Assistance

Chris Meloche, London $13,000 Media Artists: Mid-Career and Established

Christine Negus, London $1,100 Exhibition Assistance

Leslie Putnam, London $1,500 Exhibition Assistance

Maureen Riley, London $1,000 Exhibition Assistance

Eric Simard, London $1,000 Exhibition Assistance

Henry Adam Svec, London $500 Exhibition Assistance

Morison Bock, London $2,000 Theatre Creators' Reserve

Dianne C. Pearce de Toledo, London $7,500 Visual Artists: Mid-Career ($7,500)

Dianne C. Pearce de Toledo, London $1,500 Exhibition Assistance

Rosemary Sloot, London $1,500 Exhibition Assistance

Nadia Bozak, London $2,000 Writers' Reserve

Nadia Bozak, London $1,500 Writers' Reserve

Axl T. Ernst, London $1,000 Exhibition Assistance

Farhang Jalali, London $800 Exhibition Assistance

Sarah Kane, London $1,000 Exhibition Assistance

James Kirkpatrick, London $800 Exhibition Assistance

Patrick Mahon, London $1,494 Exhibition Assistance

Jamie Quail, London $1,300 Exhibition Assistance

Larry Russell, London $5,000 Visual Artists: Emerging ($5,000)

Sarah Smith, London $3,600 Popular Music

Andrew Somerset, London $2,500 Writers' Reserve

Paul Walde, London $7,500 Visual Artists: Mid-Career ($7,500)

Kelly Wallace, London $700 Exhibition Assistance

Anna Wieselgren, London $5,000 Visual Artists: Emerging ($5,000)

Find us on Facebook: London Community News

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              570 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Gazette (Tasmania, Australia)

                          September 21, 2016 Wednesday
                                Gazette Edition

Speak up on floods

BYLINE: ALEX LUTTRELL

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 361  words


FARMERS and producers in the Derwent Valley affected by June's floods are being
urged to report their damage bills to the council and the Tasmanian Flood
Recovery Taskforce in order to become eligible for Federal and State Government
assistance grants.

As part of Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, the governments
are offering up to $10,000 for farmers affected by the floods.

Central Highlands farmers were recently deemed eligible for the grants, but
Derwent Valley Mayor Martyn Evans said those in his municipality had not yet met
the threshold.

Floods battered parts of the Derwent Valley on June 6, when the River Derwent
broke its banks at New Norfolk and flooded the caravan park and nearby
Esplanade. Flooding also occurred below Meadowbank Dam and on both the Styx and
Tyenna rivers.

TFRT, co-ordinator and Tasmania Police Commander Peter Edwards said to be
eligible for grants, 15 per cent of Derwent Valley primary producers needed to
have been affected and each needed to have suffered 10 per cent loss of
production.

"That's why it's slow, we have to get data in over the threshold," Mr Edwards
said.

"We are still collecting data for the State Government and it's a work in
progress so we're not sure of the number." Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers
Association president Wayne Johnston said he had heard from affected farmers in
the area.

"I would encourage farmers if they have damage to report it to the council," Mr
Johnston said. "If there's no damage value and if they (the governments) don't
know, they can't do anything." Cr Evans said that many farmers in the region
hadn't voiced their concerns. "If there's a concern then we need to make sure
they're assessed," he said. Meanwhile, former Auditor-General Mike Blake will
head an independent inquiry into the state's response to the floods the floods.

The State Government has agreed to the inquiry, in addition to internal agency
reviews, at a cost of $400,000.The review will cover preparedness measures,
community preparation, possible causes such as cloud seeding, water storage
management and debris management, warning effectiveness, environmental effects,
and future mitigation.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: The Gazette


                   Copyright 2016 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              571 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Courier Mail (Australia)

                              May 23, 2008 Friday
                        1 - First with the news Edition

Wine hopes to wither - Climate woes will hit the industry hard, say experts

BYLINE: Belinda Tasker, Jodie Munro O'Brien

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 445  words


AUSTRALIA could be forced to give up its place among the world's biggest wine
exporters within 50 years and become a niche player, a report predicts.

Britain's oldest independent wine merchant, Berry Bros & Rudd, believes hotter
temperatures and water shortages will spell the end of mass wine production in
Australia.

It has also forecast China will become the world's top wine producer by 2058,
which is also when Berry believes the traditional bottle of plonk will be
replaced by cartons.

Berry's study of what the global industry will look like in 50 years paints a
disturbing picture for Australia, which last year exported nearly $3 billion
worth of wine.

It says the effects of climate change will hit wine-growing regions in South
Australia, Victoria and NSW and force producers to move to the cooler climes of
Tasmania to focus on high-quality boutique wines.

``By 2058, Berry predicts Australia will be too hot and arid to support large
areas of vine,'' the report says. ``It will no longer be renowned for volume
wine and will become, instead, a niche producer, concentrating on hand-crafted,
terroir-driven fine wine.''

If the predictions are true, this is dire news for Australia, which has become
the No. 1 supplier of imported wines in the lucrative British market and is No.
2 in the US.

However Berry wine buyer Jasper Morris says it's not necessarily all over for
Australian vintners.

``There's no reason why they couldn't concentrate on the upper end of the
market,'' Mr Morris said. ``You can compensate for the lack of volume with an
increase in value.''

He suggested growers could set up wineries in China, which Berry tips will be
the world's biggest producer within the next five decades with wines to rival
the best from France.

But wine consultant Annie Grant, of the Wine Emporium in Fortitude Valley, found
the study hard to believe. She said wine lovers who appreciated good-quality
wine would not turn to the cheaper cask wine.

``You can't keep wines for the length of time we do in anything other than
glass," she said.

Miss Grant said she was not concerned about Australia losing its place among the
world's top winemakers, particularly with the quality of Australian soil.

``Some lands are better for fruit and vegetables and others better for grazing
-- this is because of minerals in the soil -- grapes are the same," Miss Grant
said.

She said China already produced wine but not of the same quality as wines from
Australia, France or countries such as South Africa, Canada or Argentina.

Berry also visualises that ``wine tankers'' carrying, instead of bottles,
cheaper and lighter cartons of wine will sail around the world en route to
thirsty customers.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CML


                   Copyright 2008 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              572 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                            January 3, 2004 Saturday

Farmers endure highs, lows in 2003; Milk prices rise, but beef producers are
nervous about mad cow case

BYLINE: JOHN EVERLY

SECTION: Tristate; Pg. a3

LENGTH: 505 words


The year 2003 was one of contrasts and records for American agriculture.

A year of record cattle and beef prices ended in uncertainty as the beef
industry dealt with its first case of mad cow disease. Farmers in the United
States harvested their largest corn crop ever during a drought year, but saw
miserable soybean yields.

As 2003 came to a close, farmers enjoyed higher milk, beef and soybean prices.

"It does look like we will have stronger farm income this year than last year,"
said Robert Tigner, farm management specialist with Iowa State University
Extension. Higher farm cash receipts and government farm program payments
improved farm balance sheets, he said.

"It's been a very good year for cattlemen," said Joel Brinkmeyer, executive vice
president with the Iowa Cattlemen's Association.

The shine on the cattle market tarnished in late December, however, as news of a
cow in Washington state infected with mad cow disease had a detrimental impact
on prices. The year ended with beef producers facing an uncertain 2004.

"I don't see a fear or a scare, but they're sure nervous about what could happen
to the market," Brinkmeyer said.

For dairy producers, 2003 ended much better than it began. Producers endured
about 18 months of staggeringly low prices, said Grant County Extension agent
Dave Wachter.

"The last three or four months of 2003 prices turned around," he said.

Tigner said: "We probably will finish up with positive cash flow for dairy,
thanks to higher milk prices in the fall and the (Market Income Loss Contract)
payments that USDA makes."

Farmers fretted about the weather in 2003, as the tri-state area had one of its
driest summers ever.

"The dry year made it very interesting for crop production in 2003," said Ted
Bay, with Grant County Extension.

In Grant County, soybean yields averaged about 50 percent of normal, he said.
Growers also battled yield-robbing soybean aphids.

Meanwhile, some farmers saw their highest corn yields ever.

"The drought certainly impacted yield, but not as much as expected," Bay said.

Farmland owners saw their investments appreciate during the year. Iowa farmland
values hit a record in 2003. Dubuque County farmland, averaging $$ @2,722 per
acre, also was the highest ever.

"It's going to strengthen balance sheets. Land prices constitute a fair amount
of farmers' assets," Tigner said. "And happily at the same time, we have low
interest rates, too."

Farming also saw mixed results in the public policy arena.  A federal energy
bill did not clear the Senate because it lacked the votes to end debate.
Agricultural interests wanted the legislation to increase consumption of
farm-based renewable energy.

Congress also delayed implementation of country of origin labeling for food by
two years. The program would mandate that certain foods be labeled at retail
indicating their country of origin. Supporters said the program would provide
reassurances to consumers and give domestic farmers an economic boost.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                              573 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                     January 6, 1989, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Petition may hit Canadian pork exports

BYLINE: (CP)

SECTION: BUSINESS TODAY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 500 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


   WASHINGTON (CP) - U.S. hog producers have formally renewed their bid to have
penalty duties imposed on imports of ham, bacon and other pork products from
Canada.

The case, filed yesterday to U.S. trade authorities by the U.S. National Pork
Producers Council, is the first formal trade complaint launched against a
Canadian product since the free trade agreement went into effect Sunday.

The council's petition, backed by 15 state pork associations and a handful of
meat-packing companies, says a countervailing penalty duty is needed on imports
of fresh, chilled and frozen pork products to offset unfair government
subsidization of Canadian hog producers.

"A countervailing duty would eliminate the unfair advantage Canadian farmers
have over U.S. pork producers because the Canadian government subsidizes hog
production," council president Ray Hankes said.

"Canadian pork producers can benefit from more than 20 potential subsidy
programs. This countervailing duty would help level the playing field."

U.S. producers and meat packers are upset by the sharp increase in shipments of
Canadian pork products to the U.S. since a U.S. penalty duty of 4.4 cents a
pound (9.7 cents a kilogram) was imposed in 1985 on imports of live Canadian
hogs.

U.S. trade authorities ruled then that U.S. hog producers were being harmed by
unfairly subsidized hog imports from Canada.

They rejected, however, the council's attempt to also have penalty duties
imposed on pork products from Canada.

The council argues Canadian producers are getting around the duty on live hogs
by increasing their shipments into the U.S. market of duty-free pork products.
It said Canada exported 512 million pounds (232 million kilograms) of pork into
the U.S. last year, compared with 345 million pounds (156 million kilograms) in
1984.

"Canadians have increased their imports of pork products into the United States
by more than 52 per cent since 1984," the council said.

The imports caused U.S. farmers to lose as much as $697 million (U.S.) in
revenues in 1988, it said.

The Canadian Pork Producers Council has accused U.S. producers of exaggerating
the growth in imports. It says there has been about a 26 per cent increase in
pork shipments since the duty on hogs was imposed, the result of the lower value
of the Canadian dollar and stepped-up U.S. demand for leaner Canadian pork.

The U.S. producers' council, which announced plans to file a complaint in
September, submitted its formal written petition yesterday to the U.S.
International Trade Commission and the U.S. commerce department.

The council is more optimistic about its chances of winning the case this time
because of recent changes to U.S. trade law.

The changes, part of a comprehensive new trade bill approved last fall,
establish broader criteria for determining when producers of an original
product, in this case hogs, and producers of a byproduct, in this case pork
meats, should be treated as one industry.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1989 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              574 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             August 2, 1999 Monday

Gold producers see more mergers ahead  With prices at 20-year lows, rivals now
view each other as prospective marriage partners

BYLINE: TAVIA GRANT Bloomberg News; BLM

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: Toronto


North America's biggest gold producers are blunt: Their prospects for going it
alone look bleaker and bleaker.

With gold prices at 20-year lows and central banks unloading their reserves,
investors are falling over themselves to get out of gold shares. That's forcing
big producers such as Placer Dome Inc., Barrick Gold Corp. and Kinross Gold
Corp. to view each other as potential marriage partners rather than rivals.

"I wouldn't be surprised" to see mergers among the largest companies, Barrick
chief executive officer Randall Oliphant said. "It's traditional when commodity
companies are under pressure and looking to reduce costs -- consolidation is
what results."

The process is already under way. Toronto-based Franco-Nevada Mining Corp.Ltd.
and sister company Euro-Nevada Mining Corp.Ltd. have agreed to merge in
September to create the world's fifth-biggest gold company by market value, an
effort to boost the company's appeal with big investors. Just last week, Robert
Buchan, chief executive of North America's No. 5 gold producer, Kinross, said
the company is considering putting itself up for sale.

The attitude marks a shift in the industry where big companies generally gobble
up smaller ones with promising mining claims. In the past year, Toronto-based
Barrick bought Sutton Resources Ltd., an exploration company, and Placer Dome of
Vancouver bought Getchell Gold Corp., a U.S. company whose reserves were
one-ninth that of Placer's 62 million ounces.

The Toronto Stock Exchange's index of gold mining stocks has lost more than half
its value in the past three years as prices for the metal have dropped.
According to HSBC Securities analyst Victor Flores, gold companies worldwide
have a combined market value of about $35-billion (U.S.) -- or about the size of
Texaco Inc., the fourth-largest U.S. oil company by market value. There's plenty
of room for consolidation: North America is home to about 40 gold producers that
mine at least 20,000 ounces a year.

Toronto-based Kinross, which expects to produce one million ounces of gold this
year, and smaller companies such as Meridian Gold Inc. of Reno, Nev., Cambior
Inc. of Montreal and Houston-based Battle Mountain Gold Co., are seen by
analysts as the most likely to link up with other companies. The list is
expanding.

"These companies need to do things to attract investors," HSBC's Mr. Flores
said.

Mr. Flores estimates the profitable companies will need to produce at least two
million ounces of gold a year to weather low prices. Right now, only four North
American firms are doing that: Barrick, Denver-based Newmont Mining Corp.,
Homestake Mining Co. of San Francisco and Placer Dome.

Toronto-based Barrick, the world's fourth-largest gold producer and one of the
most profitable, "doesn't feel pressure" to merge, Mr. Oliphant said.
Partnerships won't be forged solely between North American companies. Most
analysts expect companies such as South Africa's AngloGold Ltd., the world's No.
1 producer, to partake as well.

Both Newmont and Homestake, the world's second- and seventh-largest gold
producers, recently reiterated plans to make acquisitions. Newmont might make a
good match for Barrick, some analysts said, because the companies have big
Nevada mines located near each other.

"The major companies have really cut back significantly on costs," said John
Ing, president of Toronto-based brokerage Maison Placements Canada Inc. "So a
combination would have to be looked at not from cost savings but on more of a
strategic level -- that is geographic or development of a huge ore body."

The state of Nevada, home to about 35 gold mines, looks like a prime region for
consolidation. Barrick, Newmont, Meridian and Franco-Nevada Mining all have
properties near each other there.

"This is a time of trial in our industry," said Newmont's newly appointed
president Wayne Murdy.

Gold fell as low as $253.80 an ounce last week. It's shed 39 per cent since
February, 1996.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1999 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              575 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              December 14, 2000, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

PRODUCERS OF "YOUNG MESSIAH" ARE DELIVERING A NEW EPIC PIECE

BYLINE: Brian Q. Newcomb; Special To The Post-DispatchPRODUCTION; PLAY; CHORUS

SECTION: GET OUT, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 725 words


For makers and fans of contemporary Christian music, Christmas offers an
opportunity to share the values inherent in the music with a broad audience.

Not only that, it can be lucrative. Because of the unique blend of message and
commercial appeal, perennial Christmas package tours have become de rigueur,
dating back to successful "Young Messiah" tours through recent yearly Christmas
shows by Amy Grant and others.

This season, the producers of "Young Messiah" are delivering an epic new piece,
"Child of the Promise," which is touted as a Broadway-style musical. The tour
boasts performances from some of the best-known names in the contemporary
Christian music genre. Steven Curtis Chapman, Crystal Lewis, Twila Paris, Russ
Taff, Avalon, 4Him and Wayne Watson are among the performers coming to the
Savvis Center on Friday.

Stormie Omartian wrote the text and lyrics of "Child of the Promise," and the
music was written, arranged and produced by her husband, Michael Omartian, a
multi-Grammy winning producer associated with such artists as Donna Summer, Rod
Stewart and Steely Dan.

For the recording of the show, the Omartians' appeal drew in popular mainstream
singers, such as Summer, Richard Marx, Michael Crawford, Michael W. Smith, Amy
Grant and Vince Gill (who are not on the tour).

One singer envisioned for the album and tour from the beginning was Steven
Curtis Chapman. Speaking by phone about halfway through the 20-city tour,
Chapman said he was willing to participate from the beginning.

"Being a big fan of Michael and Stormie, and a big fan of Michael's productions
through the years, I jumped at the chance to be a part of it," said Chapman, who
sang the part of Joseph on the recording.

"It's always been a secret aspiration to do something like this," Chapman said.
"I've been a big fan, influenced and impacted by musicals like 'Les Miserables.'
It's a powerful art form to combine music and drama. This just adds that fourth
dimension, where you can tell the story more visually. So this has been the
fulfillment of those dreams.

In the mainstream market, Christmas albums have become endearing favorites from
artists as varied as Tony Bennett and Cyndi Lauper, while such artists as Bruce
Springsteen, Madonna and U2 have all recorded songs for seasonal collections.
What's true of the mainstream industry is just as much so in the contemporary
Christian music world.

Most of the acts touring as part of "Child of the Promise" have their own albums
of Christmas music out. The first half of Friday night's concert, Chapman said,
will feature a lot of familiar music.

"We've split it up so that the first half gives us a chance to do what we do
normally," he explained. "I sing 'Christmas is All in the Heart,' which is an
autobiographical sketch of my own Christmas memories and experience, from my
album 'The Music of Christmas,' which came out about four years ago. And I'm the
host; I end up welcoming everyone and leading folk in singing some Christmas
carols."

The second half of the event is "Child of the Promise," which features costumes,
sets and scenery. In the album's publicity, Michael Omartian suggests "we
envisioned this as a large historical body of work." Of her point of view in
shaping the lyrics, Stormie Omartian said, "I wanted to show that God uses
ordinary people to do extraordinary things."

For Chapman, identifying with the role of Joseph, the husband to Mary and
surrogate father to the baby Jesus, came easily.

"As a dad and a husband, his story of faithfulness even in the face of this
incredible mystery - how in the world is he going to explain it? Yet, his love
for this woman and for God compel him to do the unthinkable. Joseph has always
been a hero of faith for me. I want to identify with him, in his integrity and
character; it's what I'd like to be as a man."

While "Child of the Promise" lacks many of the elements that would work on the
Broadway stage, for fans of Christian music it carries a winning message of
seasonal witness, as well as a star-packed lineup. And ultimately, it will be
their drawing power that determines whether the package becomes a yearly event.

====

"Child of the Promise"

Where: Savvis Center, 1401 Clark Avenue

When: 7:30 p.m. Friday

How much: $ 15-$ 35

More info: 314-241-1888

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                              576 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     News Bites - Australian Stock Exchange

                            February 17, 2006 Friday

CONSTELLATION BRANDS FORECASTS 2007 EPS OF $US1.58-1.66

LENGTH: 404 words


Constellation Brands Inc estimates earnings per share of between $US1.58
($A2.14) and $US1.66 for the fiscal year to February 28, 2007.

The guidance includes expectations of net sales to grow six to eight percent, an
adjusted EBIT of around $US850 million and capital expenditures of $US155
million.

The company also estimates an earnings per share of US23c to US26c for the
fourth quarter to February 28, 2006. This puts the fiscal year 2006 earnings per
share at between $US1.33 and $US1.36, up from $US1.19 in 2005.

The 2006 guidance includes expectations of net sales to grow in the mid-teens,
including the benefit of 10 additional months of the Robert Mondavi business. An
adjusted EBIT of around $US780 million is expected.

The company will conduct a $US100 million share buyback as well as accelerate
vesting of certain employee option grants and eliminate performance-based
accelerated vesting from future option grants.

The retirement of its global wine business chief executive officer, Stephen
Millar, has provided the company an opportune time for the reorganisation of the
wine business. It will look to refine its decentralised operating approach to
enable its wine business leaders to be more flexible and responsive in managing
their processes and markets.

Constellation estimates restructuring costs of $US55 million, of which $US24
million is expected to be recorded in the current fourth quarter.

BACKGROUND: Constellation Brands is a leading international producer and
marketer of more than 200 beverage alcohol brands including wine, imported beer
and spirits. It is the largest wine company in the world, the largest
multi-category supplier of beverage alcohol in the United States, a leading
producer and exporter of wine from Australia and New Zealand and both a major
producer and independent drinks wholesaler in the United Kingdom.

A conference call to discuss the company's outlook and other announcements will
be conducted on February 17, 2006 at 11.00am EST. This can be accessed on
+973-935-8505.

STOCK DASHBOARD: FEBRUARY 16, 2006

CONSTELLATION BRANDS, INC

Closing Price: $3.54

Price change from previous trading day: -1.67%

Relative Strength (6 months percentile rank): 49.9

Market capitalisation: $87.7 million

Price/Earnings: 23.52 times

Turnover volume: 1,720

Volume Index (1 is average): 0.6

Turnover value: $6,089

Turnover period: 8188 days

Value of $1,000 invested 1 year ago: $499

Source: www.BuySellTips.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Earnings Projections

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2006 News Bites Pty Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                         Australian Company News Bites


                              577 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                             June 30, 2015 Tuesday

AP government to buy out power projects

SECTION: HYDERABAD

LENGTH: 429 words


HYDERABAD: With the power purchase agreements signed by the state with gas-based
private power projects coming to an end in 2016, the AP government has decided
to buy them out at their terminal value.

Recently, the AP government had cleared the proposal of the eastern and southern
discoms to buy the 220 mw GVK Power project located at Jegurupadu in East
Godavari district. The GVK management had entered into an agreement with the AP
government in 1997 for 18 years. With the agreement ending in June 2015, the two
discoms have proposed an outright purchase of the project at a terminal value to
be determined by Grant Thornton, a third party audit company.

According to the terms of the PPA, the state has two options with regard to gas
based projects. One is the buyout option, and the other is, refurbish and
upgrade and get into fresh agreements with the private power producer. After GVK
Power, the state has now decided to exercise the buyout option in case of three
units whose term will end soon.

They are, the 208 mw Spectrum power project located in Kakinada, the 351 mw
Lanco power project situated in Kondapalli and the 220 mw Reliance power project
located in Samalkot. While the Lanco PPA is completing its term in December
2015, the other two other projects have their term till September 2016.

If the buyout option is exercised for the four power projects, then the AP
discoms can acquire about 1,000 mw of gas-based power by investing about Rs
1,500 crore. While the offer made for GVK's Jegurupadu unit is Rs 300 crore, for
acquiring remaining units, discom officials estimate an amount of Rs 1,200
crore.

"For GVK and Spectrum, the PPA conditions are similar and the two discoms have
the first right to buy. For the Lanco and Reliance projects, the PPA conditions
are such that the private developers can get their project valued by a third
party agency. In any case, we plan to buyout the four gas-based projects as they
would ensure power for all in the state," said a senior official in the energy
department.

Due to serious supply constraints of natural gas, all these gas-based projects
have been kept idle by their managements and the AP government is now looking at
reviving them. According to a report by APGenco, the chances of gas supply from
the KG-Basin and other wells will improve once the gas rate is revised by the
government of India. It also pointed that by using alternative fuel like
Regassified Liquid Natural Gas (RNLG), the projects can be made available to
meet the peak-time power demand in the state.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              578 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Times of India (Electronic Edition)

                             June 30, 2015 Tuesday
                               hyderabad Edition

AP govt to buy out power projects

SECTION: TIMES CITY

LENGTH: 421 words


With the power purchase agreements signed by the state with gas-based private
power projects coming to an end in 2016, the AP government has decided to buy
them out at their terminal value.

Recently, the AP government had cleared the proposal of the eastern and southern
discoms to buy the 220 mw GVK Power project located at Jegurupadu in East
Godavari district. The GVK management had entered into an agreement with the AP
government in 1997 for 18 years. With the agreement ending in June 2015, the two

discoms have proposed an outright purchase of the project at a terminal value to
be determined by Grant Thornton, a third party audit company .

According to the terms of the PPA, the state has two options with regard to gas
based projects. One is the buyout option, and the other is, refur

bish and upgrade and get into fresh agreements with the private power producer.
After GVK Power, the state has now decided to exercise the buyout option in case
of three units whose term will end soon.

They are, the 208 mw Spectrum power project located in Kakinada, the 351 mw
Lanco power project situated in Kondapalli and the 220 mw Reliance power project
located in Samalkot. While the Lanco PPA is completing its term in December
2015, the other two other projects have their term till September 2016.

If the buyout option is exercised for the four power

projects, then the AP discoms can acquire about 1,000 mw of gas-based power by
investing about Rs 1,500 crore. While the offer made for GVK's Jegurupadu unit
is Rs 300 crore, for acquiring remaining units, discom officials estimate an
amount of Rs 1,200 crore.

"For GVK and Spectrum, the PPA conditions are similar and the two discoms have
the first right to buy. For the Lanco and Reliance projects, the PPA conditions
are such that the private developers can get their project valued by a third
party agency . In any case, we plan to buyout the four gas-based projects as
they would ensure power for

all in the state," said a senior official in the energy department.

Due to serious supply constraints of natural gas, all these gas-based projects
have been kept idle by their managements and the AP government is now looking at
reviving them. According to a report by APGenco, the chances of gas supply from
the KG-Basin and other wells will improve once the gas rate is revised by the
government of India. It also pointed that by using alternative fuel like
Regassified Liquid Natural Gas (RNLG), the projects can be made available to
meet the peak-time power demand in the state.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              579 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 19, 2016 Tuesday

APUC To Review Funding Requests Totaling $1,207,134

LENGTH: 944  words

DATELINE: New York



  Bismarck: North Dakota Department of Commerce has issued the following news
release



 By ND Commerce

 The North Dakota Agricultural Products Utilization Commission (APUC) will
review funding requests for thirteen projects totaling $1,207,134 at its
quarterly meeting July 18th in Medora.





 APUC is a program of the North Dakota Department of Commerce that administers
grant programs for researching and developing new and expanded uses for North
Dakota agricultural products. The grants can be used for basic and applied
research, marketing and utilization, farm diversification, nature-based
agritourism, prototype and technology and technical assistance.



 The following requests will be reviewed:



     Grand Forks Region EDC (Grand Forks) is requesting $32,382 to complete a
market analysis for expanded transload services in the Grand Forks region.
Contact Keith Lund at (701) 746-2722.

     North Dakota Soybean Processors (Fargo) is requesting $103,000 to defray
costs for preliminary engineering services for a soybean crush facility and
refinery. Contact Darin Perius at (701) 541-0399.

     Dakota Specialty Milling (Fargo) is requesting $203,000 to expand its
domestic and international sales and marketing activities and engineering design
work for a new 70,000 square foot food grade warehouse. Contact Bryan Hendricks
at (701) 282-9656.

     New Energy Spirit Biomass Refinery LLC (Amherst, MA) is requesting $125,000
to develop and operate a commercial-scale refinery which would be a part of the
Spiritwood Industrial Energy Park in North Dakota. The project's purpose is to
convert local crop residues such as corn stover and wheat straw into cellulosic
ethanol and solid lignin biofuel and to market these profitably. Contact Stephan
Rogers at (413) 531-6884.

     Spiritwood Ingredients LLC (Fergus Falls, MN) is requesting $52,500 to
develop and construct a barley processing plant using five million bushels of
high protein feed barley to produce high concentrate barley protein for use in
the aquaculture (fish farming) industry. The remaining co-product will be used
as feedstock for ethanol production. The project will be part of the Spiritwood
Industrial Energy Park in North Dakota. Contact Todd Hylden at (218) 205-0545.

     Keshav Rajpal (Grand Forks) is requesting $253,000 for the Red River
BioRefinery's engineering phase of their project for a fully integrated
biorefinery, which will be one of the largest advanced ethanol producers in the
U.S. and one of the lowest cost producers of both advanced and cellulosic
ethanol. The biorefinery will transform low value agricultural byproducts to
value added biofuels and other coproducts. Contact Keshav Rajpal at (608)
334-7240.

     Crunchfuls North Dakota (Mountain View, CA) is requesting $93,000 to bring
the healthy benefits of ND beans to schools in a convenient daily ready-to-eat
bean bar and bean bites, branded as Sure Snack which is compliant with School
Nutrition's USDA. The project will focus on product sampling and product
presentations with school food service directors toward securing their interest
and partnership for launch in schools starting with North Dakota and expanding
nationwide. Contact Stephanie Hoffart at (701) 852-1075.

     Dakota Pride Cooperative (Jamestown) is requesting $34,262 to support
business expansion efforts and partner with a producer for the marketing of a
newly developed hard spring wheat variety. Contact Travis Bruner at (701)
626-2070.

     Fluffy Fields Vineyard & Winery (Dickinson) is requesting $91,987 to
support a comprehensive marketing campaign designed to increase visitors and
revenues; lean evaluation of production practices; and to build a greenhouse to
be used to expand the growing season. Contact Deb Kinzel at (701) 483-2242.

     Intelligent Malt, LLC (Fargo) is requesting $153,000 to produce a prototype
barley malting unit that will be paired with a novel cloud based marketplace to
directly connect producers to consumers. The purpose of this project is to meet
the growing demand for craft malted barley in the craft beverage sector. Contact
Katrina Christiansen at (515) 451-0859.

     Section 3 Hops (Casselton) is requesting $14,279 to begin its initial
planting and preparation phase for one acre of hops located in the Wheatland
North Dakota area. Section 3 Hops hopes to grow local product which can be
utilized in the local craft beers within the Fargo-Moorhead area as well as
regionally, with plans to partner with breweries in neighboring states, such as
South Dakota and Minnesota. Contact Amy Meier at (701) 793-6299.

     NDSU Department of Mechanical Engineering & Applied Mechanics (Fargo) is
requesting $25,473 to evaluate harvesting and application of cattails, a
perennial herbaceous plant found in North Dakota, and to demonstrate their
potential industrial applications as potential cellulosic raw material. Contact
Amy Scott at (701) 231-8045.

     The 2016 Agricultural Bio-Sciences International Conference (Fargo) is
requesting $26,250 for marketing and educational efforts for the 2016 Conference
to be held in Fargo, ND, September 18-21, 2016. The conference is a premier
global meeting promoting innovation in bioscience to ensure sustainable food,
feed and fiber security. Contact Roger Reierson at (701) 237-4850.



 APUC is an office within Economic Development and Finance, a division of the
North Dakota Department of Commerce.



 For additional program information please visit North Dakota APUC at
www.NDAPUC.com  or find us on Facebook at www.facebook.com /NDAPUC.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              580 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 19, 2016 Tuesday

APUC To Review Funding Requests Totaling $1,207,134

LENGTH: 944  words

DATELINE: New York



  Bismarck: North Dakota Department of Commerce has issued the following news
release



 By ND Commerce

 The North Dakota Agricultural Products Utilization Commission (APUC) will
review funding requests for thirteen projects totaling $1,207,134 at its
quarterly meeting July 18th in Medora.





 APUC is a program of the North Dakota Department of Commerce that administers
grant programs for researching and developing new and expanded uses for North
Dakota agricultural products. The grants can be used for basic and applied
research, marketing and utilization, farm diversification, nature-based
agritourism, prototype and technology and technical assistance.



 The following requests will be reviewed:



     Grand Forks Region EDC (Grand Forks) is requesting $32,382 to complete a
market analysis for expanded transload services in the Grand Forks region.
Contact Keith Lund at (701) 746-2722.

     North Dakota Soybean Processors (Fargo) is requesting $103,000 to defray
costs for preliminary engineering services for a soybean crush facility and
refinery. Contact Darin Perius at (701) 541-0399.

     Dakota Specialty Milling (Fargo) is requesting $203,000 to expand its
domestic and international sales and marketing activities and engineering design
work for a new 70,000 square foot food grade warehouse. Contact Bryan Hendricks
at (701) 282-9656.

     New Energy Spirit Biomass Refinery LLC (Amherst, MA) is requesting $125,000
to develop and operate a commercial-scale refinery which would be a part of the
Spiritwood Industrial Energy Park in North Dakota. The project's purpose is to
convert local crop residues such as corn stover and wheat straw into cellulosic
ethanol and solid lignin biofuel and to market these profitably. Contact Stephan
Rogers at (413) 531-6884.

     Spiritwood Ingredients LLC (Fergus Falls, MN) is requesting $52,500 to
develop and construct a barley processing plant using five million bushels of
high protein feed barley to produce high concentrate barley protein for use in
the aquaculture (fish farming) industry. The remaining co-product will be used
as feedstock for ethanol production. The project will be part of the Spiritwood
Industrial Energy Park in North Dakota. Contact Todd Hylden at (218) 205-0545.

     Keshav Rajpal (Grand Forks) is requesting $253,000 for the Red River
BioRefinery's engineering phase of their project for a fully integrated
biorefinery, which will be one of the largest advanced ethanol producers in the
U.S. and one of the lowest cost producers of both advanced and cellulosic
ethanol. The biorefinery will transform low value agricultural byproducts to
value added biofuels and other coproducts. Contact Keshav Rajpal at (608)
334-7240.

     Crunchfuls North Dakota (Mountain View, CA) is requesting $93,000 to bring
the healthy benefits of ND beans to schools in a convenient daily ready-to-eat
bean bar and bean bites, branded as Sure Snack which is compliant with School
Nutrition's USDA. The project will focus on product sampling and product
presentations with school food service directors toward securing their interest
and partnership for launch in schools starting with North Dakota and expanding
nationwide. Contact Stephanie Hoffart at (701) 852-1075.

     Dakota Pride Cooperative (Jamestown) is requesting $34,262 to support
business expansion efforts and partner with a producer for the marketing of a
newly developed hard spring wheat variety. Contact Travis Bruner at (701)
626-2070.

     Fluffy Fields Vineyard & Winery (Dickinson) is requesting $91,987 to
support a comprehensive marketing campaign designed to increase visitors and
revenues; lean evaluation of production practices; and to build a greenhouse to
be used to expand the growing season. Contact Deb Kinzel at (701) 483-2242.

     Intelligent Malt, LLC (Fargo) is requesting $153,000 to produce a prototype
barley malting unit that will be paired with a novel cloud based marketplace to
directly connect producers to consumers. The purpose of this project is to meet
the growing demand for craft malted barley in the craft beverage sector. Contact
Katrina Christiansen at (515) 451-0859.

     Section 3 Hops (Casselton) is requesting $14,279 to begin its initial
planting and preparation phase for one acre of hops located in the Wheatland
North Dakota area. Section 3 Hops hopes to grow local product which can be
utilized in the local craft beers within the Fargo-Moorhead area as well as
regionally, with plans to partner with breweries in neighboring states, such as
South Dakota and Minnesota. Contact Amy Meier at (701) 793-6299.

     NDSU Department of Mechanical Engineering & Applied Mechanics (Fargo) is
requesting $25,473 to evaluate harvesting and application of cattails, a
perennial herbaceous plant found in North Dakota, and to demonstrate their
potential industrial applications as potential cellulosic raw material. Contact
Amy Scott at (701) 231-8045.

     The 2016 Agricultural Bio-Sciences International Conference (Fargo) is
requesting $26,250 for marketing and educational efforts for the 2016 Conference
to be held in Fargo, ND, September 18-21, 2016. The conference is a premier
global meeting promoting innovation in bioscience to ensure sustainable food,
feed and fiber security. Contact Roger Reierson at (701) 237-4850.



 APUC is an office within Economic Development and Finance, a division of the
North Dakota Department of Commerce.



 For additional program information please visit North Dakota APUC at
www.NDAPUC.com  or find us on Facebook at www.facebook.com /NDAPUC.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              581 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                           November 3, 2011 Thursday

HANDING the reins over to the next generation

SECTION: LIVESTOCK GENERAL; Pg. 82

LENGTH: 701 words


HANDING the reins over to the next generation has long been a testing business
on farms, as has been finding innovative ways to bring new, young people into
industries that have big start-up costs. Australia's milk producers, however,
are proving it can be done. Successful examples of farm growth linked to the
transition of ownership and the sharing of resources to provide young farmers a
stepping stone into the industry were outlined at last month's Dairy Australia's
Northern Dairy Con- ference on Queensland's Gold Coast. Dairy Australia chairman
Max Rob- erts, Bega Valley, said succession planning was something a lot of
farmers mulled over while sitting on the tractor, but that's as far as it went.

"Contrary to much of what is said about the dairy industry, I believe there are
a lot of enthusiastic young people in the industry and the skill is in retaining
them," he said. "It may be that young people have to be a little pushy and pick
up the triggers but the point is, it can be done and the family can still be
talking to each other at the end of the day." Keynote speakers at the conference
were West Australian producers, father and son Peter and Grant Evans, winners of
this year's Dairy Business of the Year for their State. The Evans' milk 850
Holsteins off 440 hectares of their 800ha Busselton property under a profit
sharing agreement. Their cows average 990 kilograms of milk solids per annum off
annual ryegrass and clover, with a growing season from May to December, and
under a total mixed ration system during summer and autumn. Their costs of
production are $3.97/kg of milk solids, putting them in the top 15 per cent of
WA milk producers. Peter Evans is a second generation dairy farmer but before he
was even 21, the partnership between him and his parents split, with Peter
taking control of the 100 cow dairy and beginning the process of buying property
from his parents. Grant, now 28, returned to the farm when he was 22 after
working in other areas of agriculture. "I came home under totally different
circumstances to Dad ? not because I was told to but because I wanted to take up
an opportunity," he said. Each of the farmers takes out a market-based salary ?
as Peter opts to do less, his salary decreases. The remaining profits each year
are divided according to land ownership (the dairy is given more value than the
home property because its return on capital is higher). With his share of the
profits, Grant will increase his interest in the partnership and will also
borrow money on commercial terms to buy cows and land. Also outlined at the
conference was the successful Cluster Farm Project being run in the Murray Dairy
region. Project leader Cam Smith said there was an estimated 112,000ha in the
reg- ion that was committed to dairying just five years ago which is now either
sitting idle or underused. "There is a lot of land and infrastructure that, with
a bit of TLC, would be ready to go again," he said. Via the concept of bringing
together resources like land, water and machinery from more than one farm to
increase the tools available for milk production, new people are able to be
brought into areas where dormant farms are sitting. "It's about creating
synergies and efficiencies, and providing young farmers a stepping stone into
the industry or a dairy business in its early stages a chance to expand," Mr
Smith said. He presented case studies which show- ed both a complex and simple
example of how cluster farming was working in the south. At its simplest, it may
be one neighbour who is committed to continuing in the dairy industry leasing
the farm next door that is currently being under used. At its most complex, a
cluster farm may bring together land, water, livestock, machinery and workers
from a number of properties under one management umbrella. "In the recent past
farmers on under-used land may have got through by trading water, selling hay or
taking on some agistment ? however that opportunity is not providing adequate
returns today," Mr Smith said. "Cluster farms are not new but they do provide
untapped potential for dairying to return to a growth phase and this is
something that could be replicated across the country."

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2011 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              582 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                                August 13, 2005

Helping hand for those with recipe for success

SECTION: Business; Farm/Food; News; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 152 words


The Scottish Executive's processing and marketing grant scheme has so far helped
55 food companies in the Highlands and Islands to add value to agriculture
produce. More than £5.9million has been awarded to producers and processors. The
cash injection has generated total investment of more than £17million in the
north.

Mo Shepherd, the grant co-ordinator in Inverness, said: "The scheme can help
towards capital costs as well as helping with marketing materials, market
research, product development and attendance at trade shows.

"The executive are keen to encourage applications from producers and processors
of agricultural produce in the Highlands and Islands area.

"The processing and marketing grant scheme is open until the end of 2006 and so
the message is that those who plan to take advantage of it should act sooner
than later." More information from Mrs Shepherd on 01463 253065.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2005

LANGUAGE: English

                  © Copyright 2005 Aberdeen Press and Journal


                              583 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                               walesonline.co.uk

                      June 17, 2015 Wednesday 5:27 PM GMT

Independent TV producers press George Osborne for S4C funding deal;
Teledwyr Annibynnol Cymru, the producers' trade body, want funding assurances
the Welsh language broadcaster

BYLINE: By Martin Shipton

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 486 words


Independent TV producers in Wales are calling on George Osborne to provide S4C
with a secure funding deal for the future.

TAC (Teledwyr Annibynnol Cymru), the producers' trade body, also want assurances
that the Welsh language broadcaster should not be disadvantaged if the BBC gets
a raw financial deal when its charter is renewed at the end of next year.

The organisation has sent an open letter to the Chancellor as well as to Culture
Secretary John Whittingdale and Welsh Secretary Stephen Crabb.

The letter welcomes the continuity in the new Government which means those
Ministers have a knowledge and understanding of the independent sector and of
S4C, and praises measures such as the creative industry tax breaks.

However, the letter goes on to state that the next step should be to establish a
long-term funding and governance arrangement for S4C. Funding demand

Currently the funding for S4C is split between a £6.7m grant from the UK
Government's Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) and £75m from the TV
licence fee.

As a result S4C is partly overseen by the BBC Trust, although it remains a
separate broadcaster with its own editorial policy and management.

Related: Carmarthenshire council under fire over new road linked to S4C
relocation

TAC's policy manifesto, published earlier in the year, suggested S4C's funding
should rise by 10% and be linked to inflation.

The letter also asks that the BBC charter review be used to encourage the BBC to
commission more from Welsh producers for its UK network services, as part of
better representing all the nations and regions of the UK. S4C 'a driver of
growth'

TAC Chair Iestyn Garlick said: "The Government has already introduced some
positive measures for the creative industries.

"The next step is for S4C, due to its role as a driver for creativity and
economic growth, as well as its cultural importance, to have a long-term stable
platform in terms of funding and governance.

"Its viewing figures are healthy, particularly since S4C has been on iPlayer,
and S4C creates an economic value to the Welsh economy which is double the
amount it invests.

"For this to continue it's important that S4C's funding is set at a sustainable
level and that its governance is clearer.

"The outcome of charter review should include a long-term future for S4C.

"In the short term any cuts the BBC has to make due to the licence fee being
frozen should not include S4C, as it is a separate broadcaster."

Related: Conservative plans to 'abolish' licence fee pose serious threat to S4C
funding

The letter also asks that the high-end Welsh-language drama TV tax credit be
given a reduced threshold for minority language productions, a step which could
attract extra investment into the Wales economy.

Until former Culture Secretary Jeremy Hunt ended the arrangement in 2010, S4C
was funded by an inflation-linked annual grant from DCMS.

Latterly, the grant was worth around £100m.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBWM


                         Copyright 2015 Trinity Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                              584 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Courier Mail (Australia)

                             March 3, 2009 Tuesday
                        1 - First with the news Edition

Bargains by the barrel load

BYLINE: Ken Gargett

SECTION: CM2; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 581  words


ANECDOTAL evidence from wine stores, as well as statistics from around the
globe, provide compelling evidence that the value of wine sales has dropped
considerably.

Volume has not been affected to the same extent as yet, suggesting that
winelovers are drinking as much but lesser quality wine. It is bad news for the
Aussie wine industry, not least because the focus of their efforts of

late have been very much trying to achieve just the opposite.

Cleanskins and casks looked very much like making a strong comeback but the
recent intense heat and tragic bushfires have turned predictions on their head
and the expected excess production has very quickly become a much smaller pond
than looked likely only a month or two ago.

Cleanskins can offer terrific value in times like these but they can also be a
way for less scrupulous producers to offload a lot of bog average plonk, and the
conditions suggest that, even if cleanskins are far less prevalent than
expected, wine of questionable quality will not be in such short supply.

There may be instances where top makers have been left with a surplus and wish
to sell it off. If you happen on these, the savings are considerable. If you are
buying cleanskins by the dozen or more, try to make sure that the retailer will
offer you a taste. If not, my suggestion is to buy a few different cleanskins by
the single bottle, try them, and work out what you like.

Also, you'll start seeing a lot of very cheap Marlborough sauvignon blanc
arriving over the next year. Some will be excellent, much will not.

So what to buy? First, it really is worth checking out a few different retailers
as one will have something on special and the next, something different.

I have mentioned what great value I thought De Bortoli Gulf Station pinot noir
2008 was at about $16. Don't miss their Windy Peak range ($10-$12), especially
2008 pinot noir and 2006 sangiovese. The sangiovese is amazing, offering genuine
varietal characters.

Brown Brothers has a wide range that are not only interesting but offer value.

One of the best lines around at the moment for value, is Banrock Station. Its
sparkling and the moscato, a style garnering more and more interest, are both
worth a look. So too, the sparkling shiraz.

Angove's is another producer that sneaks under the radar but is always reliable.
The Lehmanns lower range wines ditto. McWilliam's also has a series of bargains,
especially the perennially discounted Elizabeth semillon (where else can you get
a very well made, delicious wine with five years of age, for this sort of
money?) and, under screwcap, even more exciting.

Other names? Moondah Brook, Yalumba, Jacobs Creek (yes, the tall poppy syndrome
has done these wines no favours), Trentham Estate, Talinga Park, Oxford Landing,
Zilzie, Grant Burge Barossa Vines, Penfolds Koonunga Hill, Tyrrell's Old Winery
and d'Arenberg's Stump Jump are just some of the many.

Should anyone want to really come out of left field in this category, try

some of the great value imports from Vintage Cellars.

Finally, while I would of course suggest that there is no substitute for an
up-to-the-minute wine column, those wanting to expand the list of wines they
consider in the under $15 category should get hold of a copy of Quaff 2009 by
Peter Forrestal (Hardie Grant, $20). Forrestal will be known to those of you who
attended the recent Courier-Mail masterclasses. He was one of the presenters. He
will also be at this year's Noosa Food and Wine Festival.

kgargett@bigpond.com

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CML


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              585 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                 The Sunday Star-Times (Auckland, New Zealand)

                            October 27, 2013 Sunday

SeaDragon positive despite delay

BYLINE: By FIONA ROTHERHAM

SECTION: BUSINESS; NATIONAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 842 words


NELSON-BASED FISH oil producer SeaDragon Marine Oils has gained a $286,000
Government grant despite warning shareholders it won't meet its forecasts for
the 2014 financial year due to a delay in entering the market for omega-3
products.

The delay followed a board decision to lease a purpose-built factory just south
of Nelson that can handle omega-3 oils, instead of expanding its existing
factory. The new facility won't be ready until the end of next year.

Chief executive Ross Feeley said the delay meant the part of the financial
forecasts relating to omega-3 would not be met but the company was on target
with its existing production of squalene and krill oils.

The forecasts, of $10 million in revenue and $600,000 in profit before tax in
the financial year ending March 2014, assumed the new plant would have been
operating for 10 months. Feeley said new forecasts have yet to be set.

The dollar for dollar investment by New Zealand Trade and Enterprises's
International Growth Fund is to help the company accelerate its move into
omega-3 fish oils, a market which has grown by 7.3 per cent for the last five
years. NZTE's fund has so far allocated $4.1m of grants to 13 companies since
July 1 and provided just over $30m in grants to 73 companies in the last
financial year.

SeaDragon is the largest producer of refined fish oils in Australasia. It
exports 77 per cent of its product by value.

Last year it secured a cornerstone investor, Australian- based BioSciences
Managers, which invested $2.5m conditional on a reverse listing on to the NZX
via Claridge Capital. It has a 25.3 per cent stake while a controlling 52.8 per
cent is held by MerSea Holdings, whose shareholders include Feeley and chairman
Doug Wilson.

The pair were involved in a 2004 management buyout of AgResearch subsidiary
BioProducts, which was involved in deer velvet. They then bought SeaDragon,
developing an international reputation for their ability in refining fish oils.

But funding constraints meant SeaDragon struggled despite demand for its
products. It was loss-making until the cornerstone shareholder came on board.

One of the risks identified in an Edison analyst's report on the company was
that the balance sheet could become stretched if the ramping up of production
from the new fish oil plant was unsuccessful.

Matt McNamara, BioSciences' chief investment officer - who is also on
SeaDragon's board - said it invested in the-then struggling company because the
problem was a constraint on working capital.

It could see huge opportunities in the burgeoning market for omega-3 products.

"It had orders but not the stock. When we were able to provide the capital it
needed they were able to buy stock and get revenues rocking and rolling. Sales
have taken off since they've had the cash."

The group made a turnaround profit of $3.35m in the 2013 March financial year
compared to a $515,000 loss for the same period the year before as a private
company, although most of that was due to a rise in the value of the 12 per cent
stake in smartphone and tablet advertising group Snakk Media it inherited in the
reverse listing.

In August it sold 10 million Snakk Media shares for $900,000 and is looking to
sell the remainder, currently valued at $1.2m. The proceeds will help fund the
fit-out of the new facility which will boost its current processing of around
4oo-500 tonnes a year to around 5000 tonnes.

Feeley and the Australian investors remain optimistic about the company's
ability to capture the worldwide trend towards omega-3 through the new $6m
facility. McNamara said part of the demand was being fuelled by the big
pharmaceutical companies looking for alternative healthcare products to sustain
their topline revenue as 18 of the top 20 drugs sold worldwide come off patent
within a five-year period.

One of SeaDragon's problems has been a shortage of supply rather than customers.
It makes the refined oils from fish waste, predominantly sourced from Talley's
and Sealord. Feeley said he has made further progress in persuading fishing
companies it was more viable to sell to SeaDragon than to dump waste at sea or
sell it for animal feed.

SeaDragon's long-term goal with the omega-3 oil is to expand into new markets
including functional foods, infant formula, and SeaDragon-branded capsules. The
global market for such products is estimated to be worth US$30 billion.

Although most fish oil is currently sourced from anchovies, SeaDragon's new
factory will produce single-species oils such as hoki and farmed salmon which,
under the free trade agreement with China, would have a tariff advantage over
other oils.

Feeley said the aim was to produce a refined oil ingredient that had a point of
differentiation to what was already available in the market.

"We want to leverage off the whole New Zealand cachet."

--------------------

CAPTION:

Healthy investment: SeaDragon turns fish waste into a refined oil used as an
ingredient in dietary supplements.

On target: SeaDragon chief executive Ross Keeley is confident its new factory
will help future-proof the business.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2013 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                              586 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                             May 15, 2008 Thursday

Produce growers like farm legislation

BYLINE: The Monterey County Herald

SECTION: STATE

LENGTH: 715 words


WASHINGTON (AP)   Fruit and vegetable farmers in California and elsewhere would
reap a bonanza of new money in a giant farm bill passed by the House on
Wednesday that for the first time includes significant expenditures for produce
growers.

Money for traditional commodity subsidies, food stamps and other programs in the
$290 billion bill still dwarfs spending on so-called "specialty crops"   fruits,
vegetables, nuts and nursery products, which together account for about half the
country's crop value.

Nonetheless fruit and vegetable producers and their allies said they'd made a
landmark advance. The bill would spend more than $1 billion directly on
specialty crops through grants and other programs, while hundreds of millions
more would go for related programs, such as a $1 billion fresh fruit and
vegetable snack program for schools.

Senate Democrats calculated the total specialty crop spending in the bill at
around $3 billion.

"For the first time the farm bill makes an historic investment in specialty
crops especially important to my state of California," House Speaker Nancy
Pelosi, D-San Francisco, said on the House floor. "The producers who account for
more than half of all crop value in the United States are now represented in our
farm bill."

California with its grapes, pears, avocados and almonds is the country's top
specialty-crop producing state, followed by Florida, Washington, Texas, Oregon,
North Carolina, Michigan, New York, Georgia and Arizona, according to the
Specialty Crop Farm Bill Alliance.

The alliance represents 120 groups of growers and producers that came together
over the past few years to lobby for inclusion after the last farm bill, in
2002, once again mostly ignored specialty crops.

"What we've tried to do is create and support programs that are going to help a
broad cross-section of our industry," said Robert Guenther, senior vice
president of public policy for the United Fresh Produce Association and
spokesman for the specialty crop alliance. "Finally we hit the tipping in this
farm bill."

The bill passed the House 318-106 despite a veto threat from President Bush, who
complained it's too expensive and doesn't reduce commodity spending, and debate
on the legislation began in the Senate.

Among the specialty crop spending in the bill:

· $1.02 billion to expand a pilot fresh fruit and vegetable snack program at
schools to all 50 states.

· $466 million for specialty crop block grants.

· $377 million for a new program to combat pest and disease.

· $230 million for research on food safety, mechanization, genetics, breeding
and other issues.

· $59 million for trade assistance and marketing promotion.

"California agriculture is finally getting the respect and treatment it
deserves," said Rep. Dennis Cardoza, D-Merced, who helped negotiate the bill.

Also included was $170 million added in by Rep. Mike Thompson, D-St. Helena, to
help families and businesses in California, Oregon and Washington affected by
the shutdown of the Pacific salmon season. Some Republicans criticized that
measure as pork that didn't belong in the farm bill but Thompson called it
"desperately needed."

A provision by Rep. Doris Matsui, D-Sacramento, to establish the fragile
Sacramento River watershed as a "national priority region" eligible to compete
with six other regions for $280 million for water projects also made it into the
bill.

According to the office of Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., California's top
specialty crops along with their 2006 value are: grapes, over $3 billion;
nursery and greenhouse products, $2.7 billion; almonds, $2 billion; lettuce,
$1.6 billion; strawberries, $1.2 billion; tomatoes, $1.1 billion; and
floriculture (flowers), $1 billion.

Feinstein and Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., both planned to support the bill
when the Senate votes, which was expected Thursday.

Of California's House delegation, all but three of the 34 Democrats voted "yes"
on the bill. The three who voted "no" were Reps. Henry Waxman of Los Angeles,
Pete Stark of Fremont and Jane Harman of Venice.

Of the 19 California Republicans, most voted "no" but there were four "yes"
votes: Reps. John Doolittle of Rocklin, Wally Herger of Marysville, Elton
Gallegly of Simi Valley and George Radanovich of Mariposa.

Rep. Mary Bono Mack, R-Palm Springs, didn't vote.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              587 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Oklahoman

                             June 8, 2005 Wednesday
                                  City Edition

Chesapeake makes senior note offering

BYLINE: Staff Reports

SECTION: BUSINESS; OKLAHOMA BRIEFS; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 479 words


ENERGY

Chesapeake Energy Corp. on Tuesday priced a $600 million offering of senior
notes and formally announced a $245 million tender offer.

The offering of $600 million in senior notes due Jan. 15, 2018, at an interest
rate of 6.25 percent were priced at 98.923 percent of par to yield 6.375 percent
to maturity.

The Oklahoma City energy company said it plans to use the proceeds from the
offering to pay for the tender offer of more than $245 million in 8.125 percent
senior notes due 2011 and of its $300 million aggregate principal amount of 9
percent senior notes due 2012.

<b>Kerr-McGee directors re-elected</b>

Kerr-McGee Corp. shareholders re-elected two directors in a belated vote
Tuesday.

William F. Wallace and Ian L. White-Thompson were confirmed nearly a month after
the Oklahoma City energy company held its annual shareholders meeting. The
director vote was delayed because of a deal with billionaire investor Carl Icahn
and his associates.

The famed corporate raider promised to withdraw his nomination of competing
directors in April after Kerr-McGee agreed to buy back $4 billion in stock in a
modified Dutch auction and sell about $2 billion in natural gas production
assets. The settlement also followed Kerr-McGee's announcement that it would
sell or spin off its chemicals unit, although the company has said it planned
the divestiture before Icahn made the suggestion.

IN OTHER NEWS

<b>Agricultural grants announced</b>

The state's Agricultural Enhancement and Diversification program received
$250,000 in appropriations this year to help producers establish diversified
products.

To receive the funds, producers must apply for the grants -- that can run as
much as $5,000 -- by July 1. Interest-free loans are also available to assist in
marketing and research for promoting value-added ventures and sales.

"All funds were awarded during the last application period in April, and we' re
thrilled the program received money to continue," said Rick Maloney, director of
the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry.

Applications are available online at www.oda.state.ok.us or by contacting Jason
Harvey at 522-5563 or by mail at Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food and
Forestry, 2800 Lincoln Blvd., Oklahoma City, OK 73105.

<b>Student wins FFA contest</b>

Chickasha high school student Cami Morris recently was named one of 10 winners
of the National FFA Organization's Risk Management Essay Contest.

Morris' essay was based on her supervised agricultural experience program at her
high school. As part of her winnings, Morris and her father took an expense-paid
trip to Washington to accept the award, where she met with their congressional
representatives, toured the White House and the Capitol, and met U.S. Department
of Agriculture officials. The contest is offered by the National FFA
Organization in partnership with the Rick Management Agency and the USDA.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2005 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              588 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 Daily Variety

                            January 12, 1993 Tuesday

Complex of Fear (Tues. (12), 9-11 p.m., CBS)

BYLINE: Griffin Gilbert

SECTION: REVIEW

LENGTH: 619 words


Filmed in Atlanta by Cosgrove-Meurer Prods. in association with World
International Network. Exec producers, John Cosgrove, Terry Meurer, J.C. Shardo;
producer, John Flynn; co-producer, Carrie Stein; director, Brian Grant; writers,
Dyanne Asimov, Matt Dorff; camera, Nic Knowland; editor, Ben Weissman; sound,
Brit Warner; art director, Guy Tuttle; music, Nan Mishkin.

Cast: Hart Bochner, Joe Don Baker, Chelsea Field, Brett Cullen, Ashley Gardner,
Jodan Williams, Russ Blackwell, Lisa Darr, Tom Nowicki, Ann Bronston, Kathryn
Firago, Terry Beaver, Brett Snell, Alexis Snell, Clarinda Ross, Robert
Treveiler, Farrah Forke.

Complex of Fear," which is based on fact, tells of a serial rapist and the
effects on the residents of the apartment complex where the rapes occurred.
Despite slight storyline glitches, and the fact that some of the characters come
across as throwaways from "thirtysomething," an air of suspense is maintained
from start to finish.

Centering around the relationship of newlyweds, police officer Ray (Hart
Bochner) and Michelle (Chelsea Field) Dolan, the story moves from fairly lame
scenes detailing their getting familiar with their new Ken and Barbie-type
neighbors, to their settling in after their move.

Scenes of a pool party and a dinner party help intro the central characters who
will later be viewed as potential suspects by the police.

When the rapist is interrupted before he rapes his first victim, the incident is
not announced to the other residents. Daily life continues until attack number
two. The victim this time has a "reputation," which in the police officers' eyes
throws a large question mark over whether it was actually a rape, so the attack
again goes unannounced.

It is not until attack No. 3 that the apartment residents are informed and
pandemonium ensues. Feeling somewhat responsible, Ray makes it his mission to
catch the rapist.

The direction of Brian Grant and camerawork of Nic Knowland deserve special
mention, particularly the frequent yet subtle shots through the rapist's POV as
he prowls the woods surrounding the complex, scouting for his next victim.

Also, Knowland's use of long shots creates a feeling of distance between Ray and
Michelle when their relationship starts to deteriorate after she confides in him
about an incident from her past.

There's no gratuitous sex or violence for shock value; instead, director Grant
and writers Dyanne Asimov and Matt Dorff create tension by showing the rapist
breaking into each victim's apartment, then cutting to the aftermath and the
police questioning. It is all very suspenseful in its effectiveness.

A small but important point is the vidpic's treatment of the police
interrogations of the victims after the rapes: In each case, the interviews are
conducted by policemen, not women, with little show of empathy; and the
interviews are never at the police station, but always in the victim's
apartment, where other police personnel are present.

During the telefilm, the FBI definition of a serial rapist is given by the
police as "a man who is insecure, feels threatened by women and so he is seeking
to exploit and humiliate them." Introduction of this info seems pivotal, yet
it's apparently forgotten by the filmmakers. When the identity of the rapist is
revealed, there is no background given on him illuminating why he is the rapist;
to the contrary, he's seemingly a normal guy, who displays none of the described
traits.

Nevertheless, pic is suspenseful, particularly in second half as the
relationship between Ray and Michelle is threatened, and the pace escalates in
the endeavor for rapist's capture.

Thesping is OK; Joe Don Baker as Detective Frank Farrell merits note.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1993 Daily Variety Ltd.
                               All Rights Reserved


                              589 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            November 3, 2009 Tuesday
                                  All Editions

Farmers' comments sought for general store in Dexter

BYLINE: DIANA BOWLEY OF THE NEWS STAFF

SECTION: Pg. B5

LENGTH: 306 words

DATELINE: DEXTER


Farmers from within a 25-mile radius of Dexter are being encouraged to attend a
public meeting at 7 p.m. Tuesday, Nov. 17, in the Dexter Town Council chambers
to comment on a proposed general store that will be devoted to selling locally
grown and produced foods.

The Dexter Regional Development Corp., in coordination with the town, received a
grant to renovate or rebuild the former Fossa building on Main Street into a
year-round general store that is expected to be open by August 2010. The
corporation also is seeking a USDA Value-Added Producers Grant to help cover the
first year's operating expenses.

"The year-round general store is just Phase I of the larger project we envision
that will include an online ordering system with possible delivery, the
development of a local creamery, warehousing for storage, developing a large-
scale shared greenhouse and opening a cafe," Judy Craig, coordinator of the
project, said this week.

Craig said corporation members, who toured the Dexter Cafe building next door to
the Fossa building, envision the cafe building's inclusion in the project at
some point. Funding would be needed to secure the privately owned building.
Craig said the dream is to serve breakfast and lunch in the cafe using locally
grown and produced products and to use the kitchen for educational purposes in
the evenings.

The corporation is looking for comments from local farmers and producers of
other goods on how to develop the general store. At the same time, the
corporation is identifying farmers who could contribute to the store.

In addition to the public meeting, a survey is being developed for farmers to
help develop a working relationship among providers, sellers and consumers,
Craig said.

For information, contact Craig at 924-3067 or e-mail her at
judy@DexterFarmProject.com

dianabdn@myfairpoint.net

876-4579

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2009 Bangor Daily News


                              590 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 8, 2009 Wednesday

Lending young farmers a hand: Ag secretary visits area farm to tout federal
grants

BYLINE: Susan Mires, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 450 words


Apr. 8--LATHROP, Mo. -- Craig Evans lives in the same house where he grew up, on
the farm his grandfather bought 64 years ago and where he and his wife, Kelly,
are raising their three children.

Visiting the Evans farm near Lathrop Tuesday, U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Tom
Vilsack praised that heritage.

"It's important to be rooted, which is one of the values rural America provides,
to be rooted and connected to the land," Mr. Vilsack said.

Because of the challenges farmers face, he wants the U.S. Department of
Agriculture to do more to help beginning producers. At a press conference, he
noted that the average age of American farmers has increased to 57, with the
number of farmers under age 25 decreasing by 30 percent.

"It is a difficult occupation, but it is very critical to the future of the
country that we continue these family farms," Mr. Vilsack said.

On Tuesday he announced that the U.S. Department of Agriculture is making $17
million available in grants for beginning farmers.

Chris and Kim Hiley of Gallatin, Mo., participated in the press conference. They
used USDA loans to purchase cattle to get started in farming. The loans have
made a big difference, said Mr. Hiley, 35.

"Just starting out, we're totally working on borrowed money," he said. "It's
hard to compete with established producers for land and leases."

Mr. Evans said he was also concerned about the high cost of doing business,
largely because of higher fuel and fertilizer prices.

"In the last year, my operating costs have gone up $125 an acre," he said.

That adds $9,000 in interest payments alone. Mr. Evans said he's worried that
efforts to cut carbon emissions will make it even more expensive to farm.

Mr. Vilsack said alternative energy can help agriculture offer solutions and
income-making opportunities for a cleaner environment. He also noted that nearly
half of all farmers require some form of off-farm income.

"We have to create not only great family farms, but strong rural communities.
Off-farm income makes it easier to help farmers," he said.

Portions of the stimulus package that include money for rural broadband Internet
access, highways and more money for food stamp recipients will benefit farms and
rural towns, Mr. Vilsack said.

Susan Mires can be reached at susanm@npgco.com

To see more of the St. Joseph News-Press or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.stjoenews-press.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090408-JM-Lending-young-farmers-a-hand-0408

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JM


                      Copyright 2009 St. Joseph News-Press


                              591 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 therecord.com

                              May 25, 2015 Monday

Stephen King miniseries to be filmed at Queen's Tavern in Ayr, owner says

BYLINE: jhicks@therecord.com

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 716 words


AYR - Weirdness coats the time-in-a-blender interior of the old Queen's Tavern
in Ayr.

Golden Elvis busts. A barber's chair throne fit for a monarch in a mullet. Eddie
Shack autographed nose-for-value photos. A Dirty Harry pinball machine. An
alas-poor-Yorick skull. A copy of a copy of a copy of an Andy Warhol print of a
hidden naked dude. Hawaiian-style leis with garlands of bottle caps linked
together in pop-top chains.

Look hard. Drink in each twisted talisman. The eclectic mix is electric.

"It's shock value," said Mary Ann Melnychuk, whose family has owned the
160-year-old bar for 36 years. "I try to do shock without offending anyone."

Yes, shock value is the quietly disquieting vibe in this shining anachronism.

Maybe that's why producers of the new Stephen King time-travel miniseries
"11.22.63" appear poised to rent out this quaint, but quirky Stanley Street
establishment - an old speakeasy where packs of university students have been
known to launch D.U.S.T.E.D. (Drink Unsuspecting Small-Town Establishment Dry)
raids of Tommyknocker mischief.

Melnychuk says she closes her place down for the cameras on June 7.

The timeless bar, with all its random silliness and needful things temporarily
removed, will revert to the late-1950s, early-1960s settings of King's 2011
bestselling what-if book focused on the date of the Kennedy assassination.

The set designers, who appeared by the busload last Wednesday, will be busy.

The Queen's will reopen as the tavern for business on the night of June 12.

A production publicist and assistant location manager contacted by The Record
this week via email provided no confirmation. But Melnychuk is preparing her bar
for a big star.

It is known that James Franco, that Oscar-nominated bag of bones, is the lead.
Surely, he'll appear out of the mist along the Nith River, she says.

The A-list Hollywood actor with the fire-starter grin might even appear in
scenes that may be shot in Hespeler's tiny downtown next month. Hespeler
business association executive director Karen Grant isn't giving out any coveted
details, although the village's Facebook page earlier this month confirmed the
production is coming this summer.

"I've been told not to reveal anything," Grant said in an email Friday.

But King, the great master author of mystery and misery, could make a cameo at
the Queen's Tavern. The producers have been mum on the matter with Melnychuk.

Will the Running Man himself show up?

"They can't say either way," Melnychuk said. "Why wouldn't he be an extra in a
bar, if that's his shtick? It's the perfect spot."

Four weeks ago, the production team came to Ayr seeking settings for the
nine-hour series about time portals hidden in diners, era-hopping schemes to
foil the Kennedy assassination and the perils of tinkering with history.

Melnychuk saw the location scouts scour the town's green mile, their faces
drawing thinner with growing desperation. The skeleton crew so out of place with
their clipboards and awkwardly-held cameras. She had to approach them.

"Of course, I'm a nosy parker," she said.

She asked them what was going on and invited them into the Queen's. They got
hooked.

"They just fell in love with the bar," she said. "They popped in and went, 'Oh,
my goodness. This bar is better than the one we picked in Hamilton.'"

So eat your palpitating heart out, Hamilton. Froth at the mouth like a rabid St.
Bernard, if you like. The Queen's Tavern in Ayr apparently won the gig of going
back in time.

And the old Ice House just down the street? That crumbling dark tower and
one-time creamery just might become a time portal in disguise. Step inside and
you might lose yourself in a fictional dead zone, Melnychuk muses.

The Queen's is no stranger to visiting stardom.

Sharon Stone shot a thriller here a decade ago. Dr. Ho, the Canadian back pain
relief guru, strolled in one Halloween.

Now, Franco and Stephen King may take a stool below a rainbow-coloured row of
eight-track cassettes lined up across the bar like tiny headstones in a crowded
pet cemetery.

Even better, Melnychuk will make a cauldron of cash to indulge this television
time trip.

A payday of $112,263 would be a fitting sum, right?

"Not that much," she said. "But it's worth my time to be closed."

And fooling with time - and its bloody toll - is what this horror show is all
about.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Metroland Media Group Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              592 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 therecord.com

                              May 24, 2015 Sunday

Queen's Tavern in Ayr fit for a King

BYLINE: jhicks@therecord.com

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 716 words


AYR - Weirdness coats the time-in-a-blender interior of the old Queen's Tavern
in Ayr.

Golden Elvis busts. A barber's chair throne fit for a monarch in a mullet. Eddie
Shack autographed nose-for-value photos. A Dirty Harry pinball machine. An
alas-poor-Yorick skull. A copy of a copy of a copy of an Andy Warhol print of a
hidden naked dude. Hawaiian-style leis with garlands of bottle caps linked
together in pop-top chains.

Look hard. Drink in each twisted talisman. The eclectic mix is electric.

"It's shock value," said Mary Ann Melnychuk, whose family has owned the
160-year-old bar for 36 years. "I try to do shock without offending anyone."

Yes, shock value is the quietly disquieting vibe in this shining anachronism.

Maybe that's why producers of the new Stephen King time-travel miniseries
"11.22.63" appear poised to rent out this quaint, but quirky Stanley Street
establishment - an old speakeasy where packs of university students have been
known to launch D.U.S.T.E.D. (Drink Unsuspecting Small-Town Establishment Dry)
raids of Tommyknocker mischief.

Melnychuk says she closes her place down for the cameras on June 7.

The timeless bar, with all its random silliness and needful things temporarily
removed, will revert to the late-1950s, early-1960s settings of King's 2011
bestselling what-if book focused on the date of the Kennedy assassination.

The set designers, who appeared by the busload last Wednesday, will be busy.

The Queen's will reopen as the tavern for business on the night of June 12.

A production publicist and assistant location manager contacted by The Record
this week via email provided no confirmation. But Melnychuk is preparing her bar
for a big star.

It is known that James Franco, that Oscar-nominated bag of bones, is the lead.
Surely, he'll appear out of the mist along the Nith River, she says.

The A-list Hollywood actor with the fire-starter grin might even appear in
scenes that may be shot in Hespeler's tiny downtown next month. Hespeler
business association executive director Karen Grant isn't giving out any coveted
details, although the village's Facebook page earlier this month confirmed the
production is coming this summer.

"I've been told not to reveal anything," Grant said in an email Friday.

But King, the great master author of mystery and misery, could make a cameo at
the Queen's Tavern. The producers have been mum on the matter with Melnychuk.

Will the Running Man himself show up?

"They can't say either way," Melnychuk said. "Why wouldn't he be an extra in a
bar, if that's his shtick? It's the perfect spot."

Four weeks ago, the production team came to Ayr seeking settings for the
nine-hour series about time portals hidden in diners, era-hopping schemes to
foil the Kennedy assassination and the perils of tinkering with history.

Melnychuk saw the location scouts scour the town's green mile, their faces
drawing thinner with growing desperation. The skeleton crew so out of place with
their clipboards and awkwardly-held cameras. She had to approach them.

"Of course, I'm a nosy parker," she said.

She asked them what was going on and invited them into the Queen's. They got
hooked.

"They just fell in love with the bar," she said. "They popped in and went, 'Oh,
my goodness. This bar is better than the one we picked in Hamilton.'"

So eat your palpitating heart out, Hamilton. Froth at the mouth like a rabid St.
Bernard, if you like. The Queen's Tavern in Ayr apparently won the gig of going
back in time.

And the old Ice House just down the street? That crumbling dark tower and
one-time creamery just might become a time portal in disguise. Step inside and
you might lose yourself in a fictional dead zone, Melnychuk muses.

The Queen's is no stranger to visiting stardom.

Sharon Stone shot a thriller here a decade ago. Dr. Ho, the Canadian back pain
relief guru, strolled in one Halloween.

Now, Franco and Stephen King may take a stool below a rainbow-coloured row of
eight-track cassettes lined up across the bar like tiny headstones in a crowded
pet cemetery.

Even better, Melnychuk will make a cauldron of cash to indulge this television
time trip.

A payday of $112,263 would be a fitting sum, right?

"Not that much," she said. "But it's worth my time to be closed."

And fooling with time - and its bloody toll - is what this horror show is all
about.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Metroland Media Group Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              593 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 BusinessWorld

                             June 16, 2009 Tuesday

Muscovado makers in Antique start targeting foreign markets

BYLINE: Nanette L. Guadalquiver

SECTION: Pg. S1/3

LENGTH: 602 words


BACOLOD CITY - Muscovado producers in Antique are getting assistance from the
Department of Science and Technology (DoST) to improve product quality to meet
the strict requirements of other markets in Asia, Europe, and North America.

Antique Vice-Governor Rhodora J. Cadiao told Science and Technology Secretary
Estrella F. Alabastro during her visit to the province last month that they once
exported muscovado to Japan, "but when it got there, it became moist."

The Industrial Technology Development Institute, which is attached to the DoST,
is formulating measures to standardize muscovado production to ensure that the
product meets international requirements on moisture content, microbial load and
color consistency, among other standards.

Antique, located west of Iloilo province on Panay island, is a major producer of
muscovado, or raw cane sugar, yielding about 30% of the country's supply.

Figures of the Antique Office of the Provincial Agriculturist show the province
produces an average of 2,632 tons of muscovado annually.

Quality issues, however, have prevented producers from going into exports,
unlike their counterparts in Iloilo and Negros Occidental.

Only one miller based in Negros Occidental, Alter Trade Manufacturing Corp., is
registered with three international muscovado certifying bodies, and has been
exporting the "Mascobado" brand to Japan and to European countries such as
France, Germany, and Italy since the mid-1990s.

Muscovado producers in Antique, however, have started improving production
processes and increased their prices after receiving assistance under the DoST
Small Enterprises Technology Upgrading Program.

AYS Realty and Development Corp. owned by Ulysses Solis, based in Patnongon
town, received an innovation system support fund of P350,000 in September last
year to augment its P2-million capital.

Based on a fact sheet provided by the DoST, the assistance enabled AYS Realty to
upgrade its production facilities to produce sediment-free sugar and ensure
compliance to food safety standards, leading to increased value of its muscovado
sugar from P40 to P200 per kilogram.

AYS Realty, which employs 10 workers, also increased its market share by
introducing muscovado sugar in sachet, with the installation of a packaging
equipment under the DoST packaging common service facility which includes a
form-fill-seal machine for sachet packaging, two band sealers, and a mechanical
sifter-cum-pulverizer.

Another beneficiary, the Hamungaya Sugar Mill in Belison town, was granted a
P100,000 assistance to upgrade its facilities under the Japanese
government-funded Kennedy Round 2 Productivity Enhancement Project (KR2 PEP)
that is administered by the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA).

Hamungaya Sugar Mill, which has a capital of P1 million on top of the government
grant and 50 workers, was also able to improve the quality of its muscovado. Now
that its product is sediment-free and compliant with food safety standards, the
mill has been able to increase its price to P35 per kilogram from P25/kg.

Meanwhile, the Polytechnic State College of Antique also received a
P1.195-million funding, P1.145 million from the DoST Grants-In-Aid Program and
P800,000 from the NEDA-KR2 PEP, for the implementation of projects for the
upgrading of the Antique muscovado industry, including assistance to eight major
mills in acquiring stainless steel troughs and settling tanks.

The beneficiary-mills were also provided technology training as well as
production consultancy and technical assistance on the establishment of
technology-based food processing incubation centers.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2009 BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              594 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                           November 5, 2015 Thursday

Antidumping or Countervailing Duty Investigations, Orders, or Reviews:
Corrosion-Resistant Steel Products from India, Italy, the People's Republic of
China, the Republic of Korea, and Taiwan

LENGTH: 3141  words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Washington, DC:  This Notice document was issued by the International Trade
Administration (ITA)



 Summary



 On June 3, 2015, the Department of Commerce (the Department) received
antidumping duty (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) petitions concerning imports
of corrosion-resistant steel products (CORE) from India, Italy, the People's
Republic of China (PRC), the Republic of Korea, and Taiwan. (1) On July 23,2015,
the Department received timely allegations that critical circumstances exist
with respect to imports of the merchandise under investigation. (2) Based on
information provided by Petitioners, data placed on the record of these
investigations by the mandatory respondents, and data collected by the
Department, the Department preliminarily determines that critical circumstances
exist for imports of CORE from certain producers and exporters from Italy, the
PRC, Korea, and Taiwan.



    Dates



 Effective date: November 5, 2015.

 For Further Information Contact



 Mark Hoadley, AD/CVD Operations, Enforcement and Compliance, International
Trade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, 14th Street and Constitution
Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20230; telephone: (202) 482-3148.

 Supplementary Information

 Background



 Section 703(e)(1) of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended (the Act), provides
that the Department will preliminarily determine that critical circumstances
exist in CVD investigations if there is a reasonable basis to believe or
suspect: (A) that &ldquo;the alleged countervailable subsidy&rdquo; is
inconsistent with the Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM) Agreement of
the World Trade Organization, and (B) that there have been massive imports of
the subject merchandise over a relatively short period. Section 733(e)(1) of the
Act provides that the Department will preliminarily determine that critical
circumstances exist in AD investigations if there is a reasonable basis to
believe or suspect: (A)(i) That there is a history of dumping and material
injury by reason of dumped imports in the United States or elsewhere of the
subject merchandise, or (ii) that the person by whom, or for whose account, the
merchandise was imported knew or should have known that the exporter was selling
the subject merchandise at less than its fair value and that there was likely to
be material injury by reason of such sales, and (B) that there have been massive
imports of the subject merchandise over a relatively short period. Section 19
CFR 351.206 provides that imports must increase by at least 15 percent during
the &ldquo;relatively short period&rdquo; to be considered &ldquo;massive&rdquo;
and defines a &ldquo;relatively short period&rdquo; as normally being the period
beginning on the date the proceeding begins (i.e., the date the petition is
filed) and ending at least three months later. (3) The regulations also provide,
however, that, if the Department finds that importers, or exporters or
producers, had reason to believe, at some time prior to the beginning of the
proceeding, that a proceeding was likely, the Department may consider a period
of not less than three months from that earlier time. (4)

 Alleged Countervailable Subsidies Are Inconsistent With the SCM Agreement



 To determine whether an alleged countervailable subsidy is inconsistent with
the SCM Agreement, in accordance with section 703(e)(1)(A) of the Act, the
Department considered the evidence currently on the record of the five CVD
investigations. Specifically, as determined in our initiation checklists, the
following subsidy programs, alleged in the Petitions and supported by
information reasonably available to Petitioners, appear to be either export
contingent or contingent upon the use of domestic goods over imported goods,
which would render them inconsistent with the SCM Agreement.



     India: Four export-contingent duty exemption/remission schemes, (5) four
duty and tax exemption programs for &ldquo;Export Oriented Units,&rdquo; (6) the
Export Promotion of Capital Goods Scheme, (7) Pre-Shipment and Post-Shipment
Export Financing, (8) Market Development Assistance Scheme, (9) Market Access
Initiative, (10) Focus Product Scheme, (11) Status Certificate Program, (12)
five duty and tax exemption programs for special economic zones, (13)
Incremental Exports Incentivisation Scheme, (14) and three duty and tax
exemption programs provided by the state of Gujarat for special economic zones
(15)



     Italy: Several export-contingent preferential financial products provided
by the Special Section for Export Credit Insurance (16)



     The PRC: Export loans, (17) Income Tax Credits for Domestically-Owned
Companies Purchasing Domestically Produced Equipment, (18) Preferential Income
Tax Subsidies for Foreign-Invested Enterprises&mdash;Export Oriented FIEs, (19)
Foreign Trade Development Fund Grants, (20) Export Assistance Grants, (21)
Programs to Rebate Antidumping Legal Fees, (22) Subsidies for Development of
Famous Export Brands and China World Top Brands, (23) Sub-Central Government
Programs to Promote Famous Export Brands and China World Top Brands, (24) and
Export Interest Subsidies (25)



     Korea: Several export-contingent preferential financial products and
services provided by the Korean Export-Import Bank Countervailable Subsidy
Programs, (26) preferential loans from the Korea Development Bank and Industrial
Base Fund, (27) and export financing provided by the Korea Trade Insurance
Corporation (28)



     Taiwan: Grants for International Development Activities (29)



 Therefore, the Department preliminarily determines that there are alleged
subsidies in each CVD investigation inconsistent with the SCM agreement.

 History of Dumping and Material Injury/Knowledge of Sales Below Fair Value and
Material Injury



 In order to determine whether there is a history of dumping pursuant to section
733(e)(1)(A)(i) of the Act, the Department generally considers current or
previous AD orders on subject merchandise from the country in question in the
United States and current orders imposed by other countries with regard to
imports of the same merchandise. The Department has previously issued an AD
order on COREfrom Korea, (30) based on nearly identical HTS categories, as well
as AD orders on carbon steel flat products from the PRC. (31) Moreover, there
are current AD orders imposed by other World Trade Organization members against
certain coated steel products (i.e., carbon steel flat products either clad,
plated or coated with zinc, aluminum, or nickel) from Korea, the PRC, and
Taiwan. (32) Certain HTS numbers subject to these orders overlap with HTS
numbers listed under our current CORE scope. Therefore, there is a history of
dumping of subject merchandise exported from Korea, the PRC, and Taiwan.



 To determine whether importers knew or should have known that exporters were
selling at less than fair value, we typically consider the magnitude of dumping
margins, including margins alleged in petitions. (33) The Department has found
margins of 15 to 25 percent (depending on whether sales are export price sales
or constructed export price sales) to be sufficient for this purpose. (34)
Dumping margins alleged in all five AD petitions are significantly above the 15
to 25 percent threshold: 71.09 percent (India), (35) 123.76 percent (Italy),
(36) 80.06 percent (Korea), (37) 120.20 percent (the PRC), (38) and 84.40
percent (Taiwan). (39) Therefore, on that basis, we preliminarily conclude
importers knew or should have known exporters in all five countries were selling
at less than fair value.



 To determine whether importers knew or should have known that there was likely
to be material injury, we typically consider the preliminary injury
determinations of the International Trade Commission (ITC). (40) If the ITC
finds material injury (as opposed to the threat of injury), we normally find
that the ITC's determination provided importers with sufficient knowledge of
injury. Where, as in this case, (41) the ITC finds only threat of material
injury, the Department may consider additional sources of information, such as
trade and price statistics or press reports. (42) Petitioners placed several
press reports on the record indicating injury. For example: U.S. steel companies
are struggling against a combination of lower oil prices, oversupply and
excessive imports fed by a strong dollar. Those headwinds have become a perfect
storm that could lead to more idled plants and layoffs, and spur a major
international trade case against China, which steel makers accuse of
undercutting the market with artificially low-priced product. U.S. Steel
executives have expressed the great concern about cheap imports. On Thursday,
CEO and President Mario Longhi testified before the Congressional Steel Caucus
and warned of long-term damage to domestic steel makers from what the industry
says is illegal dumping by foreign companies. China's state-subsidized industry
continue to pump out steel, even as demand slows at home. That has led to
surging exports, particularly to the United States. (43)



 In addition, the Department has relied on massive imports and high dumping
margins as factors indicating importers knew or should have known that there was
likely to be material injury. (44) As noted above, dumping margins alleged in
the five AD petitions range from 71.09 percent to 123.76 percent. As discussed
below, we have determined imports were massive for certain producers/exporters
shipping from Italy, Korea, the PRC, and Taiwan. Therefore, we preliminarily
conclude importers knew or should have known that there was likely to be
material injury as a result of sales sold at less than fair value, exported from
all five countries.

 Massive Imports



 In determining whether there are &ldquo;massive imports&rdquo; over a
&ldquo;relatively short period,&rdquo; pursuant to sections 703(e)(1)(B) and
733(e)(1)(B) of the Act, the Department normally compares the import volumes of
the subject merchandise for at least three months immediately preceding the
filing of the petition (i.e., the &ldquo;base period&rdquo;) to a comparable
period of at least three months following the filing of the petition (i.e., the
&ldquo;comparison period&rdquo;). Imports normally will be considered massive
when imports during the comparison period have increased by 15 percent or more
compared to imports during the base period.



 Based on evidence provided by Petitioners, the Department finds that pursuant
to 19 CFR 351.206(i), importers, exporters or producers had reason to believe,
at some time prior to the filing of the petition, that a proceeding was likely.
Specifically, the Department concludes that the factual information provided by
Petitioners indicates that by March 2015, importers, exporters or producers had
reason to believe that proceedings were likely. Among the documents Petitioners
provided to support their claim of so-called &ldquo;early knowledge,&rdquo; the
Department finds the following particularly relevant.



     On March 10, 2015, Steel Market Update acknowledged and responded to an
influx of &ldquo;recent&rdquo; inquiries fromimporters of cold-rolled steel and
CORE steel products &ldquo;asking questions about the potential for a trade case
or anti-dumping filing by the domestic mills against foreign steel
imports.&rdquo; (45)



     On March 26, 2015, American Metal Market issued a press release stating
that nearly 70 percent of industry participants expected cold-rolled and CORE
steel cases to be filed in 2015. (46)



     On March 27, 2015, the Pittsburgh Tribune published an article stating that
&ldquo;domestic steel makers are beginning to take their case to
Washington.&rdquo; One expert quoted in the article concluded that a trade case
appeared &ldquo;inevitable.&rdquo; (47)



     On March 30, 2015, Barron's published analysis by Credit Suisse concluding
U.S. steel industry officials had &ldquo;no intention of delay&rdquo; and would
pursue trade remedies as soon as possible. The article states that the U.S.
industry would not pursue safeguard actions, but instead would pursue AD/CVD
remedies focused on hot-rolled coil, cold-rolled coil, and CORE steel products.
(48)



 While additional information presented in Petitioners' exhibits indicate rumors
of trade cases had been circulating as far back as 2014, (49) the above
statements indicate that by March 2015, these rumors had turned to expectations
among steel importers, exporters, and producers that forthcoming petitions were
inevitable.



 Thus, in order to determine whether there has been a massive surge in imports
for each cooperating mandatory respondent, the Department compared the total
volume of shipments from March 2015 through September 2015 (all months for which
data was available) with the preceding seven-month period of August 2014 through
February 2015. For &ldquo;all others,&rdquo; the Department compared Global
Trade Atlas (GTA) data for the period March through August (the last month for
which GTA data is currently available) with the proceeding six-month period of
September 2014 through February 2015. (50) We first subtracted shipments
reported by the cooperating mandatory respondents from the GTA data. For
non-cooperating mandatory respondents (i.e., those mandatory respondents that
did not respond to our critical circumstances questionnaire or who otherwise
indicated their unwillingness to participate in the investigations), we
determined, on the basis of adverse facts available, (51) that there has been a
massive surge in imports. Accordingly, we preliminarily determined the following
producers/exporters had massive surges in imports. (52)



     Italy (C-475-833): ILVA S.p.A. (ILVA)

     Korea (A-580-878): Hyundai Steel Company (Hyundai); &ldquo;All
Others&rdquo;

     Korea (C-580-879): &ldquo;All Others&rdquo;

     PRC (A-570-026): the PRC-wide entity; Hebei Iron & Steel Co., Ltd.
(Tangshan Branch) (Tangshan); Baoshan Iron & Steel Co., Ltd. (Baoshan)

     PRC (C-570-027): Angang Group Hong Kong Company Ltd. (Angang); Duferco S.A.
(Duferco); Handan Iron & Steel Group (Handan); Changshu Everbright Material
Technology (Everbright); Baoshan

     Taiwan (A-583-856 and C-583-857): &ldquo;All Others&rdquo;



 Conclusion



 Based on the criteria and findings discussed above, we preliminarily determine
that critical circumstances exist with respect to imports of corrosion-resistant
steel products shipped by certain producers/exporters. Our findings are
summarized as follows.

 Country    Case No.    Affirmative preliminarycritical
circumstancesdetermination    Negative preliminarycritical
circumstancesdetermination

 PRC    A-570-026    the PRC-wide entity; Tangshan; Baoshan    Yieh Phui (China)
Technomaterial Co., Ltd. (YPC); All Other producers/exporters entitled to a
separate rate.

     C-570-027    Angang, Duferco, Handan, Everbright, Baoshan    YPC; All Other
producers/exporters.

 Korea    A-580-878    Hyundai; All Other producers/exporters    Dongkuk Steel
Mill Co., Ltd. (Dongkuk/Union).

     C-580-879    All Other producers/exporters    Dongbu Steel Co., Ltd.
(Dongbu); Dongkuk/Union.

 Taiwan    A-583-856    All Other producers/exporters    Yieh Phui Enterprises
Co., Ltd. (Yieh Phui); Prosperity Tieh Enterprises Co., Ltd. (Prosperity).

     C-583-857    All Other producers/exporters    Yieh Phui; Prosperity.

 India    A-533-863    no companies    Uttam Galva Steels, Ltd. (Uttam); JSW
Steel Limited (JSW); All Other producers/exporters.

     C-533-864    no companies    Uttam; JSW; All Other producers/exporters.

 Italy    A-475-832    no companies    Acciaieria Arvedi S.p.A. (Arvedi);
Marcegaglia S.p.A. (Marcegaglia); All Other producers/exporters.

     C-475-833    ILVA    Arvedi; Marcegaglia; All Other producers/exporters.

 Final Critical Circumstances Determinations



 We will issue final determinations concerning critical circumstances when we
issue our final subsidy and less-than-fair-value determinations. All interested
parties will have the opportunity to address these determinations in case briefs
to be submitted after completion of the preliminary subsidies and less than fair
value determinations.

 ITC Notification



 In accordance with sections 703(f) and 733(f) of the Act, we will notify the
ITC of our determinations.

 Suspension of Liquidation



 In accordance with sections 703(e)(2), because we have preliminarily found that
critical circumstances exist with regard to imports exported by certain
producers and exporters, if we make an affirmative preliminary determination
that countervailable subsidies have been provided to these same producers/
exporters at above de minimis rates, (53) we will instruct U.S. Customs and
Border Protection (CBP) to suspend liquidation of all entries of subject
merchandise from these producers/exporters that are entered, or withdrawn from
warehouse, for consumption on or after the date that is 90 days prior to the
effective date of &ldquo;provisional measures&rdquo; (e.g., the date of
publication in theFederal Registerof the notice of an affirmative preliminary
determination that countervailable subsidies have been provided at above de
minimis rates). At such time, we will also instruct CBP to require a cash
deposit equal to the estimated preliminary subsidy rates reflected in the
preliminary determination published in theFederal Register. This suspension of
liquidation will remain in effect until further notice.



 In accordance with sections 733(e)(2), because we have preliminarily found that
critical circumstances exist with regard to imports exported by certain
producers and exporters, if we make an affirmative preliminary determination
that sales at less than fair value have been made by these same producers/
exporters at above de minimis rates, (54) we will instruct CBP to suspend
liquidation of all entries of subject merchandise from these producers/exporters
that are entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption on or after the
date that is 90 days prior to the effective date of &ldquo;provisional
measures&rdquo; (e.g., the date of publication in theFederal Registerof the
notice of an affirmative preliminary determination of sales at less than fair
value at above de minimis rates). At such time, we will also instruct CBP to
require a cash deposit equal to the estimated preliminary dumping margins
reflected in the preliminary determination published in theFederal Register.
This suspension of liquidation will remain in effect until further notice.



 This notice is issued and published pursuant to section 777(i) of the Act and
19 CFR 351.206(c)(2).

 Dated: October 29, 2015.

 Paul Piquado,

 Assistant Secretary for Enforcement and Compliance.

 [FR Doc. 2015-28252 Filed 11-4-15; 8:45 am]

 BILLING CODE 3510-DS-P



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              595 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             March 11, 2012 Sunday

The Journal Record Business Briefs: March 11, 2012

BYLINE: The Journal Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1292  words


Beef quality workshop set ARDMORE - The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation will
present a Beef Quality Assurance workshop from 1:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. March 29
at the Noble Foundation Kruse Auditorium in Ardmore. Beef Quality Assurance is a
national program created to raise consumer confidence through offering
management education and guidelines for the beef industry. The workshop will
include information on standards for animal care, recordkeeping, nutrition and
carcass quality. "Understanding the value and fundamentals of BQA enables
producers to help the industry in its efforts to maximize consumer confidence
and acceptance of beef and beef products," said Robert Wells, livestock
consultant. "It is vital that as an industry we continue to produce the world's
safest, highest-quality beef for consumers both nationally and internationally.
" The seminar is free. Registration information is at www.noble.org/agevents. -
Staff report Inhofe to speak at Peanut Expo LONE WOLF - Peanut producers from
across the state will meet Friday for the 2012 Oklahoma Peanut Expo at the
Quartz Mountain Resort near Lone Wolf.

Speakers will include Republican U.S. Sen. Jim Inhofe. The annual event is a
collaborative effort of the Oklahoma Peanut Commission, Oklahoma State
University and peanut sheller interests in the Southwest. The program includes
promotion updates, the peanut marketing outlook, production tips on variety
selection, disease and weed control, field technology and a national peanut
revenue protection proposal. At the conclusion of the conference, producers from
Beckham, Custer, Dewey, Ellis, Greer, Harmon, Jackson, Kiowa, Roger Mills,
Tillman and Washita counties will caucus to nominate four peanut farmers to
serve three-year terms representing District 3 on the Oklahoma Peanut
Commission. Current commissioners, Joe D. White of Frederick and Les Crall of
Weatherford, are eligible for nomination. - Staff report Authority approves
turnpike projects OKLAHOMA CITY - The Oklahoma Turnpike Authority has approved
two construction projects that will increase the number of lanes on two of the
busiest turnpikes in the state. Authority members approved expanding the Creek
Turnpike in Tulsa and the Kilpatrick Turnpike in Oklahoma City from four lanes
to six. Construction could begin as early as April. Sherwood Construction
submitted the lowest bid for the Creek Turnpike. Sherwood's bid was $58.9
million and should take about a year and three months to complete. Duit
Construction and TTK Construction combined for the lowest bid on the Kilpatrick
Turnpike at $54.8 million. The project should be completed in 13 months. The
project on the Creek Turnpike will expand the area from U.S. Highway 75 to
Memorial Road, while expansion on the Kilpatrick will be from Eastern Avenue to
MacArthur. "These bids are well under the engineer's estimate which will allow
us to bring other projects to the table earlier," said Tim Stewart, OTA deputy
director. "And the time frame to complete the projects will be an added
benefit," Stewart said. "Instead of our customers being inconvenienced for two
years, both of these projects will be completed in just over a year. "
Construction on both projects is expected to begin in April. - Staff report BOK
Financial ranked among top retirement providers TULSA - BOK Financial was ranked
among top retirement plan providers in the country, according to the Plansponsor
Defined Contribution Survey. The annual survey asks employers about their
retirement plan and then compares retirement plan providers. Survey results
showed that 100 percent of BOK Financial clients are likely to recommend BOK
Financial to others, with more than 88 percent saying they are extremely likely.
BOK Financial ranked in the top 10 for average client participation rate, a
measure of how many eligible employees are participating in their company's
retirement plan. BOK Financial received "Best in Class" awards in numerous
categories. For participant services, the company was recognized for its
participant call center, website functionality, online tools/services,
participant statements, enrollment assistance, on-site meetings, range of
investments and participant fee disclosure. For plan sponsor services, BOK
Financial was recognized for its Form 5500 processing, compliance
support/testing, legislative/regulatory updates, account team knowledge, staff
consistency, plan design flexibility, fee "cost-to-value" and service
responsiveness. Tulsa-based BOK Financial was one of 47 providers ranked in the
survey. - Staff report Oklahoma pork producers to meet in OKC MIDWEST CITY -
More than 150 producers are expected to attend the Oklahoma Pork Congress on
Friday at the Reed Center in Midwest City. The 2012 Oklahoma Environmental
Steward winner will be announced at a luncheon. The meeting will also include
discussion of the legislative session. Rich Robinson and Eddie Robinson, owners
and operators of Robinson Farms, will be inducted into the okPORK Hall of Fame.
For information, visit www.okpork.org. - Staff report Orchids Paper declares
dividend PRYOR - The board of directors of Orchids Paper Products Co. has
authorized a quarterly cash dividend of 20 cents per share of common stock. The
dividend is payable March 28 to stockholders of record March 19. - Staff report
Helmerich & Payne elects director TULSA - Donald Robillard Jr. was elected a
director at Helmerich & Payne's annual shareholders meeting. Robillard is senior
vice president and chief financial officer of Hunt Consolidated Inc. - Staff
report AEE sets luncheon OKLAHOMA CITY - The Oklahoma City Chapter of the
Association of Energy Engineers has scheduled a lunch-and-learn meeting on March
21. "Energy Plans, Opportunities and Codes in Oklahoma" will be the topic. The
meeting scheduled from 8 a.m. to 11:30 a.m., followed by lunch at the OG&E
Technology Center, 220 E. Wilshire Blvd., Oklahoma City. Speakers will include
James P. (Jay) Albert, Oklahoma deputy secretary of energy, and Temur Akhmedov,
a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design-accredited professional with
Engineered Systems and Energy Solutions Inc. For information, call Roger Farrer
at (405) 359-2523 or Tim Thompson at (405) 553-8498. - Staff report EPA awards
grant to Oklahoma Department of Labor OKLAHOMA CITY - The Environmental
Protection Agency has awarded a $234,713 grant to the Oklahoma Department of
Labor. The money is allocated for inspections and encouraging compliance with
the Asbestos in Schools Program. The ODOL will complete 100 audit inspections in
Oklahoma schools during 2012 and verify asbestos workers are properly trained
and accredited. - Staff report Specialty crop grants available OKLAHOMA CITY -
Grants are available to promote the production of specialty crops including
fruits, vegetables and tree nuts. The Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food
and Forestry is accepting applications for $384,000 in grants to enhance the
competitiveness of specialty crops, according to Agriculture Marketing
Coordinator Jason Harvey. April 20 is the deadline for grant applications.
"There's a lot to be gained by expanding Oklahoma's specialty crop industry,"
Harvey said. "The grants allow agricultural organizations and individuals to do
research on growing techniques or developing new varieties and then share the
information with others. " Grant applications are at
www.ag.ok.gov/mktdev/loans.htm. - Staff report Nichols to speak at OKC Town Hall
OKLAHOMA CITY - Larry Nichols, executive chairman of Devon Energy, will be the
speaker for OKC Town Hall at 10:30 a.m. March 22 at St. Luke's United Methodist
Church, 222nd NW 15th St. in Oklahoma City. Tickets are $15 and are available by
calling (405) 848-4727. - Staff report

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              596 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                   The Blair Press (Blair-Taylor, Wisconsin)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                October 28, 2010

Agricultural Grant Programs work shop to be held in Chippewa Falls

BYLINE: The Blair Press-Taylor staff

LENGTH: 340  words


An upcoming workshop is designed to help farmers and agricultural entrepreneurs
develop strategies to access state and federal grants and other resources. The
workshop will also give prospective applicants information, tools and training
to strengthen applications made to grant programs in order to attract increased
capital to Wisconsin agricultural industry.

Attend the workshop to help you identify which grants might be right for your
business. The workshop will also discuss ways to plan your business project and
strengthen your application. Specific grant programs to be covered
include:%<br></br>%<br></br>USDA's Value Added Producer Grant (VAPG) program
provides planning and working capital funds to farmers and farmer-based
enterprises to develop and implement value-added ventures.

DATCP's Agricultural Development and Diversification (ADD) grant program funds
initiatives that develop new value-added products, new markets, or new
technologies in agriculture.%<br></br>%<br></br>USDA's Sustainable Agriculture
Research and Education (SARE) grant program funds research, marketing and
demonstration projects.%<br></br>%<br></br>USDA's Specialty Crop Block Grant
program funds endeavors that enhance the competitiveness ot. Wisconsin Specialty
Crops%<br></br>%<br></br>DATCP's Buy Local, Buy Wisconsin grant program, which
funds projects that will increase the. demand for and supply of locally;
produced foods in Wisconsin.

The workshop will be held at the' Village of Lake Hallie Hall, 13033! 30th Ave.
Chippewa Falls. A regis-; tration fee of $15.00 will cover the cost of lunch and
materials. To register, please contact Diane Tiry. For more information you may
also contact Trisha Wagner at the Jackson County Extension office.%<br></br>%

<br></br>Copyright 2010 The Blair Press-Taylor, Blair, Wisconsin. All Rights
Reserved. This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed
in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced
without express, written consent from SmallTownPapers, Inc.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Agriculture

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BLP

                      Copyright 2010 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2010 The Blair Press Taylor


                              597 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                      DNA

                           January 31, 2013 Thursday

A slice of FDI pie for small farmers;
Sonia-led NAC asks govt to ensure that retail chains procure 15-20% of goods
from marginal farmers

BYLINE: Iftikhar Gilani

LENGTH: 615  words


Congress president Sonia Gandhi-led National Advisory Council (NAC) has asked
the UPA government to make it mandatory for foreign investors in multi-brand
retail to procure 15-20 per cent from small and marginal farmers. The government
in its guidelines has already made it mandatory for global retail chains to
procure 30 per cent of the products from small-scale industries.

The NAC in its meeting last week called for extending benefits of the FDI to
small and marginal farmers to change their lot. It says the thrust of the
recommendations was to promote farmer producer organisations (FPOs) for
"inclusive growth".

Ironically, the advisory council has taken a leaf out of the BJP-ruled Madhya
Pradesh. The NAC report gives credit to MP that pioneered FPOs with an initial
capital grant of Rs 25 lakh and infrastructure support like warehouse, land,
machinery, etc under various schemes. The report says the government can give
matching grant to FPOs to double the members' equity, subject to Rs 10 lakh per
FPO under the existing centrally-sponsored schemes of the rural development and
agriculture ministries. "Such bodies will quickly stabilise, though with initial
government funding, if they become conduit for the purchases made by the retail
and wholesale shops opened under FDI," it says.

The paper further says that FPO membership should not be based on ownership of
land but on the concept of shareholding. It says this will make it open for
membership to any producer, including tenant and landless farmers, women, Dalits
and tribals, without any need to prove title to land.

The NAC wants the government to commit funds as grant to the FPOs for at least
three years to help them "build their capacities to tap high value markets and
enter into partnership with private and public entities on more equitable
terms". It says the government can give matching grant to FPOs to double the
members' equity, subject to Rs 10 lakh per FPO under the existing
centrally-sponsored schemes of rural development and agriculture ministries.

"The promotional cost for an FPO of average 1000-1,200 members in a cluster of
15-20 village is about Rs35 lakh over a period of three years or about Rs 1,200
per farmer per year. Cost includes institutional development, capacity building
and administrative overheads."

It says FPOs can tackle the problems that small and marginal farmers face like
shrinking land asset per head as the family dependent on the same piece of land
grows, rising per unit cost of cultivation, shrinking profit margins as also
difficulties in accessing critical inputs like credit, water, power, seeds and
fertilisers. They suffer because of weak bargaining with market agents, giving
them low returns on investment.

NAC's way forward

The RBI should drop the collateral requirement of FPO up to Rs 25 lakh,
recognising it as the federated body of primary help groups who are already
eligible for collateral free loan up to Rs 5 lakh

Rate of interest for FPOs must be on par with the rate charged from individual
farmers for crop loans, with a moratorium not to charge commercial interest at
least for initial five years

The scope of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small enterprises
must be expanded to cover FPOs to require no collateral security up to Rs 1
crore

Create window of venture capital support up to Rs 1 crore to FPOs without
collateral

Extend tax exemptions to FPOs alike the cooperatives under Income Tax, Sales Tax
and under state and local taxes

Include FPOs as a recognised category of institutions under the Agriculture
Produce Marketing Committee Act at the state levels and exempt them from the
Mandi fee if trade is executed outside the market yard

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2013 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis),
                           distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              598 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                            April 19, 2012 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Party candidates pitch policies to rural community residents; Redford claims
Wildrose may cut agency

BYLINE: Darcy Henton And Keith Gerein, Calgary Herald And Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: LACOMBE


With polls showing Tory support plummeting in their traditional bastion of rural
Alberta, leaders of the front-running Wildrose and Progressive Conservative
par-ties heightened their pitches to farmers and rural communities Wednesday.

PC Leader Alison Redford stopped at a potato farm out-side Lacombe to throw her
support behind a $40-mil-lion agriculture agency that she claims could be
chopped under a Wildrose government.

She said the Alberta Live-stock and Meat Agency (AL-MA) is critical to growing
Alberta agriculture's share of the world market. "ALMA is a fantastic agency,"
she said. "It allows us to work with producers in the industry to market
products overseas. My concern is the Wildrose wants to cancel the agency. They
don't understand the importance of working with industry to develop global
markets."

Redford said that if the Wil-drose follows up on its plan to kill ALMA, the
party will be hurting rural Alberta.

"We heard repeatedly in rural Alberta that ALMA has helped ensure that our
agriculture industry remains sustainable and competitive," she said at
Scholing's Produce Inc.

But Wildrose Leader Danielle Smith said her party hasn't yet decided what to do
with the agency. She said her party initially planned to dismantle ALMA, but she
has since heard mixed reviews from industry.

As such, she said a Wildrose government would need to do some consultations
before deciding whether to shut down or change the program. "What we don't like
about ALMA is the direct subsidies to individual firms," Smith said Wednesday
from a dog shelter east of Ponoka. "We think that corporate welfare is something
government shouldn't be doing."

She said the PC government created the agency without consultation, and her
party doesn't want to make the same mistake in dismantling it without
consultation.

The organization was created in 2009 to support research, increase market access
and enhance the value chain, through a variety of programs and grants. It has
approved more than $80 million for projects that enhance and support the
livestock industry.

Rural PC candidate Doug Griffiths, who served as municipal affairs minister in
Red-ford's cabinet, said the agency takes producers from various stages of the
value-added chain and pulls them together to develop a co-ordinated marketing
strategy.

"Like every other organization when it started it had a couple of stumbles," he
said. "It has had some challenges but I would say it has been very successful."

Cattle producer Tony Saretsky said ALMA has done good work in bringing together
all cattle producers in the market chain to speak as one voice, but it has had
its failings.

"We wouldn't want to see it lost, and if it is going to be changed there needs
to be some facsimile that replaces it," he said. Some cattle producers have
expressed concern about the amount of personal information they have to now
provide to enable a high level of tracking of the origins of their herds, he
said. Sarestsky believes the tracking data are necessary to demonstrate to
consumers Alberta beef is safe. But he had some concerns about the land bills
that Redford's government has passed.

"Property rights is a hot potato," he said chuckling at his pun. "I think some
of the quick decisions on very important topics have caused problems."

The Wildrose leader said producers have been most offended by Tory land-use
bills that Smith says give the province power to take property away without
proper compensation or access to the courts.

The Conservatives have denied the legislation infringes on anyone's property
rights

The Journal and the Herald's Taste Alberta program is a partnership with
Alberta's food producer associations. Some funding for the project comes
indirectly through ALMA.

dhenton@calgaryherald.com kgerein@edmontonjournal. com

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Megan Voss, Edmonton Journal; Tory Leader Alison Redford praised the
Alberta Livestock and Meat Agency on Wednesday.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              599 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Farmers Weekly

                               December 14, 2012

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 406 words


Dairy farmers will be able to boost their marketing power by forming producer
organisations under proposals contained in a series of long-awaited government
consultations.

New rules will allow dairy farmers to come together and form producer
organisations to sell their milk to processing companies rather than having to
negotiate a price as individuals. Farmers have until mid-January to give their
views on the proposals.

Farm minister David Heath launched the consultation for English farmers during a
visit to the Isle of Wight on Tuesday (11 December). Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland are holding their own separate consultations.

Mr Heath said the move would give farmers more influence over contractual terms,
conditions and prices. "England's dairy industry is world-leading yet still has
so much potential to expand, and I'm convinced that better industry
collaboration is the key," he said.

Mr Heath also launched a separate scheme allowing English farmers to apply for
£5m of grants to develop new market opportunities through co-operation. The £5m
fund will see grants of at least £25,000 issued to support groups of milk
producers.

The UK currently imports £1.2bn more dairy produce than it exports. Under the
new plans, producer organisations could each market up to one third of UK milk
production. Organisations would negotiate milk prices, and supply terms and
conditions on behalf of their members.

Rural Affairs Secretary Richard Lochhead said consultation was one of a number
of positive developments for the industry. It would give those with an interest
the opportunity to air their views on the implementation of the EU dairy
package.

"I firmly believe Scotland's dairy industry has huge potential, which is why I
have commissioned a strategic review - due to report back early next year - to
look at ways in which we can add value to our dairy products and find ways to
drive up export volumes as well as domestic sales."

The NFU said the overall outcome needed to be a better deal for dairy farmers.
Although farmgate prices had started to increase, many producers still faced a
challenging winter, said NFU dairy adviser Rob Newbery .

"There is certainly potential for farmers to increase their bargaining power. We
are in a transitional phase for the sector and still need to see fairer
contracts and a better return for dairy farmers. There is no reason for the
government to take its foot off the gas."

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2012 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              600 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                                 July 16, 2003

Report highlights low cost cereals

SECTION: Business; Farm/Food; Alcohol; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 351 words


Kingshay's latest independent report "Moist Grain for Dairy Cows," helps
producers take advantage of low cost cereals. It highlights the feed value of
three different grain treatments: urea treated, crimped grain and biological
additive, and provides detail on the different processes required for each type.
Author John Hocknell explained: "Many dairy farms lack dry grain storage, so
moist grain treatments offer a practical way for producers to take advantage of
the current low cost of cereals.  We looked in depth at three different
processes.  We found that some treatments will suit one farm, while others would
be impractical for that system." More details are available on 01458 851 555.
Farming garden The NFU has been awarded a prestigious Royal Horticultural
Society Gold Medal at the Hampton Court Flower Show for the sixth year running,
just weeks after winning an RHS Gold at the Chelsea Flower Show, for the seventh
year in succession. The winning display of British cut flowers and plants, field
fruit and vegetables was designed by Penny Riley, of UK Horticulture, who has
created all the NFU's award winning gardens of recent years. The garden was
subtly redesigned after the Chelsea Flower Show to reflect different crops and
flowers now in season, such as red and blackcurrants, red chicory and
sunflowers.

Fun boat trip Jillie Dale, of Cornwall FWAG, is organising a fun boat trip up
the River Fal from Falmouth on August 7. There will be musical entertainment and
a pasty included in the ticket price - and the boat will also have a licensed
bar. More details are available from Mrs Dale on 01326 373823.

Grants guide Lloyds TSB Agriculture has updated its publication "Your Guide to
Farm and Rural Grants 2003." Humphrey Richards, agricultural manager for the
bank in Devon, said: "The fundamental principal of grant aid has changed over
the past decade. Government grants and schemes are now far more specific and
targeted to achieve benefits for society in general and the rural economy in
particular." The guides are available from local Lloyds TSB branches.


LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

                      Copyright 2003 Western Morning News


                              601 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            February 17, 2017 Friday

Grants become more important for farmers markets, agritourism

BYLINE: Brian Brus

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 391  words


OKLAHOMA CITY - The grant-writing workshop kicking off the annual Farmers Market
and Agritourism Conference and Expo on Thursday is more important than ever,
state Agriculture Department representatives said.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture recently announced the availability of more
than $27 million in grants to help entrepreneurial agriculture producers while
strengthening rural economies. Nearly $1 million is also available from the
Federal-State Marketing Improvement Program through matching grants with state
departments of agriculture, colleges or universities. The program funds
farmer-to-consumer marketing projects such as farmers markets,
community-supported agriculture programs and agritourism.

The timing is good for Oklahoma as lawmakers struggle to balance a state budget
with dismal tax revenue. Ashley Bender, the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture,
Food and Forestry's market coordinator, said farmers markets across the state
look to her program for support, but she's not sure how much will be possible
until appropriations are announced for the fiscal year beginning July 1.

Even the small details are important to local producers, she said -
department-printed Oklahoma Grown produce bags are popular, for example. Most of
the state Agriculture Department's support is in the form of marking promotion
and organizing events such as the upcoming conference on Thursday at the Embassy
Suites in Oklahoma City.

As the state economy slumps, agriculture investment has paid off. Department
Secretary Jim Reese said farmers markets reported more than $3 million in sales
last year. Not all operations report their results, so the total is likely even
larger. Those sales are important to rural economies as well.

"It's been one of our fastest-growing sectors of agriculture, growing at a rate
of about 25 percent per year in reported sales," Reese said. "A lot more people
are getting involved in fresh farming of foods and vegetables. And our
conferences are very popular with full attendance demanding ever-larger rooms
for bigger crowds. "

Conference topics include social media marketing, trends in vegetable and nut
farming, value-added farming, live food demos in retail spaces and sustaining
established farmers markets.



Click here for more from this resource.

Copyright © 2017 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              602 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                 Hidalgo County Herald (Lordsburg, New Mexico)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                  July 3, 2015

USDA seeks applications for grants to help socially-disadvantaged groups in NM

BYLINE: Hidalgo County Herald staff

LENGTH: 483  words


USDA Rural Development State Director Terry Brunner announces the availability
of grant funds to provide technical assistance to rural ag producers from
socially-disadvantaged groups that have experienced race, ethnic or gender
prejudice

"These grants will help women, Hispanic, African-American and other farmers and
ranchers obtain the tools and develop the skills they need to increase their
productivity and the viability of their business in New Mexico's rural areas,"
Brunner said.

Funding is made available through USDA-Rural Development's
Socially-Disadvantaged Groups Grant Program (formerly the Small,
Socially-Disadvantaged Producer Grant Program), which provides funds to
organizations that provide technical assistance to socially-disadvantaged groups
in rural areas. A socially-disadvantaged group is one whose members have been
subjected to racial, ethnic, or gender prejudice. Examples of technical
assistance include conducting feasibility studies, developing business and
strategic plans, and providing leadership training.

USDA is making notice is $175,000. The grant notice is available at
http://www.gpo.gov up to $3 million available nationwide the maximum award under
the program's/fdsys/pkg/FR-2015-05-20/pdf/2015-12225.pdf. Applications submitted
by mail must be postmarked by July 20, 2015. Electronic applications must be
submitted at www.grants.gov no later than midnight Eastern Time July 14, 2015.

Eligible applicants include groups of cooperatives, cooperative development
centers, and individual cooperatives that serve socially-disadvantaged groups.
The applicants can be headquartered in any area, but the groups assisted must be
located in an eligible rural area. Also, the majority of the governing body of
the applicant must be comprised of individuals who are members of
socially-disadvantaged groups.

For more information and applications forms, please contact Jesse Monfort Bopp
at 505.761.4952 or jesse.bopp@nm.usda.gov

USDA Rural Development's mission is to increase economic opportunity and improve
the quality of life for rural residents. Rural Development fosters growth in
homeownership, finances business development, and supports the creation of
critical community and technology infrastructure. Further information on rural
programs is available at any local USDA Rural Development office or by visiting
USDA Rural Development's web site at http://www.rurdev.usda.gov

President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way --
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities. USDA's
investments in rural communities support the rural way of life that stands as
the backbone of our American values.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HDG

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                      Copyright 2015 Hidalgo County Herald


                              603 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  The State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL)

                              June 5, 2001 Tuesday

Agriculture gets its fair share from spring legislative session

SECTION: MARKETPLACE; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 887 words


Some intense 11th-hour lobbying by supporters of agriculture paid off in the
spring session of the Illinois General Assembly that ended last week.

In the final hours of the session, legislators approved:

* $3 million for AgriFirst to be used for technical assistance and planning
grants for "value-added" projects, which focus on methods farmers can use to
retain ownership of their harvest farther up the processing chain, hopefully
gleaning a greater return once their crops have been converted to products more
valuable than simple corn, soybeans or other commodities.

* $775,000 for an Information Technology Initiative to allow the state
Department of Agriculture to set up electronic licensing and fee collection via
the Internet, automation of field inspections and updating the agency's
databases.

* $150,000 in continuing funding for the Agriculture Assembly.

* A $1 million federal Environmental Protection Agency grant for stream-bank
stabilization in conjunction with Illinois Rivers 2020.

* $257,000 to combat the Asian Long-Horned Beetle.

* $15 million for the continued funding of the Council on Food and Agricultural
Research.

* $344,000 for improvements to the agriculture department's seed and chemistry
labs.

* $4.9 million for capital improvements to the Illinois State Fairgrounds,
including upgrading of storm and sanitary sewers, renovation of restrooms,
repair and replacement of various roofs on the grounds, and other projects.

* $4.3 million for capital improvements to the DuQuoin State Fairgrounds,
including utility upgrades, installation of a cover over the show-horse arena
and restoration of the Hayes Mansion.

* $14.3 million for the University of Illinois Extension program, an increase of
more than $1.2 million over fiscal 2001. The increase will be used to add two
educators to each of the Extension's 76 county offices.

* A $600,000 budget increase to Soil and Water Conservation Districts for
salaries and operations.

"We're very pleased our legislative leaders listened to the concerns of farmers
in the final stages of drafting a state budget," said Ron Warfield, Illinois
Farm Bureau president.

Warfield said funding for value-added projects will assist farmers in capturing
a bigger share of the consumer food dollar.

Last week, for example, Excel Pork, a division of Cargill, announced it would
stop hog slaughtering July 25 at its Marshall, Mo., plant, the largest such
operation in the state. The unexpected closing will hurt prices for independent
hog farmers and may have a long-term impact on hog prices nationwide, according
to Glen Grimes, longtime University of Missouri livestock economist.

Many Missouri hogs will now likely go to Excel plants at Ottumwa, Iowa, or
Beardstown, adding transportation costs of $1.90 per hog. Nationally, increased
hog production has put remaining slaughter plants near capacity. A similar
situation prompted hog prices to fall as low as 8 cents per pound in 1998.

Farmer-owned cooperatives have become more important, as there are no new
slaughter plants scheduled to come on line. Some AgriFirst money will go toward
feasibility studies on new plants. AgriFirst also will create a pool of funds
that farmers can tap into to help recover the costs of market studies required
to develop and launch successful value-added ventures.

Gov. George Ryan included AgriFirst funding in his budget, only to see it cut
during end-of-session negotiations. Ag leaders successfully lobbied for
restoration of the funds.

"We're really ecstatic we have a start for something that can work for rural
employment, to add value to the commodities we raise in Illinois."

Hampton said the Agrifirst money was some of the most hard-fought-for in the
budget.

"It's fair to say the whole agriculture community came together and said this
thing matters," said Hampton. "Relative to the whole budget, it doesn't look
like much. But relative to zero and nothing in the past, it gives us a foothold
and some exciting possibilities."

Dan Steimel, a pork producer from DeKalb and president of the Illinois Pork
Producers Association, said the AgriFirst funding is important to the future of
agriculture in Illinois because it "will assist pork producers and others in
developing value-added initiatives."

Co-op update

Clinton, Eureka, Gridley, Pontiac and Rantoul are in the running along with
seven other towns as a site for a pork-processing plant for American Premium
Foods Inc.

The company initially considered building in Carlinville, but company concerns
about three nearby mining excavations prompted that location to be dropped.
Residents also opposed the plant by a nearly 3-1 margin in a February
referendum.

The automated plant would slaughter up to 6,000 hogs a day and create about 210
jobs, according to Jim Burke, president and chief executive officer of the
American Premium subsidiary Meadowbrook Farms

A cooperative of about 240 family farms, Belleville-based American Premium will
market its products under the Meadowbrook Farms brand, said Burke.

Officials hope to complete construction of the plant by September 2002, said
Bruce Leman, chairman of American Premium's site selection committee.

"We feel like we have to break ground this summer," said Leman.

The $25 million facility, expanded from original plans, will require about 40
acres.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN. LOCAL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The State Journal-Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              604 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   The National Business Review (New Zealand)

                                 Image: Xena fg

                               November 26, 2004

Local producers eye Hollywood grants;
Film

SECTION: Pg.20

LENGTH: 405 words


John Drinnan

Smaller-scale New Zealand films may win if the government approves relaxed rules
for the Large Budget Screen Production Grants (LBSPG) aimed at big Hollywood
productions.

Economic Development Minister Jim Anderton told the annual conference of the
Screen Production and Development Association (Spada) last week he supported
changes that would improve locals' access to the LBSPG.

Local producers have been furious the rules shut them out but hand taxpayer
funds to Hollywood. The scheme offers a 12.5% rebate when more than $15 million
is spent in New Zealand. Projects that spend $15-50 million have to spend 70% of
the total budget in New Zealand to get a rebate.

Changes to the grants scheme would ease the restrictions rather than overhaul
the scheme, which is still aimed at attracting overseas producers rather than
local production.

Proposals developed by government-backed industry body the Screen Council are
expected to go to cabinet mid-2005.

The current rules encourage long-running TV series like Xena: Warrior Princess
and Hercules, which had a long run under previous tax incentives.

The most significant change in the scheme allows "bundling" of Hollywood
television productions in the "movie of the week" genre. These individual
productions seldom top $15 million individually - the proposed bundling would
allow three or five movies produced within 12 months to apply using a combined
figure.

The Screen Council says bundling of these projects might mean more work in
servicing American projects but it is unlikely to affect New Zealand filmmakers.

Only a small number of New Zealand films would top the $15 million minimum for
one project or for a series of three or four.

Potentially more significant would be removing the rules against projects giving
LBSPG grants to those picking up any other New Zealand public funding.

The Screen Council also proposes a 0.5% levy of the total production budget be
charged as a levy, which would give an annual fund of about $500,000 for
education and training. Mr Anderton has been positive about the changes.

The other issue affecting the attractiveness of New Zealand as a film location
for US productions is harder to control.

That is the high value of the New Zealand dollar against the greenback, which
this week sailed past the 70c barrier.

CHANGES? The current rules encourage long-running TV series like Xena

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

        Copyright 2004 Fourth Estate Holdings Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


                              605 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            April 19, 2012 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Tories, Wildrose fight for rural votes; Redford claims Smith would dismantle
ALMA

BYLINE: Darcy Henton and Keith Gerein, Calgary Herald; Edmonton Journal

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: LACOMBE


With polls showing Tory support plummeting in its traditional bastion of rural
Alberta, leaders of the front-running Wildrose and Progressive Conservative
parties heightened their pitches to farmers and rural communities Wednesday.

PC Leader Alison Redford stopped at a potato farm outside Lacombe to throw her
support behind a $40-mil-lion agriculture agency she claims could be chopped
under a Wildrose government.

She said the Alberta Livestock and Meat Agency (ALMA) is critical to growing
Alberta agriculture's share of the world market.

"ALMA is a fantastic agency," she said. "It allows us to work with producers in
the industry to market products overseas. My concern is the Wildrose wants to
cancel the agency. They don't understand the importance of working with industry
to develop global markets."

Redford said that if the Wildrose follows up on its plan to kill ALMA, the party
will be hurting rural Alberta.

"We heard repeatedly in rural Alberta that ALMA has helped ensure that our
agriculture industry remains sustainable and competitive," she said from a
podium in front of a potato sorting assembly line at Scholing's Produce Inc.

But Wildrose Leader Danielle Smith said her party hasn't yet decided what to do
with the agency.

She said her party initially planned to dismantle ALMA, but she has since heard
mixed reviews from industry.

As such, she said a Wildrose government would need to hold some consultations
before deciding whether to change the program.

"What we don't like about ALMA is the direct subsidies to individual firms,"
Smith said Wednesday from a dog shelter east of Ponoka. "We think that corporate
welfare is something government shouldn't be doing."

She said the PC government created the agency without consultation and her party
doesn't want to make the same mistake in dismantling it without consultation.

The organization was created in 2009 to support research, increase market access
and enhance the value chain, through a variety of programs and grants. It has
approved more than $80 million for projects that enhance and sup-port the
livestock industry.

Rural PC candidate Doug Griffiths, who served as municipal affairs minister in
Redford's cabinet, said the agency takes producers from various stages of the
value-added chain and pulls them together to develop a co-ordinated marketing
strategy.

"Like every other organization, when it started it had a couple of stumbles," he
said. "It has had some challenges, but I would say it has been very successful."

Cattle producer Tony Saretsky said ALMA has done good work in bringing together
all cattle producers in the market chain to speak as one voice, but it has had
its failings.

"We wouldn't want to see it lost, and if it is going to be changed, there needs
to be some facsimile that re-places it," he said.

Some cattle producers have ex-pressed concern about the amount of personal
information they have to provide to enable a high level of tracking of the
origins of their herds, he said.

Saretsky believes the tracking data is necessary to demonstrate to consumers
Alberta beef is safe.

But he had some concerns about the land bills that Redford's government has
passed.

"Property rights is a hot potato," he said chuckling at his own pun. "I think
some of the quick decisions on very important topics have caused problems."

The Wildrose leader said producers have been most offended by Tory land-use
bills that Smith says give the province power to take property away without
proper compensation or access to the courts.

The Conservatives have denied the legislation infringes on anyone's property
rights.

Griffiths said that if there is a growing swell of support for the Wildrose in
rural Alberta, he hasn't seen it. When he explains to landowners why the land
bills were passed and what they accomplish, most drop their objections, he said.

But Smith said a Wildrose government would immediately repeal those bills, and
work with Ottawa and foreign governments to reduce red tape and open new markets
for Alberta's agricultural products.

dhenton@calgaryherald.com

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2012 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              606 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                              June 30, 2013 Sunday

agriculture briefs

BYLINE: Telegraph Herald

SECTION: B; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 240 words


Agency reminds producers

to submit acreage reports

LANCASTER, Wis. - The Grant County Farm Service Agency reminds producers to
submit their annual acreage report to their local agency county office by July
15 to meet Farm Service Agency program eligibility requirements.

Accurate acreage reports are necessary to determine and maintain eligibility for
the Direct and Counter-cyclical programs authorized in the 2008 Farm Bill,
including the Supplemental Revenue Assistance Payments and Average Crop Revenue
Election programs.

Carcass Challenge leads to award

AMES, Iowa - A northeast Iowa steer was judged to be in the Top Ten of the Iowa
Cattlemen's Association Carcass Challenge.

Jason Kurt, of Cascade, collected the eighth-place award for a steer entered by
the Jones, Dubuque and Delaware County Cattlemen's Associations in the challenge
contest.

The Iowa Cattlemen's Association Carcass Challenge is a statewide carcass
contest for cattle producers in Iowa. It was organized by the 2012 association's
Young Cattlemen's Leadership Program participants.

The steer sponsored by the three county cattlemen's groups graded Choice and had
a ribeye area of 14.2 square inches. Winners were determined by the Retail Value
per Days on Feed calculation, which evaluates carcass desirability and trait
value as well as growth rate per day on feed. Their steer's Retail Value per
Days on Feed was $5.95 compared to the group average of $5.54.

Telegraph Herald

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Woodward Communications, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              607 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                         September 17, 1997, Wednesday

Trade commission finds evidence of steel rod dumping by 7 countries

BYLINE: BY RICHARD LAWRENCE

SECTION: WORLD TRADE; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 224 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The U.S. International Trade Commission found a ""reasonable indication'' that
U.S. stainless steel wire rod producers are being injured by imports from seven
countries.

Exporters in the seven countries - Germany, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Spain,
Sweden and Taiwan - are selling the rod in the U.S. market at less than fair
value or dumping prices, U.S. producers contend.

The producers have asked the government to impose antidumping duties on the
imports, which, they say, should range from 9.6 percent of import value on
Taiwan rod to 63.4 percent on Spanish rod.

Italian producers also are alleged to be receiving unfair government subsidies,
which could lead to U.S. countervailing duties on the Italian rod.

The ITC ruling was the first step in a months-long process to determine whether
suppliers from the seven nations will be penalized.

By late October the Commerce Department is to issue a preliminary ruling on
whether Italian producers are being subsidized. By early January, it will
preliminarily rule whether exporters in the seven countries are dumping the wire
rod.

If Commerce confirms dumping and subsidies, ITC will then make a final injury
decision. A finding of injury would trigger antidumping and countervailing
duties.

Total U.S. imports last year of stainless steel wire rod were $140 million.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1997 Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              608 of 998 DOCUMENTS


             Journal Record Legislative Report (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            September 8, 2008 Monday

Wagon Creek Creamery to receive $35,000 from USDA

BYLINE: Brian Brus

LENGTH: 437  words


OKLAHOMA CITY - Wagon Creek Creamery owner Ron Crain has enjoyed pulling money
out of Texas instead of sending his company's raw product out of state for
someone else to develop and profit from, he said.

A recent recipient of the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Value-Added Producer
Grant - and the only Oklahoma company out of 144 awarded - Crain is planning to
use the funds to create a marketing plan to more efficiently move his creamery
products out of Helena.

"We try to focus on Oklahoma and around our region, mostly by grass-roots
efforts when people find us," he said. "To say we have any marketing now would
be generous. ... But when I've tried to raise sales we went to Dallas where our
products sold pretty well. And that's the Texas dollar coming into Oklahoma.
That's a real plus if we can do more of that. "

Wagon Creek Creamery will receive about $35,000; the USDA awarded nearly $20
million nationwide. Many of the other recipients are planning feasibility
studies and marketing programs for alternative or renewable fuels, the
department announced.

"These grants will improve financial returns and help create jobs for
agricultural producers, business and families across rural America," Agriculture
Secretary Ed Schafer said in prepared statement.

Crain and his wife, Barbara, have operated a small dairy farm for about 17
years. The operation is strictly organic - their 50 head of mixed-breed cattle
are pasture grass fed, raised without hormone-boosting drugs or grain, and when
a cow needs doctoring for anything even as simple as vaccinations its milk is
discarded and not used in products.

A couple of years ago the Crains realized they couldn't continue to merely sell
their milk as a wholesale commodity.

"We got tired of the inevitable up-and-down cycles of that market, since we were
selling to a national co-op," Ron Crain said. "We decided that we would either
lose the farm or go for it. ... We've been hustling ever since. "

"Go for it" means the Crains take their milk and add value by processing it
themselves into finished products such as yogurt cheese, ricotta, onion dip and
cheesecakes, he said. Sales have continued to rise, even for lack of elaborate
marketing plan. The creamery now retails through about a dozen grocers such as
Akin's Natural Foods in Oklahoma and bordering states.

 "We're catering now to a health food catering niche and those people who are of
a sustainable resource mind-set," he said.

 "Oklahomans need to take the commodities they produce and turn them into more
value-added products because it keeps money here in our state. We can make our
own finished products. "

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              609 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           The Advertiser (Australia)

                           February 13, 2007 Tuesday
                                 State Edition

THE REGIONS More in our series on country South Australia;
The added value of turning away from traditional produce

BYLINE: NIGEL AUSTIN, RURAL EDITOR

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 656  words


THE Limestone Coast is progressing rapidly from its role as a traditional bulk
producer of beef, lamb, grain, potatoes and seafood to developing a higher-value
food industry.

Its food industry is worth almost $900 million with the growth helping to boost
the economy and local employment.

Limestone Coast Regional Development Board chief executive Grant King said the
success included developing a niche food sector based around some of the
region's main products.

The Tatiara Meat Company and flour producer Blue Lake Milling were two of the
major food producers while Tatiara Olive Processing was a significant developing
company.

''We also have Scott de Bruin running Wagyu beef, Kraft Foods at Suttontown is
the biggest Philadelphia cheese producer in Australia and Limestone Coast Cheese
at Lucindale is doing a great job,'' Mr King said.

One of the few organisations regionally branding is Limestone Coast Lamb which
markets its meat in Adelaide, on the nation's east coast and locally in the
South-East. General manager Graham Clothier said lamb quality from the company's
group of 12 producers was world class.

He had undertaken a Nuffield Scholarship in 2005 to study lamb marketing in New
Zealand, Canada, Britain and the U.S. and had found ''our lamb is as good as
anywhere''.

''There have not been many successful branded meat products and we want to be
one of the first,'' Mr Clothier said.

''We have a very good name for our product throughout Adelaide and we are aiming
to get into the food-service sector on the east coast.''

The lamb was sold through various butchers, including Barossa Fine Foods, while
Foods Devine at Findon targets the restaurant trade.

Limestone Coast food industry development officer Michaela Bell said there was
no doubt that while the region had traditionally been strong in seafood and
meat,

it was enjoying good growth in small value-adding industries.

''The Limestone Coast is becoming known as a premium food producing region,''
she said, adding that the regional food-industry program had been succeeded in
encouraging micro businesses, networks and farmers markets.

''A lot of our value-adding industries are starting to grow,'' she said.

''The olive industry in particular is starting to achieve strong sales in the
U.S. and it's going down the track of lots of value adding.''

Mrs Bell said Pendleton Estate was infusing its olive oils with different
flavours and achieving good results. The region also had businesses such as
Outback Pride near Reedy Creek and Millicent's Green Farmhouse specialising in
native foods.

Meanwhile, aquaculture company Limestone Coast Trout has opted to maximise the
price it receives for its seafood rather than go all out for growth. Everything
it does is focused on value-adding to its core business of fish farming with
nine streams of cash flow.

They are the fish farm, selling nutrient-rich waste water, leasing sheds, a
cafe, a farm shop, accommodation, catering, tourism and education.

Through its paddock-to-plate approach, it achieves about $20/kg for the rainbow
trout it grows, processes and retails from its Millicent farm.

Joint-owner Darren Winter said this approach was favoured rather than building
production from the present 20 tonnes to 100 tonnes and shooting for economies
of scale.

''If we were just wholesaling, we'd have to be selling 100 tonnes of fish a
year,'' he said.

The company achieved its $20/kg by filleting, processing, smoking and retailing
for outlets including the Adelaide and Barossa farmers markets and the Mt
Gambier Market.

It also sells whole trout on the Sydney Fish Market.


LIMESTONE COAST

_ Population: 63,040

- Unemployment rate: 4 per cent

_ Land area: 21,376sqkm

_ Forestry: 270,000ha



MAIN INDUSTRIES:

_ Forestry:

$788 million

_ Agriculture:

$591 million

_ Food sector:

$892 million

_ Livestock:

$297.5 million

_ Grapes :

$200 million

_ Wine:

$500 million

_ Seafood:

$110 million

_ Dairy: $100 million

_ Horticulture:

$90 million

_ Tourism:

$176 million

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV


                   Copyright 2007 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              610 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         The Gazette (Montreal, Quebec)

Gold producers anticipate mergers: Low prices are forcing rivals to look at each
other as potential partners

BYLINE: TAVIA GRANT

SECTION: Business; F1 / BREAK

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: TORONTO


North America's biggest gold producers are blunt: their prospects for going it
alone look bleaker and bleaker.

With gold prices at 20-year lows and central banks unloading reserves, investors
are falling over themselves to sell gold shares. That's forcing big producers
such as Placer Dome Inc., Barrick Gold Corp. and Kinross Gold Corp. to view each
other as potential marriage partners rather than just rivals.

''I wouldn't be surprised'' to see mergers among the largest companies, Barrick
chief executive Randall Oliphant in an interview last week.

''It's traditional when commodity companies are under pressure and looking to
reduce costs - consolidation is what results.''

The process is under way. Last month, Canada's Franco- Nevada Mining Corp. and
Euro-Nevada Mining Corp. agreed to merge to create the world's fifth-biggest
gold company by market value, an effort to boost the company's appeal with big
investors. Just last week, Robert Buchan, chief executive of North America's No.
5 gold producer, Kinross Gold, said the company is considering putting itself up
for sale.

The attitude marks a shift in the industry, where big companies generally gobble
up smaller ones with promising mining claims. In the past year, Toronto-based
Barrick bought Sutton Resources Ltd., an exploration company, and Placer Dome
bought Getchell Gold Corp., a U.S. company whose reserves were one-ninth of
Placer's 62 million ounces.

Gold Index Drops

The Toronto Stock Exchange's index of gold-mining stocks has lost more than half
its value in the past three years as prices for the metal have dropped.
According to HSBC Securities analyst Victor Flores, gold companies worldwide
have a combined market value of about $35 billion U.S.- or about the size of
Texaco Inc., the fourth-largest U. S. oil company by market value. There's
plenty of room for consolidation: North America is home to about 40 gold
producers that mine at least 20,000 ounces a year.

Toronto-based Kinross, which expects to produce one million ounces of gold this
year, and smaller companies such as Meridian Gold Inc., Cambior Inc. and Battle
Mountain Gold Co. are seen by analysts as the most likely to link up with other
companies.

''These companies need to do things to attract investors,'' HSBC's Flores said.

In announcing its earnings yesterday for the first six months of 1999, Cambior
said its gold-hedging program allowed it to sell its production at $366 an
ounce, $86 over the market price. The program assures full coverage of the
remaining gold production for 1999 at $364 an ounce and 80 per cent of
production in 2000 at $322 an ounce

Flores estimates the profitable companies will need to produce at least 2
million ounces of gold a year to weather low prices. Right now, only four North
American firms are doing that: Barrick, Newmont, Homestake Mining Co. of San
Francisco and Vancouver-based Placer Dome.

Nevada, home to about 35 gold mines, looks like a prime region for
consolidation. Barrick, Newmont, Meridian and Franco-Nevada Mining all have
properties near each other there.

Gold fell as low as $253.80 an ounce this week. It's shed 39 per cent since
February 1996.


LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 1999 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              611 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2016 Zoom Information Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                            Zoom Company Information

                                   July 2016

                                  Soy Labs LLC

                               651 Commerce Road
                               Mexico,  MO 65265
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: (573) 582-7388
FAX: (573) 582-7399
URL: www.soylabs.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EMPLOYEES: 35

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   Soy Labs, LLC is a research-driven nutraceutical company dedicated to
improving the quality of life for consumers through next-generation, soy-based
nutritional products. In collaboration with soybean producers and scientists
from the nation's leading research institutions, Soy Labs spearheads the product
development process and brings these cutting-edge products to market.  Founded
in 2005, Soy Labs was established through a grant from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) and investment from 1SoyÃ, a farmer-owned, soybean
cooperative, based in Jefferson City, Missouri, that seeks to diversify its
interests beyond commodities and agricultural operations. Recently, the USDA
announced that Soy Labs is the recipient of a second grant from the USDA Value
-Added Producer Grant Program to support the launch of its flagship product
line, CardioTrimÂ®.  At Soy Labs, we strive to be "the best of the best" among
the top research-based nutraceutical and functional food companies. Our
CardioTrim products are formulated to address the underlying aspects of major
health and wellness concerns facing an aging adult population. We produce
high-quality products using only clinically-researched, highly bioavailable
ingredients in our formulations. CardioTrim contains two cutting edge,
proprietary ingredients available only from Soy Labs. AlbumaSoyÃ (a proprietary
soy albumin extract) and CissusÃ (CQR-300), a patented extract of the Cissus
quadrangularis plant, are the cornerstone of our

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *

REVENUE: USD 7,000,000

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2016


                              612 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                             hollywoodreporter.com

                          September 5, 2007 Wednesday

Series casts spell on partners

BYLINE: Gail Schiller

SECTION: TELEVISION INDEX; TOP STORY 3

LENGTH: 768  words


NEW YORK -- With an unusual head start, "WordWorld," a new PBS preschool show
funded in large part by a multimillion-dollar grant from the Department of
Education, lined up several licensing partners and an exclusive retail deal with
Target even before it bowed this week.

It is rare for licensees to sign onto a TV property before determining ratings
or the success of a show. Even most producers and networks prefer to wait and
see how a new series goes before lining up merchandising partners.

The concept of the show, which depicts the letters that spell a word morphing
into the animals or objects they spell (i.e. the letters D-O-G turn into an
animated dog), was appealing enough to Target and licensees including Mega
Bloks, Spin Master, Sababa Toys and Rose Art to sign deals with WordWorld.

"The whole idea behind the license is a great idea on its own," said Harold
Chizick, spokesman for Mega Brands, makers of Mega Bloks. "I think the show is
going to give our products even greater exposure, but in terms of play value and
educational value, the benefit kids are getting out of the product is a big
plus. We bought into the whole concept of word building and wordplay. We saw a
natural fit for our company and what we do in the construction aisle based on
the innate play pattern of letters becoming words becoming things."

"It speaks to the uniqueness of the property," added Don Moody, founder and CEO
of parent company Word World Llc. and executive producer of the series, which
premiered Monday. "Most people wouldn't have the number of licensees we have nor
would they have the retail exclusives we have. It is because the content itself
was developed as multiplatform content that the property lives as a toy even if
there is no show. We're launching a brand, and part of our brand is a television
show."

In fall 2005, when the show was in development, retailer FAO Schwarz featured
WordWorld product in a boutique area when its New York store reopened after a
brief closure. "I thought it was really innovative and interesting and felt it
could stand on its own as a product even without having the show on TV yet,"
said David Niggli, president and chief merchandising officer for FAO Schwarz.

"It did very well considering there was no TV or any other marketing support. No
one knew the property unless they came into the store. We thought it was unique
from the first time we saw it."

Licensed product will hit Target shelves in January. Moody said as part of its
exclusive retail partnership, all Target stores in America will feature a
seven-foot space in the toy department with all of WordWorld's branded products
in one area. There also will be a boutique area featuring WordWorld products on
Target.com, he said.

Alex Kay, executive vp of Word World and a producer of the show, said WordWorld
was able to garner interest from licensees and retailers at such an early stage
by manufacturing some of the products themselves.

Word World Llc. is part of the Ready to Learn Partnership, a public-private
consortium awarded a five-year, $47 million grant from the U.S. Department of
Education's Office of Innovation and Improvement. Additional members of the
consortium include Chicago PBS member station WTTW and the Michael Cohen Group,
an international research firm responsible for formative and summative testing
of the show. The grant will be used by the consortium to produce three other TV
shows.

WordWorld was created by Moody and his cousin Jacqueline Moody, with children's
television veteran Tina Peel serving as executive vp production, education and
research. The show is directed by Emmy-winning children's TV director Olexa
Hewryk.

Moody, an artist who previously founded a clothing company and a Manhattan-based
ad agency, came up with the idea for WordWorld following two years of research
into the field of literacy prompted by his decision to change careers when his
wife became pregnant. "I realized I was getting ready to be a father and that
meant being a citizen," he said. "I changed my life. As I set out on this new
career, I had in my mind aside from putting dollars in my pocket, I had to add
some other kind of value to the universe and humanity."

WordWorld's curriculum is based on scientifically based reading research
including research from the National Reading Panel, which was assembled by
Congress and is comprised of leading scientists in reading research,
representatives from colleges of education, teachers, educational administrators
and parents.

Moody said Word World Llc. is projecting $36 million in revenue in 2008 based on
the sale of licensed product.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: ONLINE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                    Copyright 2007 VNU Business Media, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              613 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Alaska Journal of Commerce

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              July 10, 2009 Friday

AGIA revisited: Former state economist takes a shot at plan

BYLINE: Tim Bradner, Alaska Journal of Commerce, Anchorage

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 2383 words


Jul. 10--Roger Marks, a recently retired senior economist in the state
Department of Revenue, has raised significant questions about the validity of
the Palin administration's analysis of the Alaska Gasline Inducement Act, or
AGIA, a state incentive law intended to spur development of a natural gas
pipeline.

The pipeline and AGIA have been in the news lately after the announcement that
pipeline company TransCanada Corp. and North Slope producer ExxonMobil Corp.
partnered to conduct preliminary engineering and studies on a gas pipeline.

TransCanada, based in Calgary, Alberta, is the holder of a license issued under
AGIA, which entitles it to a $500 million state subsidy.

ExxonMobil is not yet formally a part of the venture and is not obligated under
the terms of AGIA. The Houston-based company has said it still opposes the
stipulations in AGIA, but hopes to work with the state through its partnership
with TransCanada to modify those stipulations while still achieving the state's
goals.

ExxonMobil officials won't be working with Gov. Sarah Palin, since she resigned
and is due to leave office July 26.

It's relatively unclear what direction incoming-Gov. Sean Parnell will take.
Parnell said he plans to keep the current commissioners.

In a technical paper to be published in the September issue of the Journal of
Economic Issues a shorter version has already printed in the Oil and Gas
Financial Journal Marks lays out his opinion on problems created by the state
law in achieving the goal of gas pipeline construction.

Many of the issues already have been discussed in legislative hearings. But
Marks, who played a key role in the previous Murkowski administration's effort
to negotiate a pipeline contract, raises new questions on several points,
including the wisdom of granting an exclusive license to TransCanada with the
company's intent to channel Alaska gas through its Alberta gas distribution hub
and pipelines.

The state would be better off, he argues, leaving arrangements as to how Alaska
gas can be transported and sold to private commercial firms to work out among
themselves.

State Revenue Commissioner Pat Galvin and Deputy Natural Resources Commissioner
Marty Rutherford, architects of the state's AGIA law, disagreed with Marks on
several key points.

"The AGIA findings and determination addressed the issues raised by Mr. Marks
and has never been presented with any substantive challenge" said Rutherford.

Marks: State's analysis is flawed

As an economist, Marks is critical of the state's economic analysis on the
profitability of a North Slope gas pipeline because it underestimates risk and
overstates profits, he says.

He argues this has led the state to the conclusion that it can impose a set of
conditions on private commercial firms -- gas-producing companies -- that must
bear the risks through the AGIA requirements.

"A flawed financial analysis of the project overstated the economic vitality of
the project, and therefore understated the severity of the commercial issues,"
created by the AGIA requirements, Marks said in an interview with the Alaska
Journal.

Marks laid out five basic problems in AGIA:

1. A basic misalignment of interests, including a sacrifice of the state's own
interest in revenues.

This is raised because of the state's goal for a pipeline to be built and owned
by a pipeline company rather than producers. If there are construction cost
overruns, the pipeline company makes more profit because its returns are based
on the regulated tariff, which includes cost recovery.

"Gas shippers lose money on cost overruns. The pipeline makes money through the
return on equity investment. That is why the producers want to build it," so
that costs can be controlled, Marks said.

Rutherford said the concern over a pipeline company earning more if there were
higher costs would be valid if there was additional equity invested to pay the
higher cost, because the pipeline's return is paid in the equity.

TransCanada has proposed that federal loan guarantees be used to finance
overruns, so that the equity in the project would be unchanged, she said.
However, this has not yet been agreed to by the federal government.

Marks said the producers' interests, as well as the state's, are to rigidly
control pipeline construction costs to keep the tariff as low as possible. By
granting the AGIA license to a pipeline company, the state has encouraged an
arrangement where cost management is more difficult.

TransCanada, in its proposal to the state, agreed to reduce its return if cost
overruns occur, but Marks questions the value of this.

"FERC (the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission) does deal with cost overruns in
setting tariffs, but the overruns are measured relative to the sponsor's cost
estimate at the time of certification. FERC is not charged with exercising due
diligence on cost estimates," he said.

Although the administration has said that it welcomed producer, as well as
pipeline company, applications through AGIA, the Palin said on several occasions
that the state's goal was to have an independently owned pipeline, not one
controlled by producers.

2. The state's evaluation of TransCanada's AGIA proposal.

The state assessed only the net present value of the project to the state, not
the gas shippers or the benefits of a pipeline that is not developed under the
AGIA terms (BP and ConocoPhillips have partnered to do just that). This approach
gives the state only a partial understanding of the project's benefits and
costs, Marks said.

3. Structure of the state incentive.

The structure of the state's incentive of a $500 million grant discourages
TransCanada to do an adequate front-end cost estimate before the planned 2010
open season. The company is reimbursed 50 percent of its costs up until the time
of an open season. And then 90 percent reimbursement after an open season.

The structure of this incentive prompts the pipeline company to minimize its
pre-open season costs to maximize the grant reimbursement, Marks said.

Marks said there is ample literature in professional journals on what
constitutes appropriate amounts spent in preliminary planning of a major
construction project. Citing an estimate that 1.5 percent of the project cost
should go to preliminary facility planning, TransCanada should be spending $390
million on a $26 billion project.

TransCanada's planned spending is at $83 million. This will result in a
low-quality estimate at the initial open season, resulting in no significant
binding commitments, Marks said.

This has been somewhat offset with ExxonMobil's entry into the project, with an
increase in the pre-open season budget to $150 million. Still, there are
questions as to how this money can be spent in the seven months remaining before
TransCanada must file its pre-open season package of information with FERC.

As for the 90 percent state reimbursement after a failed open season, up to a
cap of $500 million, "the important thing to realize is that it was necessary
for the state to have the high post-open season reimbursement rate because the
licensee still has to go for certification by FERC if the initial open season
fails," as a condition of the AGIA license, Marks said.

"Given that such spending would be wasteful because a certificate would be
useless without commitments, no private entity would incur the costs for
certification after a failed open season without a high public reimbursement
rate," he said.

Revenue Commissioner Galvin disagreed. "Any funding necessary to achieve
certification after the state's contribution will come from TransCanada and
ExxonMobil. We think the structure of the state's pre- and post-open season
funding creates the proper tension between adequate spend and cost control,"
Galvin said.

4. Rolled-in rates for tariffs on pipeline expansions.

This not only creates a subsidy for new gas shippers paid for by the original
shippers and FERC does not allow subsidies but it creates an incentive for
potential new shippers to wait to commit gas, rather than encouraging them to
commit as soon as possible, Marks said.

"Rolled-in rates will encourage explorers to postpone exploration, so as to not
commit gas at the first open season. Because their expansion capacity could be
subsidized, they can afford to sit back and wait, and see whether the pipeline
has cost overruns and how gas markets look down the road," Marks said.

Rutherford said the benefit of delay doesn't exist.

"Explorers gain nothing by waiting. If they participate in an initial open
season, then the initial tariff will be lower than it might have been if they
had waited to come in as expansion shippers," she said. "Explorers will take the
first opportunity to begin gas sales, not just so that they can collect the
additional revenue, but because their leases require them to do so."

5. Locking in with Trans- Canada.

Marks also is concerned that Alaska's gas will becoming locked into using
TransCanada's hub and existing pipelines in Alberta. Using the Alberta hub will
cost 24 cents per million British Thermal Units, or roughly per thousand cubic
feet.

"TransCanada will make lots of money out of this," Marks said. "The reduction of
24 cents per million in value to the producers and the state will not be
insignificant. What this illustrates about AGIA is that it has the pipeline
company determining the gas market (because of where its pipelines go) rather
than the entities marketing the gas, the shippers."

Shippers should have the flexibility to work with other pipeline companies or
build their own, Marks said.

Rutherford disagreed.

"The AGIA process and the TC Alaska project do not dictate the market to
shippers," she said. "The project brings gas to the first liquid market, the
Alberta hub, beyond which shippers and not the pipeline will determine the final
disposition of that gas. It could go into eastern Canada, southeast down either
the Alliance or Northern Border pipelines, south toward the West Coast, or it
could remain in Alberta, depending on which creates the greatest revenue
opportunity.

"If a new-build pipeline creates more value, then that can be pursued without
violating the principles of AGIA," she said.

Flawed economic analysis?

The most scathing part of Marks' criticism focuses on the work that state
economists did in their evaluations of a gas pipeline rate-of-return and
profitability.

The estimates compared gas producers' returns with two cases: a producer-owned
pipeline and a pipeline owned by a third-party independent pipeline company.

With a gas price of $3.50 per million British Thermal Units, which is roughly
the same as with the thousand cubic feet, or mcf, measure used commonly in the
U.S., the estimate was that a producer-owned pipeline would generate a 12.5
percent rate of retrurn, while an independent pipeline would see a 29.8 percent
return.

"Defects in this analysis may have led the administration to believe the project
(an independent pipeline) was better than it is," Marks said.

The principal defect on the analysis was an improper treatment of the firm
transportation, or FT, commitments the producers have to make to the pipeline,
he said.

These contracts for capacity are "take-or-pay," meaning they have to be paid no
matter what. Such contracts would involve more than $100 billion in financial
obligations.

Marks contends the obligations are real and should be treated like debt in a
proper analysis of a project from a user's, or customer's (gas shipper or
producer), point of view.

"These commitments are considered liabilities, or debt. In essence it is like
borrowing 100 percent for the capacity the FT supports, with the tariff being
like the principal and interest payment," Marks said. "Liabilities are typically
defined as probable future sacrifices or economic benefits arising from present
obligations."

Done properly, Marks said, the analysis should treat the project as if the user
were building and owning it, since the effect on the user would be the same
whether the pipeline were owned by the producer or a pipeline company.

Marks quoted from the standard Brealey and Myers finance textbook, which
addresses the general concept of financial leases, which are like FT
commitments, as to who really owns the leased asset:

Brealey and Myers said, "From an economic point of view, you might say the user
is the real owner, because in a financial lease, the user faces the risks and
receives the rewards of ownership. The user cannot cancel a financial lease. If
the asset turns out to be hopelessly costly and unsuited, that is the user's
problem, not the lessor's."

But the state didn't do the analysis that way, Marks said.

"The calculations were made using the simple cash flows associated with a
third-party pipeline," he said. "Because there is little or no associated
up-front capital costs with debt, the value of the FT commitment is ignored,
which exaggerates the rate of return. That overstated the estimated rate of
return in the state's analysis to 29.8 percent (annually) for a producer with a
third-party-owned pipeline. The more realistic return in either case is the more
modest 12.5 percent the state estimated for the producer-owned pipeline."

Also, the discount rate for the state's net present value analysis was too low,
he added. It needed to be higher to reflect the value of the FT commitment.

"Again, by ignoring the value of the FT commitment, the state used a low
discount rate, which like the rate of return analysis, overstated the net
present value of the third-party pipeline to the state," Marks said.

Galvin said Marks looked at only half of an important equation.

"The opportunity to monetize extraordinarily valuable hydrocarbon assets is made
possible through firm transportation commitments," he said. "Any liability is
substantially offset by the asset value of the reserved capacity."

Tim Bradner can be reched at

tim.bradner@alaskajournal.com

To see more of the Alaska Journal of Commerce, or to subscribe to the newspaper,
go to http://www.alaskajournal.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Alaska Journal of
Commerce, Anchorage Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20090710-JA-AGIA-revisited-Former-state-economist-takes-a-shot-at-plan-0710

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JA


                   Copyright 2009 Alaska Journal of Commerce


                              614 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            April 28, 2007 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

NEIGHBORS

BYLINE: BARBARA KENT, Tribune correspondent

SECTION: PLANT CITY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1156 words


By BARBARA KENT

Tribune correspondent

National Championship Games Return To Four-Plex

PLANT CITY - For the second consecutive year, the National Junior College
Athletic Association will hold its Division I women's fast-pitch softball
championship games in Plant City.

The games are here because the International Softball Federation is based in
Plant City and hosts the event.

The championship games will be May 17-19. They also will return next year.

Sixteen teams from across the country will qualify for the games, which will
take place at the Randy L. Larson Softball Four-Plex adjacent to the softball
federation's administration building at Plant City Stadium.

A total of 30 games will be played. Tickets will be sold at the stadium on game
days for $20 for a tournament pass for all three days; ages 65 and older and
children younger than 12 will get the pass for $15. Children younger than 4 will
be admitted free. A one-day pass is $10 and $7 for children and seniors.

Don Porter, federation president, said National Junior College Athletic
Association softball has produced quality talent through the years. Two-time
Olympic softball gold medalist Crysti Butos of the USA team played association
softball, as did Ani Nyhus, who pitched for Canada at the 2004 Olympics in
Athens. Leah English, the catcher for Great Britain at last year's International
Softball Federation Women's World Championship in Beijing, played for North
Florida Community College in Madison.

Alzheimer Caregivers Invited To Free Program

PLANT CITY - The University of South Florida Suncoast Alzheimer's and
Gerontology Center is sponsoring a free community program, Alzheimer's Disease:
What Caregivers Need to Know.

It will be from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. May 24 at the First Baptist Church of Plant
City, 503 N. Palmer St. Lunch will be provided.

Topics will include: Understanding Alzheimer's Disease, Progress in Treatment,
Communication Strategies, Managing Troublesome Behaviors, Legal and Financial
Information and more. More than 50,000 people in the Tampa Bay area have
Alzheimer's, according to the center.

Although there is no charge, advance registration is required. For registration
or information, call Eileen Posey at (813) 974-4355.

Trip To Cypress Gardens Set For Seniors

PLANT CITY - The Plant City Recreation and Parks Department HAWKS (Happy
Adventurous Wise Knowledgeable Seniors) will go to Cypress Gardens Adventure
Park on May 8. The deadline for purchasing tickets is Monday.

The group will leave Plant City at 9 a.m. and return at 5 p.m. Cost is $25 per
person, which includes admission and transportation.

Reservations and payment may be made Monday at the Planteen Recreation Center,
301 Dort St.

For information, call Deborah Haldane, (813) 659-4200, Ext. 4343.

Jules Burt Painting Will Be On Play's Set

PLANT CITY - World renowned painter Jules Burt has provided one of her paintings
for the set of the upcoming Plant City Entertainment production of "Steel
Magnolias."

That will give the local community theater something in common with the
long-running, award-winning television show "Friends," because Burt's art was
also part of its sets.

The show will be staged in the Trinkle Center on the Plant City campus of
Hillsborough Community College, 1206 N. Park Road, May 4, 5, 11 and 12. Curtain
time for each performance is 8 p.m., with the box office opening at 7 p.m. and
doors at 7:30 p.m.

Tickets may be bought at the door if available or in advance at Hardee's
Fashions, 1501 N. Wheeler St. Group rates are available if arranged in advance
by calling Hardee's at (813) 754-4829.

Tickets are $10 for general admission and $8 for ages 55 and older and students
through the 12th grade.

NARFE Will Meet Thursday

PLANT CITY - The Plant City chapter of the National Association of Active and
Retired Federal Employees will meet at 1:30 p.m. Thursday at the facility of the
First Baptist Church of Plant City at North Collins and East Baker streets.

The speaker will be Kathrine Goosney, information and referral manager for the
West Central Florida Area Agency. She will give an overview of the agency's
elder help line and SHINE services.

For information, call the chapter's president, Johanna Frazier, at (863)
425-0677.

Blood Drive Is Today At Library

PLANT CITY - Florida Blood Services will conduct a blood drive from 12:30 to 5
p.m. today at Bruton Memorial Library, 302 McLendon St.

Donors will receive a T-shirt, a wellness checkup of blood pressure, pulse,
temperature and iron count, including cholesterol screening, plus a coupon for a
free Chick-fil-A sandwich and chicken minis.

Confirmations Set At Hope Lutheran

PLANT CITY - The members of Hope Lutheran Church will celebrate the rite of
confirmation May 6 for five youths.

The service, which will begin at 9:15 a.m., will be led by the Rev. Dean Pfeffer
at the church, 2001 N. Park Road.

Those to be confirmed follow two years of instruction in the Christian faith and
Lutheran teachings. They are:

Shayla Bryant, daughter of Melissa Bryant; Sabrina Cotton, daughter of DeAnne
Benton and Howard Cotton; Jeremy King, son of Chris and Rebecca Seabolt; Krystal
Parrish, daughter of Johnnie and Kelly Parrish; Andy Petersen, son of Dane and
Cindy Petersen.

For information, call the church at (813) 752-4622.

Agriculturists Invited To Free Workshop

SEFFNER - A workshop on the USDA Value-Added Producer Grant Program will be held
from 2 to 4 p.m. Monday by the Hillsborough County Cooperative Extension
Service, the Hillsborough County Agriculture Industry Development Program and
the USDA.

The workshop will be at the extension service office, 5339 County Road 579 in
Seffner

The free workshop will help participants learn more about value-added
agriculture, opportunities that may exist locally and how to apply for the
grants. Some of the topics will include: a description of value-added
agriculture, potential value-added strategies and resources to assist such
projects.

The USDA grant awards matching funds to be used for expenses involved in
business planning activities such as conducting a market analysis, developing a
marketing plan and working capital to establish or improve a value-added
agricultural enterprise and for farm-based renewable energy.

Those who are eligible for the program include independent producers, farmer and
rancher cooperatives, agricultural producer groups and majority-controlled
producer-based business ventures.

For information, call the extension office, (813) 744-5519.

Neighbors columnist Barbara Kent reports on community news. Items submitted must
include a telephone number. Items may be faxed to (813) 865-4441 or mailed to
Neighbors, 101 N. Wheeler St., Plant City FL 33563.

Photo credit: Tribune file photo by JULIE BUSCH

Photo: A painting by Jules Burt, who has a gallery in Tampa, will be used
onstage in Plant City Entertainment's "Steel Magnolias."

Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2007 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune


                              615 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                              May 5, 1988 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

FARM SUBSIDIES RISING DESPITE ACTION: REPORT

BYLINE: NELSON GRAVES of Reuter

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 404 words


Governments have continued to increase subsidies paid to farmers despite
international support to reverse the trend, according to an American report.

It found that Japan and South Korea had the most pervasive systems to support
domestic producers but the European Community, Canada and the United States also
boosted assistance to farmers.

The report updates a 1987 study of government policies' effect on producer
revenue and consumer cost, and was prepared by the US Agriculture Department's
Economic Research Service.

The report was closely examined by negotiators in world trade liberalisation
talks within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

The US proposed eliminating all trade distorting farm subsidies within 10 years.
Other countries acknowledged the need for cuts although some disagreed with the
ambitious timetable and scope of the proposal.

The new data reinforced three main conclusions of last year's study:

* Less developed countries tend to use subsidies to aid consumers.

* Developed countries tend to assist producers.

* Subsidies to producers of food grains, dairy products and sugar tend to be
higher than aid to other producers.

Examining Japanese Government policies on 12 commodities, the report said the
average farmer received 79 per cent of the value of his output in the form of
subsidies. That percentage, the Producer Subsidy Equivalent, was up from an
average of 72 per cent between 1982 and 1986.

The highest levels of Japanese assistance went to producers of milk, barley,
wheat, rice, sugar and beef. Producers of poultry and mandarin oranges received
less aid.

South Korea's PSE for 10 commodities was the second highest at 58 per cent but
below the 1982-86 average of 60 per cent.

The European Community's PSE for 13 commodities rose to 50 per cent, meaning
nearly half the value of commodities sold came in the form of government
subsidies. Rice, rapeseed and milk were the most heavily subsidied

Subsidies to EC soybean, beef and sugar producers fell between 1985 and 1986.
The EC's average PSE in 1982-86 was 35 per cent.

The US PSE for 12 commodities soared to 36 per cent in 1986 from a 1982-86
average of 25 per cent, pushed up by higher income subsidies to wheat,
feedgrains and rice farmers following enactment of the 1985 Farm Bill.

US subsidies for every commodity measured by the study rose between 1985 and
1986. Sugar, barley, rice and wheat were the most heavily subsidised products.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1988 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              616 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                          Sunday Times (South Africa)

                                October 19, 2003

The director who asked for more

BYLINE: Gill Moodie

SECTION: Arts, Culture & Entertainment; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 608 words


The director who asked

for more

Local version of Oliver Twist made possible by filmmaker's novel approach to
fundraising

GOTTA PICK A POCKET OR TWO: Director Tim Greene with Producers Clare van Zyl and
Aurelia Driver in the Bo-Kaap Picture: TERRY SHEAN

GILL MOODIE



SOUTH Africa's most innovative film project is in the can - made possible with
funding from about 800 investors who coughed up R1 000 a piece.

There was only enough money to shoot the local version of Oliver Twist in three
weeks, but director Tim Greene pulled it off. He is now concentrating on raising
money to edit and print the film.

"It was a hell of a thing - the mountain of the stuff we shot in 21 days,"
explained Greene. "We were everywhere: across the Swartland, in the city and the
Bo-Kaap."

Twist began with Greene putting his script on the Internet along with a message
asking for pledges of R1 000 from the public.

Top actors Sello Maake ka Ncube, Bianca Amato and Akin Omotoso were among those
who were issued with share certificates in the film.

In what could become the longest associate producer credits in film history,
other investors included former Sunday Times editor Ken Owen, artist Brett
Murray, film producer David Wicht, radio host John Robbie - who also bought a
share for his young son - and musician Tim Parr.

The project raised R950 000 which was topped up by a R100 000 grant from the
Arts and Culture Trust and a R300 000 investment from the Spier Arts Trust.

In an adaptation of one of Charles Dickens' most famous characters, the
protagonist in Twist starts life in the Swartland and is sold from an orphanage
into child labour at a vineyard, before escaping into the hands of a Rasta who
runs a network of street-kid thieves in Cape Town.

Getting respected actors such as veteran stage and TV actress Terry Norton and
Sewende Laan's Peter Butler to take part was not hard, said producer Aurelia
Driver.

"Tim's so positive, he drew people to the project," she said.

Leslie Fong who plays Fagin - better known as Isidingo henchman Slu - said:
"When I did the audition, I was really hoping I would get it. I admired the
whole drive to get the film off the ground and I really wanted to be a part of
it."

The crew were paid a reduced rate, Driver said.

Greene, who has directed music videos, short films and the SABC 1 drama series
Tsha Tsha, said there was no money for overtime so Twist had to meticulously
planned.

"We ran it very tight. A few compromises had to made along the way but, all
told, it looks good."

The 780 associate producers were invited to "add value" to their investment by
becoming unpaid extras for a day.

Kim Engelbrecht, who plays Lolly in Isidingo and took the role of Nancy in
Twist, said: "Tim's had the story in his head for a very long time, so he knew
exactly what he wanted shot for shot and how each line should be delivered, so
the acting was easy."

Fong said the atmosphere on set made up for the time constraints.

"There was a real sense of adventure. There was a sense of really doing
something we all believed in."

Greene reckons another couple of million is needed to finish the film, and aims
to have it ready to send to festivals in a year's time.

"People have got to take their eyes off this ridiculous notion that feature
films in this country have got to be funded internationally. It's hard enough to
make your first film without getting saddled with foreign trade deals.

"The fact of the matter is that if you think small and write something practical
and have an innovative strategy, the money is there."



LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                       Copyright 2003 Times Media Limited


                              617 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  The Press-Republican (Plattsburgh, New York)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           November 17, 2016 Thursday

Curve ball: sports producer to rabbi

BYLINE: Robin Caudell, The Press-Republican, Plattsburgh, N.Y.

SECTION: LIFESTYLE

LENGTH: 804 words


Nov. 17--PLATTSBURGH -- Judaism, a BFF and college-lessons learned twist like
Challah bread in Rabbi Daniel Price's life.

The 1979 alum presented "From Sports Producer to Rabbi: Lessons Learned Along
the Way," which was sponsored by the Jewish Studies Program and supported by a
grant from the Plattsburgh College Foundation and Plattsburgh Alumni
Association.

STORIES WITHIN STORIES

Plattsburgh pinged his radar during the winter of 1975.

He and his father were attending an uncle's funeral in Montreal.

A Peekskill native, he had attended high school in Israel and was keen on
joining his friends in the Israeli Army.

"We came through here, and my dad said, 'Well what abut this place?'" said
Price, who is a rabbi at Temple Israel of Westport in southern Connecticut.

"I said, 'Yeah. Yeah.'"

At SUNY Plattsburgh, Price meandered from history to music to radio to
television production.

During his sophomore year, he studied for a year at the Hebrew University with
other SUNY students.

At the college, he worked at WPLT when it was limited cable and at the TV
station when it had clunky, outdated Golden-Age-of-television equipment.

"We got to learn real production values and real important things," Price said.

He graduated in May 1979 and paid tuition for a summer internship at WPTZ.

While there, he ran the audio after the regular got sick.

Price did a second internship and worked at WPTZ and also the college-radio
station.

On his birthday, Oct. 20, 1979, WPTZ hired him as a production assistant.

ALL SHOOK UP

But Israel beckoned.

So did Susanna Burgett, a brilliant blonde, whose beautiful voice sent him gaga
over her.

In spring 1980, he moved to Israel.

Burgett had written him a long note outlining what could have been.

In Israel, despite his TV contacts, things moved slow -- too slow for Price.

Israel or Burgett?

"Israel will always be here," Price said.

"I'm going to find that girl in Plattsburgh. So, I went back to find the girl."

The two had a six-year relationship and a 29-year friendship that ended with her
death in 2008.

He established the Susanna C. Burgett Scholarship open to female students with a
3.0 GPA and financial need at the college.

HEAD HUNTED

After leaving the Holy Land, Price worked at Record Town Pyramid Mall.

Four months into his new job, WPTZ bigwigs walked into Record Town and offered
Price a position at the station.

After seven years total in Plattsburgh, he relocated to Connecticut to work at
Satellite News Channel.

"We were going to blow CNN out of the water," Price said.

"After a year and half, Ted Turner bought us out."

He was one of 400 people thrown to the wind.

RIGHT PLACE, RIGHT TIME

He took a production job in Northfield, N.J. On his lunch hour, he gabbed with a
deli worker he new from Burlington, Vt.

One day in the deli, he met a Major League Baseball productions manager.

While working at WPTZ, Price and Rick Whitlow produced Montreal Expos news
packages for NBC.

He sent a video to the MLB manager in NYC.

The manager's assistant replied, "Jeff and I looked at your video. It's very
good but we have nothing for you at this time. If you're ever in NY, look us
up."

The assistant's words stayed with Price.

In the interim, he landed a directing job at a Hartford, Conn., station.

At the same time, his relationship with Burgett ended.

He quit his job.

DOWN AND OUT

He went to NYC to cry on a friend's shoulder.

On a stroll down Park Avenue, he asked himself, what are you going to do the
rest of your life?

He visited a friend who worked at NBC and saw Letterman in action.

He remembered that MLB letter and quickly found himself on the 19th floor of a
skyscraper on the Avenue of the Americas.

He walked into an offline-editor job, "This Week in Baseball," in Conn.

Later, Price started the American arm of NHL Productions.

He attended World Series, Stanley Cups and Final Fours.

CAN'T GET NO SATISFACTION

After eight-and-a-half years, he dunked the dream and returned to directing live
television.

He worked at USA Networks, Biography on A&E, History Channel shows, CNBC, MSNBC
and Sport Channel NY, the predecessor to Fox Sports Network.

Midlife Price asked himself, what's the end game here?

He was married with kids.

He couldn't do the adrenaline-rush television anymore.

"I went home for six months, and I thought about it," Price said.

ANCESTRAL RITUALS

He hails from a centuries-old lineage of rabbis.

His maternal grandfather was a cantor.

He entered rabbinical school at the Academy for Jewish Religion.

"Rarely in the middle of your life do you have the opportunity for personal
growth," Price said.

"I would never trade those years that I spent learning for anything."

Email Robin Caudell:

rcaudell@pressrepublican.com

Twitter:@RobinCaudell

___ (c)2016 the Press-Republican (Plattsburgh, N.Y.) Visit the Press-Republican
(Plattsburgh, N.Y.) at pressrepublican.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20161117-ZI-Curve-ball-sports-producer-to-rabbi-1117-20161117

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZI


                      Copyright 2016 The Press-Republican


                              618 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                                August 18, 2000

Glanbia/Leprino say cheese

SECTION: CITY EDITION; BUSINESS THIS WEEK 1; CURRENT ACCOUNT; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 652 words


Glanbia/Leprino say cheese of the family-owned group that is the biggest
mozzarella producer in the world, doesn't harbour corporate grudges. If he had,
it's unlikely that Leprino would have so eagerly jumped into bed with Glanbia by
spending (pounds) 27.5 million (E35 million) for close to a half-share in
Glanbia's mozzarella business.

This isn't the first time that Leprino - probably unique in the world food
industry in being not just privately-owned but family-controlled for the past 86
years - has tried to get into the European mozzarella industry by linking up
with an Irish producer. Five years ago, Leprino set up a joint venture with
Golden Vale to build a (pounds) 25 million plant in Fermanagh with lots of
support supposed to come from the North's Industrial Development Board (IDB).

That joint venture - and particularly the planned grant aid from the IDB - led
to a storm of protest from an organisation called the European Association of
Mozzarella Manufacturers, which claimed that state support for a new producer
was unfair and threatened to go all the way to the European Commission to block
the move.

The Commission, however, gave the thumbs up to the (pounds) 4 million grant aid
for the project.

And who were some of the leading lights in this trade association that tried to
put the kybosh on Golden Vale and Leprino's plans? Well, it included Avonmore
and Waterford Foods (now less than happy bedfellows in Glanbia) and Carbery Milk
Products.

Eventually, Golden Vale and Leprino abandoned the Fermanagh mozzarella plan
because it could not get the commitments from pizza companies for the minimum
required production of mozzarella. The reality was, however, that Avonmore beat
Golden Vale/Leprino to a big supply contract from Pizza Hut.

Five years on and the mozzarella scene has changed. Golden Vale no longer has
any interest, with Jim Murphy focusing more on ready meals, and getting out of
dairy processing. Pat O'Neill no longer heads Glanbia, with Ned Sullivan now
running the show and succeeding in building relations with Jim Leprino to the
extent that allows Leprino and Glanbia to join forces to launch a charge on the
European market.

Purely on the finances, it looks like Leprino is paying a full price for its 49
per cent stake in the Glanbia mozzarella business, with the (pounds) 27.5
million for the half stake representing almost 11 times the Glanbia division's
1999 pre-tax profits. But as well as cash, Leprino - acknowledged as a world
leader in mozzarella production technology - is bringing its own expertise to
the joint venture and that should pay dividends.

But the stock market hasn't paid a blind bit of notice to the Glanbia/Leprino
deal. The price paid by Leprino for its stake values the Glanbia mozzarella
business at (pounds) 55 million. That means that the market values the rest of
Glanbia's business - the Irish dairy operations, processed meats operations in
Ireland and Britain and its successful dairy business in Idaho in the US - at
just (pounds) 95 million. That sort of valuation is hardly justified.

This column has never been a great fan of Glanbia since the merger that was
overly generous to its Irish milk producers. But there are signs of light at the
end of the tunnel. Dairy commodity prices are improving, the 3p a gallon milk
price premium guaranteed to farmers runs out this year, and Idaho has turned
into a gem of a business.

It may be too early to say that Glanbia is a recovery play, but the current
price in the market - less than five times current year earnings forecasts - is
oversold.

That, however, will mean little to Irish institutional investors focused on
large euro-zone investments and with little interest in small Irish food
companies, especially those like Glanbia which is effectively controlled by its
raw material suppliers - the farmers who own the co-op, which owns 54 per cent
of the plc.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 2000 The Irish Times


                              619 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                                October 15, 2001

NEWS: 999

SECTION: NEWS: 999, Pg.9

LENGTH: 838 words


'It's a very important initiative for us, we are delighted at the news'

GBP 3m to promote best Cornish food

Jamie Smith

MORE than 400 food and drink producers are set to benefit from a GBP 3 million
Objective One-funded project which aims to put 100 Cornish products on shop
shelves in the next three years.

Run by speciality food group Taste of the West, the project will promote the
quality and diversity of Cornish food and drink through a wide -ranging
programme which will include grant support, marketing advice and research, new
promotional material and a dedicated Cornish Shopping Mall website.

Humphry Stobart, NFU Cornwall Forum chairman for fresh produce, last night
welcomed the announcement.

He said: "Promotion is probably the biggest factor in making a business work and
be successful. If you get that right and you've got the right product you're on
to a winner."

Costing just over GBP 3 million, the project has secured GBP 1 million from
Objective One, which has been matched by the Department of Food and Rural
Affairs, with the balance coming from the private sector.

The project will assist 210 businesses with preliminary technical or business
advice, help an additional 210 businesses increase their use of Cornish produce
and provide 125 businesses with capital grants.

Tim Jones, chairman of Devon and Cornwall Business Council, said the council
would definitely support the initiative. He said: "We've been holding talks
about the issue and about setting up some genuine co-operatives in Devon and
Cornwall to help farms into traditional farming methods so that they are adding
value in their own particular areas. It's a very important initiative for us, we
are delighted at the news, it will get the full support of the business
council."

Part of the project will be a trade development programme to create sales
opportunities for Cornish food and drink businesses and help them become more
competitive.

This will be achieved through "meet the buyer" events, group attendance at major
food shows in Cornwall and nationally, direct marketing, e-commerce, the
development of a marketing intelligence service, encouraging co-operative
marketing and the compilation of buyer directories and consumer leaflets.

To help food and drink producers break into new markets, the project will run a
marketing grants scheme, which will provide cash support to help local
businesses develop new products and promote themselves.

Project manager Graham Woolcock said the marketplace for small specialist
regional food producers had been made increasingly difficult by the growth of
out-of-town supermarkets.

And in a week which has seen a new survey reveal that average farm incomes
dropped to just GBP 2,500 last year food producers need all the help they can
get.

Mr Woolcock said: "This scheme is required because, with the present economic
conditions resulting in slim or negative profit margins, farmers are unable to
finance upgrading their operations and technical expertise from normal funds."

Over the next three years, it is hoped the funding will put a hundred new
products on the shop shelves. Mr Woolcock said: "The county is already known for
dairy products and specialist foods, such as biscuits and wine, but now we want
to broaden the range and appeal. This is where technical expertise is
necessary."

In addition to encouraging Cornwall's agriculture industry to diversify by
developing and selling its produce, the money will also contribute to the post
of Food Sector Development Adviser.

Cornwall's Food Sector Development Adviser is Amanda Fielder. Her task is to act
as a matchmaker, putting food producers and potential purchasers n be they
hotels, supermarkets or local authorities n in touch with one another. She is
currently endeavouring to bring Cornish schools into her list of buyers.

She said: "Farmers have enough work on their hands with day-to-day farm
administration without having to cope with distribution problems. Without the
European funding, they would have all been left without a vital link in the
chain."

The advice to farmers and food producers will be supplied through Business Link
Devon and Cornwall, which is run by Prosper. The service will manage the scheme
along with the Rural Diversification Capital Grant Initiative. On top of this
responsibility, Prosper is delivering the Farm Business Advice Service and two
other proposed projects to aid the industry.

Dick Waterson, of the Food in Cornwall Association, which represents around 40
restaurants, said: "It is another step in the same direction that we have been
travelling, we see it as a confirmation of the principles to which we adhere."

Hilary Wood, from the Cornwall branch of the Women's Food and Farming Union,
which has itself produced a directory of local suppliers, said: "We've been
shown how important this is by the popularity of the directory, we've produced n
20,000 copies have all gone and it's being reprinted."

FEAST YOUR EYES: Cornish organic produce

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

                      Copyright 2001 Western Morning News


                              620 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                          September 15, 2016 Thursday
                                 Print Edition

Land protection: Grain Produce...

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 336 words


Land protection: Grain Producers SA has called on federal Agriculture Minister
Barnaby Joyce to protect grain production in SA by supporting a moratorium on
mining on prime agricultural land. Mr Joyce is on record as saying that mining
should not occur on prime agricultural land. While the comment was made in the
context of prime farming land on the NSW Liverpool Plains, GPSA has analysed
land values between NSW and SA. According to the SA Valuer General, many parts
of the state's farmland are valued between $4000 a hectare and $10,000/ha, well
above the value of the prime agricultural land of the Liverpool Plains. With
less than five per cent of SA's land available for agricultural production, it
is imperative that what is left is protected.

Visa review: Livestock SA has made comments to the working holiday maker visa
review, seeking a change to the backpacker tax. They also sought an increase to
the maximum time backpackers can be employed on one property in SA's pastoral
region from six to 12 months. In the NT it was increased last year to 12 months,
and this same flexibility is required for outback SA. Premier Jay Weatherill has
also written to the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton
about this issue on Livestock SA's behalf.

Grape transport: Getting grapes to wineries was again an issue at vintage, with
some major delivery delays at wineries, differing interpretation of regulations
by inspectors and police, B-double access problems and confusion about who needs
to use log books. Wine Grape Council of SA is still keen to hear growers'
experiences so that these can be addressed before next year if possible.

Pinery grants: Primary Producers SA wishes to remind farmers in the council
areas of Clare and Gilbert Valleys, Light, Mallala and Wakefield that funding
applications for those who suffered direct damage in the Pinery fire close on
November 4. Grants of up to $10,000 are available for any clean-up and
reinstatement costs that were not covered by insurance.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              621 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                              May 22, 2011 Sunday

agriculture briefs

BYLINE: Telegraph Herald

SECTION: B; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 338 words


Program might help

cover honeybee losses

Eligible producers who lost honeybees, honeybee hives, or harvested and
purchased feed due to adverse weather or colony collapse disorder (CCD) before

Oct. 1, can register for the federal Department of Agriculture's Emergency
Livestock Assistance Program (ELAP).

Applicants are eligible for payments based on 60 percent of the average fair
market value, as determined by the federal Farm Service Agency. The payment
rates, established by the FSA, for 2011 honeybee colonies and hives are based on
the average fair market values of honeybee colonies and/or hives. The Farm
Service Agency has established the following average fair market values for 2011
honeybee losses: $70 per honeybee colony or $200 per honeybee hive.

More information on ELAP is available at the local FSA county offices or on the
Internet at www.fsa.usda.gov.

Sessions planned

for beef producers

MAQUOKETA, Iowa - A five-session program to help eastern Iowa beef producers
increase their grazing knowledge and skills will begin in June.

The workshops, all near Maquoketa, will begin at

1 p.m. and last through late afternoon. The sessions are scheduled for
Wednesday, June 8, Wednesday, July 6, Thursday, Aug. 4, Tuesday, Aug. 30, and a
date to be determined in early November.

The cost is $75 for the entire series. To register or get more information, call
the Benton County ISU Extension Office at 319-472-4739.

Agency extends

reporting deadline

The federal Farm Service Agency is extending the deadline to submit 2010 Average
Crop Revenue Election (ACRE) production reports for planted acres to Sept. 1.

Producers are reminded that the July 15 deadline is still in place to report the
annual acreage and that the Sept. 1 extension is only for reporting ACRE
production reports, according to Jared Reuter, executive director of the Grant
County (Wis.) Farm Service Agency.

More information about the 2010 production reports for ACRE is available at
local FSA county offices or on the Internet at www.fsa.usda.gov.

Telegraph Herald

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2011 Woodward Communications, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              622 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Clovis News Journal (New Mexico)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            February 18, 2011 Friday

BRIEF: Ag training sessions available

BYLINE: Clovis News Journal, N.M.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 165 words


Feb. 18--The U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development is conducting free
training sessions for its Rural Energy for America Program and Value Added
Producer Grant program.

Eligible applicants for REAP include agricultural producers and rural small
businesses. Eligible applicants for VAPG include independent producers, farmers
or rancher cooperatives, agricultural producer groups and majority-controlled
producer-based business ventures.

A session will be held 3-4:30 p.m. Wednesday at the Blue Hole Dive Training and
Conference Center in Santa Rosa, and through March 3 in six other New Mexico
cities.

Information: Kim Giang, 505-761-4953.

To see more of The Clovis News Journal or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.clovis-news-nm.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Clovis News Journal, N.M.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110218-CJ-BRF-Ag-training-sessions-available-20110218

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CJ


                       Copyright 2011 Clovis News Journal


                              623 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 18, 2015 Wednesday

West Virginia: New land-grant impacts site highlights WVU Extension's mission to
bring trusted resources to local communities

LENGTH: 782  words

DATELINE: Charleston


West Virginia University, The state of West Virginia has issued the following
news release:

Learning how West Virginia University Extension Service's people and programs
help to better the lives of West Virginians is just one benefit of the new land-
grant Impacts website launched this month.

WVU Extension Service Interim Director Steve Bonanno said that while the site
doesn't take into account all of Extension's programming or public value, the
portal is a good representation of how the land-grant system works.

"As a land grant university, we're committed to making our research and programs
beneficial and accessible to people across the state," he said. "The land-grant
impacts site takes the same approach, showing the benefit of your tax dollars in
action."

The site specifically highlights the teaching, research and learning efforts of
land-grant universities. It can be searched by topic area, geographic region or
even simplified to a specific state. The site also informs users about the
history of the land-grant university system and how its mission has evolved
since the systems' founding.

"This new tool will better inform people of the significant agricultural
research, education and Extension impacts taking place at land grant
universities across our nation, which offer practical solutions to today's
critical societal challenges," said Sonny Ramaswamy, director of the National
Institute of Food and Agriculture, U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Ramaswamy says that the website will help policy makers and the public learn
more about the work that is partially supported with NIFA funding, too.

WVU is one of the 238 public research universities, land-grant institutions,
state university systems and affiliated organizations represented by The
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities. The Land-grant university
system has affiliations in all 50 states, the four U.S. territories, the
District of Columbia, Mexico and Canada.

To learn more about WVU Extension Service, visit ext.wvu.edu, or contact your
local county office.

Some recent accomplishments of WVU Extension include:

2013, The Energy Express program increases literacy skills and provides summer
foods for low-resource children. 121,338 meals were served to children
participating in the program and 9,378 meals were served to community youth.
2013, Youth improve healthy lifestyle skills and practices. The Family Nutrition
Program (SNAPed and EFNEP) in West Virginia enrolled 17,294 youths in its
programs. Eighty-four percent of youths in the SNAPed program improved their
ability to choose foods according to Federal Dietary Recommendations.
Thirty-three percent of youths in the SNAPed program improved their physical
activity practices. Eighty-five percent of the youths in the EFNEP program
improved their abilities to choose foods according to the Federal Dietary
Recommendations. Thirty-seven percent of the youths in the EFNEP program
improved their physical activity practices.
2013, STEM ambassadors are role models for 4-H youth. During the combined
2012-2013 camping seasons, STEM Ambassadors provided over 3,000 hours of applied
instruction in science and engineering to more than 10,000 K-12 students
statewide.
WVU-ES has implemented programs designed to train adults and youth to implement
programs designed to improve skills in avoiding use of illegal and/or addictive
substances such as the Health Rocks program for 4-H youths. As a result, in the
Health Rocks program, over 88 percent of youth participants were confident that
they would be able to say "no" if other people, such as their friends or peers,
offer them drugs. In addition, over 85 percent of youth participants were
confident that they would be able to deal with stress by using stress management
skills, such as talking about it with someone they trust.
West Virginians improve skills in farm management. The 2013 WVU Extension
Service Small Farms Conference was held from February 28 to March 1. Over 800
participants in farm management workshops in West Virginia improved their skills
in the business side of agritourism and other small farm operations.
2013, Improved cattle quality through increased participation in state's cattle
marketing pools. West Virginia University Extension staff help organize beef
producers into marketing pools that assist producers in selling improved cattle
that command a premium price, thus increasing income and state revenues. One
hundred sixteen producers participated in the marketing pools in 2013 and
benefited from the analysis of cattle though a livestock database.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              624 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

                             July 20, 2013 Saturday

Filmmaker Coogler brings heart, talent to Fruitvale Station

SECTION: D; Pg. D11

LENGTH: 1100 words


LOS ANGELES - Ryan Coogler is back on the University of Southern California
campus for the first time since becoming one of the country's most promising
young filmmakers, and he heads straight to the camera-rental centre where he
worked as a student. He runs into a former classmate, who high-fives and
congratulates him, then asks for a photo. Coogler sheepishly obliges.

"This is inspiring, right here!" the younger man says as he snaps an iPhone shot
of himself and Coogler. "Thank you, bro!"

Coogler gives the student his email address, then looks for his old boss, the
equipment manager, who tells the 27-year-old filmmaker that he's set a new
standard for success at USC's film school, which counts Ron Howard and George
Lucas as alumni.

There's no doubt he has. Coogler's Fruitvale Station - his first dramatic
feature and first project since graduating with a master's degree in 2011 - won
both jury and audience awards at the Sundance Film Festival, where the Weinstein
Co. outbid a dozen studios to distribute it. Originally called simply Fruitvale,
the film opens Friday in New York and Los Angeles, and around the nation later
this month. Oscar buzz has already begun.

But nothing like that was on Coogler's mind when he decided to make the film. A
native of Oakland, Calif., he was home for Christmas break during his first year
at film school when 22-year-old Oscar Grant was shot by transit police in the
city's Fruitvale station on New Year's Eve 2009. Scores of witnesses filmed the
fatal shooting of the unarmed black man by white officer Johannes Mehserle on
their cellphones, and riots and protests exploded in Oakland and around the
country. (Mehserle was eventually convicted of involuntary manslaughter and
sentenced to two years behind bars.)

Coogler was also 22 then, looked like Grant and came from the same
neighbourhood. It could have been him that night, he thought.

"I wanted to do something that could potentially have a proactive effect, that
could maybe trigger a thought process or a discussion that could possibly
prevent things like this from happening in the future," he said. "And I thought
a film could be effective in proving this person's humanity."

Coogler has the athletic build of the football star he was, and a gregarious
personality that leads him to greet several students he passes on campus. But
there's something deeper: a profound desire to tell stories that aren't often
heard, stories of people like him, like Oscar Grant. It's a passion that
inspired him to abandon dreams of medical school to pursue filmmaking.

It's that drive, along with Coogler's talent, that caught the eye of USC
professor Jed Dannenbaum, who contacted producer Nina Yang Bongiovi, telling her
there's someone she had to meet.

"He's truly brilliant," Bongiovi remembers the professor saying.

She met with Coogler, and he gave her some short films he'd made at school. She
watched them immediately and told collaborator Forest Whitaker, who'd been
seeking a young artist to mentor, that they just had to work with him.

"I felt he was going to be one of those important filmmakers of his generation,"
she said.

She set up a meeting between the Oscar winner and the college student, who
remembers wearing a shirt and tie to school that day.

"I was really nervous," Coogler said, recalling how he attended the meeting
between classes and had to bring his backpack along.

He told Whitaker his ideas for Fruitvale, "and he said he wanted to help me make
it," Coogler recalled, lighting up at the memory.

After signing on with Whitaker's Significant Productions, the filmmaker
approached Grant's family in the same humble, open-hearted way he dealt with his
classmates at USC.

"It was my first time making a film; I didn't want to hide that," he said. "I
was young; I was the same age Oscar would have been had he still been alive, but
I thought those things were in my favour in many ways."

Coogler wasn't looking to sensationalize anything. As a young, black Oakland
resident who saw himself and his friends in Grant, Coogler sincerely wanted to
reflect his neighbourhood and the people he knew.

"I wasn't trying to do this to further my career," he said. "I just wanted to
tell the story."

So with the family's blessing and Whitaker's support, he did, recounting the
last day in the 22-year-old's life. The film shows his struggles with his
girlfriend and his prison past; his illuminating love for his young daughter and
desire to be a good dad; his devotion to his mom and grandmother; his penchant
for drug dealing and angry outbursts; and how much he meant to those closest to
him.

Fruitvale is not a documentary, but a dramatization based on court documents,
cellphone footage and extensive interviews with Grant's family and friends.

"I feel like we put different values on different types of lives, just
inherently, and I think people like Oscar, their lives have very little value,"
Coogler said. "(We) see things like this happen all the time and don't bat an
eyelash. But these people are human beings, and their lives matter. And what
better way to get to the bottom of who he was than through the lens of (his)
relationships."

Michael B. Jordan, best known for his work on The Wire and Friday Night Lights,
embodies his first leading role as the charming and conflicted Grant. Grant's
mother is played by Octavia Spencer, who also hopped on board as a producer,
securing financing from investors including The Help author Kathryn Stockett.

That the Trayvon Martin case is playing out while this film hits theatres
underscores the need for more stories like this, Coogler said.

"People who look like Oscar, who look like Trayvon, are dying every day on the
streets of our country - not only being shot by a police officer or not only
being shot by somebody using vigilante tactics, but oftentimes being shot by
someone that looks just like them," he said. "These lives matter, and we
shouldn't just stand by while this is happening."

Considering how much his life has changed since he left USC - he's made an
award-winning film, attended the Cannes Film Festival and is invited to ever
more Hollywood events - makes Coogler even more cognisant of his blessings and
responsibilities as a storyteller.

He still lives in Oakland, maintains his day job at Juvenile Hall in San
Francisco and hopes to continue "to make things that are true to myself."

"I'm constantly reminded where my life could be were it not for a few things,
were it not for the parents that I had, or me being two inches here instead of
two inches there sometimes," he said. "I don't think it's something I ever plan
to forget."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2013 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                               Publications Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              625 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                            February 6, 2012 Monday

BOTSWANA : Improving Rural Livelihoods Through Market Access and Sustainable
Development of Crafts in Kacgae, East and West Hanahai
(BOT/SGP/OP5/CORE/BD/11/11) Project

LENGTH: 501  words


Country: BOTSWANA
Grantee: Permaculture Trust of Botswana - Ghanzi Branch - PTB (Community Based
Organization)
Focal Area: Biodiversity
Op. Program: OP1 - Arid and Semi-Arid Ecosystems
Project Type: Full
Operational Phase: OP5- Y1 (Jul 11 - Jun 12)


Dates:  12/2011 - 12/2013
Grant Amount:  41 112,00 USD
The project seeks to establish sustainable high value market linkages for the
crafts through the establishment of a Craft Producers Association covering three
communities in Ghanzi District, Botswana, whose main task would be to source for
and engage with high value markets for the crafts. In each settlement, a craft
shop shall be set up to consolidate, bulk and market and crafts. A craft shop
will be set up in Ghanzi town to target the tourist market and urban customers.
The marketing association will be trained on marketing principles pricing and
sales management. Craft producers will be trained in quality control for product
standardization.
Notable Community Participation
Community beneficiaries and their leaders will be directly involved in the
project right from project inception,participatory monitoring and evaluation to
completion. Local gorvement departments such as Tourism and Wildlife and Foresty
will also be involved in planning and actioning of the project. The
establishment of self-managing local business institutions and associations will
ensure that rural communities continue to support each other and undertake the
livelihood strategies facilitated under this initiative. The capacity building
efforts will ensure that the local institutions such as XNRCT and associations
have internal capacity to organize and run their own affairs as well as to
maintain and negotiate partnerships, agreements and contracts with private
sector partners. Exchange vsisits for information sharing, sharing experiences,
lessons learnt, successes and challenges of craft production will be facilitated
for beneficiaries with other established craft weavers in and across the
borders.
Capacity - Building Component
PTB will work in partnership with Xwiskurusa Natural Resource Conservation
Trust, a community based organization in the settlements, in the implementation
of the action as a way to ensure sustainability, expand the scope and scale of
programming, and build capacity within the Trust and the community in general.
The partnership will promote capacity building initiatives for XNRCT to manage
development programs, improve quality of life through sustainable service
delivery, better responsiveness to local development needs, and upscale scope of
the program.

Permaculture will develop skills in XNRCT in project quality management and
community participatory approaches. PTB will undertake collaborative learning
activities with XNRCT in:
Participatory monitoring and evaluation (including participatory impact
assessment)
Mainstreaming HIV/AIDS, gender and environment protection
Integrated programming approach
Managing business par

country :Botswana
Ltd.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2012 Tenders Info
                         Syndigate.info, Al bawaba.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              626 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 9, 2015 Thursday

Illinois: USDA Awards Grants to Address Water Quality, Availability in
Agriculture Communities

LENGTH: 875  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Agriculture has issued the following news release:

WASHINGTON, April 7, 2015 - The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) today announced 21 grants totaling more
than $10 million have been awarded to universities to support critical water
problems in rural and agricultural watersheds across the United States. The
awards were made through NIFA's Agriculture and Food Research Initiative (AFRI)
Water for Agriculture challenge area and the National Integrated Water Quality
Program.

"Water is our most precious resource, one that is essential for both human
survival and well-being and for our ability to grow our crops and livestock,"
said Sonny Ramaswamy, NIFA director. "By funding research, extension, and
education for citizens and the agriculture community, we are able to proactively
create solutions to water-related issues like drought and its impact on food
security."

The AFRI Water for Agriculture challenge area was first introduced in fiscal
year (FY) 2014, and these grants represent the first year of funding for the
program. Funded projects link social, economic, and behavioral sciences with
traditional biophysical sciences and engineering to address regional scale
issues with shared hydrological processes, and meteorological and basin
characteristics. Fiscal year 2014 Water for Agriculture grants recipients are:

University of California, Riverside, Calif., $149,990
    Georgia College and State University, Milledgeville, Ga., $56,943
    Purdue University, West Lafayette, Ind., $999,438
    Michigan State University, East Lansing, Mich., $900,000
    University of Missouri, Kansas City, Mo., $148,995
    University of Nevada, Reno, Nev., $500,000
    State University of New York's College of Environmental Science and
Forestry, Syracuse, N.Y., $128,511
    Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, $49,968
    Clemson University, Clemson, S.C., $150,000
    University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tenn., $900,000
    West Texas A&M University, Canyon, Texas, $149,777
    University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas, $900,000
    Utah State University, Logan, Utah, $49,534
    University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisc., $900,000

This year's projects include the University of Nevada's Coordinated Agricultural
Program designed to increase research and participatory engagement with American
Indians and assess the impacts of climate change on future water supplies and
enhance the climate resiliency of tribal agriculture. Another project from
Clemson University will integrate remote sensing products and weather forecast
information for farmers and growers to address the best products, increase
agricultural drought indices, and develop an agricultural drought forecasting
model to provide near real-time feedback.

NIFA is expected to make $30 million available over the next five years for the
AFRI Water for Agriculture challenge area, with the expectation that the new
projects awarded this fiscal year would receive additional funds (based on
available funding) if they achievement project objectives and milestones.

The FY 2015 request for applications for the AFRI Water for Agriculture
challenge was released on February 18, 2015. Applications are due July 16, 2015.

NIFA also funded projects through the National Integrated Water Quality Program
(NIWQP) for science-based decision making and management practices that improve
the quality and quantity of the Nation's water resources in agricultural, rural,
and urbanizing watersheds. Applicants were asked to develop the science behind
the most appropriate drought triggers and provide an understanding of the
connection between trigger levels and drought management responses or decisions;
or provide estimates of the economic value of water across different uses. The
approaches to estimating water values will reflect uncertainties associated with
future weather and climate conditions. Quantifying the value of water will
provide valuable signals to agricultural producers, rural communities, and
policy makers to aid decision-making for allocating agricultural water use
across consumptive or non-consumptive uses.

Fiscal Year 2014 NIWQP grant recipients are:

Colorado State University, Ft. Collins, Colo., $659,954
    University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn., $750,000
    University of Florida, Gainesville, Fla., $659,676
    Indiana University, Bloomington, Ind., $659,839
    Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, $660,000
    South Dakota State University, Brookings, S.D., $227,135
    University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tenn., $659,926

This year's projects include South Dakota State University's research to
identify drought triggers, develop mitigation plans, investigate socio-economic
factors associated with new technology adoption, and educate different age
groups of students about drought issues. The University of Tennessee will
execute a long-term plan to assist agricultural producers, policymakers, and
communities throughout the Southeastern United States as they adapt to water
scarcity by efficiently allocating water and adopting water-conserving practices
and technologies.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              627 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 7, 2015 Tuesday

Arizona: USDA Awards Grants to Address Water Quality, Availability in
Agriculture Communities

LENGTH: 875  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Agriculture has issued the following news release:

WASHINGTON, April 7, 2015 - The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) today announced 21 grants totaling more
than $10 million have been awarded to universities to support critical water
problems in rural and agricultural watersheds across the United States. The
awards were made through NIFA's Agriculture and Food Research Initiative (AFRI)
Water for Agriculture challenge area and the National Integrated Water Quality
Program.

"Water is our most precious resource, one that is essential for both human
survival and well-being and for our ability to grow our crops and livestock,"
said Sonny Ramaswamy, NIFA director. "By funding research, extension, and
education for citizens and the agriculture community, we are able to proactively
create solutions to water-related issues like drought and its impact on food
security."

The AFRI Water for Agriculture challenge area was first introduced in fiscal
year (FY) 2014, and these grants represent the first year of funding for the
program. Funded projects link social, economic, and behavioral sciences with
traditional biophysical sciences and engineering to address regional scale
issues with shared hydrological processes, and meteorological and basin
characteristics. Fiscal year 2014 Water for Agriculture grants recipients are:

University of California, Riverside, Calif., $149,990
    Georgia College and State University, Milledgeville, Ga., $56,943
    Purdue University, West Lafayette, Ind., $999,438
    Michigan State University, East Lansing, Mich., $900,000
    University of Missouri, Kansas City, Mo., $148,995
    University of Nevada, Reno, Nev., $500,000
    State University of New York's College of Environmental Science and
Forestry, Syracuse, N.Y., $128,511
    Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, $49,968
    Clemson University, Clemson, S.C., $150,000
    University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tenn., $900,000
    West Texas A&M University, Canyon, Texas, $149,777
    University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas, $900,000
    Utah State University, Logan, Utah, $49,534
    University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisc., $900,000

This year's projects include the University of Nevada's Coordinated Agricultural
Program designed to increase research and participatory engagement with American
Indians and assess the impacts of climate change on future water supplies and
enhance the climate resiliency of tribal agriculture. Another project from
Clemson University will integrate remote sensing products and weather forecast
information for farmers and growers to address the best products, increase
agricultural drought indices, and develop an agricultural drought forecasting
model to provide near real-time feedback.

NIFA is expected to make $30 million available over the next five years for the
AFRI Water for Agriculture challenge area, with the expectation that the new
projects awarded this fiscal year would receive additional funds (based on
available funding) if they achievement project objectives and milestones.

The FY 2015 request for applications for the AFRI Water for Agriculture
challenge was released on February 18, 2015. Applications are due July 16, 2015.

NIFA also funded projects through the National Integrated Water Quality Program
(NIWQP) for science-based decision making and management practices that improve
the quality and quantity of the Nation's water resources in agricultural, rural,
and urbanizing watersheds. Applicants were asked to develop the science behind
the most appropriate drought triggers and provide an understanding of the
connection between trigger levels and drought management responses or decisions;
or provide estimates of the economic value of water across different uses. The
approaches to estimating water values will reflect uncertainties associated with
future weather and climate conditions. Quantifying the value of water will
provide valuable signals to agricultural producers, rural communities, and
policy makers to aid decision-making for allocating agricultural water use
across consumptive or non-consumptive uses.

Fiscal Year 2014 NIWQP grant recipients are:

Colorado State University, Ft. Collins, Colo., $659,954
    University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn., $750,000
    University of Florida, Gainesville, Fla., $659,676
    Indiana University, Bloomington, Ind., $659,839
    Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, $660,000
    South Dakota State University, Brookings, S.D., $227,135
    University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tenn., $659,926

This year's projects include South Dakota State University's research to
identify drought triggers, develop mitigation plans, investigate socio-economic
factors associated with new technology adoption, and educate different age
groups of students about drought issues. The University of Tennessee will
execute a long-term plan to assist agricultural producers, policymakers, and
communities throughout the Southeastern United States as they adapt to water
scarcity by efficiently allocating water and adopting water-conserving practices
and technologies.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              628 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 7, 2015 Tuesday

Arizona: USDA Awards Grants to Address Water Quality, Availability in
Agriculture Communities

LENGTH: 875  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Agriculture has issued the following news release:

WASHINGTON, April 7, 2015 - The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) today announced 21 grants totaling more
than $10 million have been awarded to universities to support critical water
problems in rural and agricultural watersheds across the United States. The
awards were made through NIFA's Agriculture and Food Research Initiative (AFRI)
Water for Agriculture challenge area and the National Integrated Water Quality
Program.

"Water is our most precious resource, one that is essential for both human
survival and well-being and for our ability to grow our crops and livestock,"
said Sonny Ramaswamy, NIFA director. "By funding research, extension, and
education for citizens and the agriculture community, we are able to proactively
create solutions to water-related issues like drought and its impact on food
security."

The AFRI Water for Agriculture challenge area was first introduced in fiscal
year (FY) 2014, and these grants represent the first year of funding for the
program. Funded projects link social, economic, and behavioral sciences with
traditional biophysical sciences and engineering to address regional scale
issues with shared hydrological processes, and meteorological and basin
characteristics. Fiscal year 2014 Water for Agriculture grants recipients are:

University of California, Riverside, Calif., $149,990
    Georgia College and State University, Milledgeville, Ga., $56,943
    Purdue University, West Lafayette, Ind., $999,438
    Michigan State University, East Lansing, Mich., $900,000
    University of Missouri, Kansas City, Mo., $148,995
    University of Nevada, Reno, Nev., $500,000
    State University of New York's College of Environmental Science and
Forestry, Syracuse, N.Y., $128,511
    Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, $49,968
    Clemson University, Clemson, S.C., $150,000
    University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tenn., $900,000
    West Texas A&M University, Canyon, Texas, $149,777
    University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas, $900,000
    Utah State University, Logan, Utah, $49,534
    University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisc., $900,000

This year's projects include the University of Nevada's Coordinated Agricultural
Program designed to increase research and participatory engagement with American
Indians and assess the impacts of climate change on future water supplies and
enhance the climate resiliency of tribal agriculture. Another project from
Clemson University will integrate remote sensing products and weather forecast
information for farmers and growers to address the best products, increase
agricultural drought indices, and develop an agricultural drought forecasting
model to provide near real-time feedback.

NIFA is expected to make $30 million available over the next five years for the
AFRI Water for Agriculture challenge area, with the expectation that the new
projects awarded this fiscal year would receive additional funds (based on
available funding) if they achievement project objectives and milestones.

The FY 2015 request for applications for the AFRI Water for Agriculture
challenge was released on February 18, 2015. Applications are due July 16, 2015.

NIFA also funded projects through the National Integrated Water Quality Program
(NIWQP) for science-based decision making and management practices that improve
the quality and quantity of the Nation's water resources in agricultural, rural,
and urbanizing watersheds. Applicants were asked to develop the science behind
the most appropriate drought triggers and provide an understanding of the
connection between trigger levels and drought management responses or decisions;
or provide estimates of the economic value of water across different uses. The
approaches to estimating water values will reflect uncertainties associated with
future weather and climate conditions. Quantifying the value of water will
provide valuable signals to agricultural producers, rural communities, and
policy makers to aid decision-making for allocating agricultural water use
across consumptive or non-consumptive uses.

Fiscal Year 2014 NIWQP grant recipients are:

Colorado State University, Ft. Collins, Colo., $659,954
    University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn., $750,000
    University of Florida, Gainesville, Fla., $659,676
    Indiana University, Bloomington, Ind., $659,839
    Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, $660,000
    South Dakota State University, Brookings, S.D., $227,135
    University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tenn., $659,926

This year's projects include South Dakota State University's research to
identify drought triggers, develop mitigation plans, investigate socio-economic
factors associated with new technology adoption, and educate different age
groups of students about drought issues. The University of Tennessee will
execute a long-term plan to assist agricultural producers, policymakers, and
communities throughout the Southeastern United States as they adapt to water
scarcity by efficiently allocating water and adopting water-conserving practices
and technologies.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              629 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 30, 2016 Thursday

South Dakota: South Dakota Ag in the Classroom Seeks Donations of Ear Tags

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: New York



 Pierre: The State of South Dakota has issued the following news release:



 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom (SDAITC) is looking for donations of animal
ear tags from livestock producers for a hands-on activity for FFA chapters to
use in elementary classrooms.









 "The most requested teaching tools I get asked for are ready-to-use kits," said
Ann Price, SDAITC executive director. "I received a grant to put together kits
that FFA advisors can use to train their chapter members. Those members then
take the kits into elementary classrooms and educate younger students about
livestock production."







 "I plan to reissue a teaching kit based on the book 'Levi's Lost Calf' by
Amanda Radke that used ear tags as a hands on piece for students. It was the
most popular lesson I've ever had, by far. Last time I did this project,
livestock producers really came through for me and donated about 10,000 tags
that were used in over 300 kits that went to schools all over South Dakota and
surrounding states."







 The tags do not have to be new. They only need to be clean and in good
condition. They can be blank or numbered. Cattle, sheep, goat or hog tags are
all welcome. The more types, shapes, colors and sizes, the better, however fly
tags cannot be used.







 According to Price, "I want the youth to be able to touch the tags, see how
they stay in the animal's ear and see how different producers customize the
information on the tags to fit their operation and then take the tags home and
share the info they learned that day with their families."







 SDAITC is a 501(c)3 non-profit corporation. The value of the tags can be
deducted from your income taxes as a donation. If you would like to donate ear
tags, send them to South Dakota Ag in the Classroom, PO Box 402, Miller, SD
57362. Email Price at sdagclassroom@yahoo.com  or call her at 605.853.6040 if
you have questions or would like more information.







 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom 's mission is to be the premier educational
organization in preparing individuals with tools to teach our youth the value of
agriculture.







 Agriculture is a major contributor to South Dakota's economy, generating $25.6
billion in annual economic activity and employing over 115,000 South Dakotans.
The South Dakota Department of Agriculture's mission is to promote, protect,
preserve and improve this industry for today and tomorrow.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              630 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            June 29, 2016 Wednesday

South Dakota: South Dakota Ag in the Classroom Seeks Donations of Ear Tags

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: New York



 Pierre: The State of South Dakota has issued the following news release:



 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom (SDAITC) is looking for donations of animal
ear tags from livestock producers for a hands-on activity for FFA chapters to
use in elementary classrooms.









 "The most requested teaching tools I get asked for are ready-to-use kits," said
Ann Price, SDAITC executive director. "I received a grant to put together kits
that FFA advisors can use to train their chapter members. Those members then
take the kits into elementary classrooms and educate younger students about
livestock production."







 "I plan to reissue a teaching kit based on the book 'Levi's Lost Calf' by
Amanda Radke that used ear tags as a hands on piece for students. It was the
most popular lesson I've ever had, by far. Last time I did this project,
livestock producers really came through for me and donated about 10,000 tags
that were used in over 300 kits that went to schools all over South Dakota and
surrounding states."







 The tags do not have to be new. They only need to be clean and in good
condition. They can be blank or numbered. Cattle, sheep, goat or hog tags are
all welcome. The more types, shapes, colors and sizes, the better, however fly
tags cannot be used.







 According to Price, "I want the youth to be able to touch the tags, see how
they stay in the animal's ear and see how different producers customize the
information on the tags to fit their operation and then take the tags home and
share the info they learned that day with their families."







 SDAITC is a 501(c)3 non-profit corporation. The value of the tags can be
deducted from your income taxes as a donation. If you would like to donate ear
tags, send them to South Dakota Ag in the Classroom, PO Box 402, Miller, SD
57362. Email Price at sdagclassroom@yahoo.com  or call her at 605.853.6040 if
you have questions or would like more information.







 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom 's mission is to be the premier educational
organization in preparing individuals with tools to teach our youth the value of
agriculture.







 Agriculture is a major contributor to South Dakota's economy, generating $25.6
billion in annual economic activity and employing over 115,000 South Dakotans.
The South Dakota Department of Agriculture's mission is to promote, protect,
preserve and improve this industry for today and tomorrow.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              631 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 28, 2016 Tuesday

South Dakota: South Dakota Ag in the Classroom Seeks Donations of Ear Tags

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: New York



 Pierre: The State of South Dakota has issued the following news release:



 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom (SDAITC) is looking for donations of animal
ear tags from livestock producers for a hands-on activity for FFA chapters to
use in elementary classrooms.









 "The most requested teaching tools I get asked for are ready-to-use kits," said
Ann Price, SDAITC executive director. "I received a grant to put together kits
that FFA advisors can use to train their chapter members. Those members then
take the kits into elementary classrooms and educate younger students about
livestock production."







 "I plan to reissue a teaching kit based on the book 'Levi's Lost Calf' by
Amanda Radke that used ear tags as a hands on piece for students. It was the
most popular lesson I've ever had, by far. Last time I did this project,
livestock producers really came through for me and donated about 10,000 tags
that were used in over 300 kits that went to schools all over South Dakota and
surrounding states."







 The tags do not have to be new. They only need to be clean and in good
condition. They can be blank or numbered. Cattle, sheep, goat or hog tags are
all welcome. The more types, shapes, colors and sizes, the better, however fly
tags cannot be used.







 According to Price, "I want the youth to be able to touch the tags, see how
they stay in the animal's ear and see how different producers customize the
information on the tags to fit their operation and then take the tags home and
share the info they learned that day with their families."







 SDAITC is a 501(c)3 non-profit corporation. The value of the tags can be
deducted from your income taxes as a donation. If you would like to donate ear
tags, send them to South Dakota Ag in the Classroom, PO Box 402, Miller, SD
57362. Email Price at sdagclassroom@yahoo.com  or call her at 605.853.6040 if
you have questions or would like more information.







 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom 's mission is to be the premier educational
organization in preparing individuals with tools to teach our youth the value of
agriculture.







 Agriculture is a major contributor to South Dakota's economy, generating $25.6
billion in annual economic activity and employing over 115,000 South Dakotans.
The South Dakota Department of Agriculture's mission is to promote, protect,
preserve and improve this industry for today and tomorrow.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              632 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 25, 2016 Saturday

South Dakota: South Dakota Ag in the Classroom Seeks Donations of Ear Tags

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: New York



 Pierre: The State of South Dakota has issued the following news release:



 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom (SDAITC) is looking for donations of animal
ear tags from livestock producers for a hands-on activity for FFA chapters to
use in elementary classrooms.









 "The most requested teaching tools I get asked for are ready-to-use kits," said
Ann Price, SDAITC executive director. "I received a grant to put together kits
that FFA advisors can use to train their chapter members. Those members then
take the kits into elementary classrooms and educate younger students about
livestock production."







 "I plan to reissue a teaching kit based on the book 'Levi's Lost Calf' by
Amanda Radke that used ear tags as a hands on piece for students. It was the
most popular lesson I've ever had, by far. Last time I did this project,
livestock producers really came through for me and donated about 10,000 tags
that were used in over 300 kits that went to schools all over South Dakota and
surrounding states."







 The tags do not have to be new. They only need to be clean and in good
condition. They can be blank or numbered. Cattle, sheep, goat or hog tags are
all welcome. The more types, shapes, colors and sizes, the better, however fly
tags cannot be used.







 According to Price, "I want the youth to be able to touch the tags, see how
they stay in the animal's ear and see how different producers customize the
information on the tags to fit their operation and then take the tags home and
share the info they learned that day with their families."







 SDAITC is a 501(c)3 non-profit corporation. The value of the tags can be
deducted from your income taxes as a donation. If you would like to donate ear
tags, send them to South Dakota Ag in the Classroom, PO Box 402, Miller, SD
57362. Email Price at sdagclassroom@yahoo.com  or call her at 605.853.6040 if
you have questions or would like more information.







 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom 's mission is to be the premier educational
organization in preparing individuals with tools to teach our youth the value of
agriculture.







 Agriculture is a major contributor to South Dakota's economy, generating $25.6
billion in annual economic activity and employing over 115,000 South Dakotans.
The South Dakota Department of Agriculture's mission is to promote, protect,
preserve and improve this industry for today and tomorrow



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              633 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            March 23, 2000 Thursday

Prairie Pasta brings escrow drive to Bismarck

BYLINE: Mark Hanson

LENGTH: 543 words


An international pasta cooperative looking to buy a pasta plant in either the
United States or Canada will bring its escrow drive to the southern part of
North Dakota next week. Organizers from Prairie Pasta Producers will be in
Washburn at Dakota Farms Restaurant at 10 a.m. on March 30 and in Dickinson at
the Elks Lodge at 2 p.m. MST on the same day. The idea started about three years
ago, but that plan was to build a plant. Now the group is looking to buy a
plant.

The escrow drive will allow the cooperative to use interest from the money it
gathers for up to 14 months to complete a business plan, hire a CEO and find the
best way to enter the pasta industry. The group has had 10 meetings in North
Dakota and Montana and four in Canada, so far. "The response has been
excellent," said Harlan Johnson, a Crosby farmer who is a cooperative board
member. "They understand the concept of an international pasta cooperative and
the concept of all North American durum farmers working together. I'm more
excited about this than I was three years ago." Farmers would commit a minimum
of $3,420 American or $5,000 Canadian to join the venture. The money would be
returned within 14 months. Producers also commit at least 2,500 bushels of
durum. The goal is to raise $5 million Canadian or $3.4 million American,
Johnson said. The escrow drive runs through April 15. The producer commitments
will help organizers gauge what type of plant it should purchase. The idea is
for the cooperative to buy durum on the open market and make pasta. Producers
who invest won't necessarily make more money on their durum, but they'll make
money off the cooperative's profits. "As farmers we have to get it through our
head that we're not raising durum anymore," Johnson said. "We're raising pasta.
Sixty-pound durum at $3 a bushel is about 5 cents a pound. A pound of pasta
sells for 30 cents. Moving up the value added chain is what we have to do."

Notes & quotes n The Ranchers-Cattlemen Action Legal Fund has mailed out ballots
to its members on resolutions passed during the group's first convention. To
receive a ballot, call 406-322-4169. Ballots must be returned to the national
office by April 3. n A crop marketing workshop is set for 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. today
in the Prairie Room at the Bismarck State College Student Union. George
Flaskerud, a grain marketing specialist in the NDSU agricultural economics
department, will talk about commodity price outlook and provide assistance in
developing producer marketing plans. n The state Agricultural Products
Utilization Commission is accepting grant applications through April 1 for the
upcoming quarterly meeting, scheduled for April 26-27 in Carrington. There are
five grant programs: Basic and applied research; marketing and use; cooperative
marketing; farm diversification; and agricultural prototype. For more
information or to receive an application package, call APUC executive director
Lance Gaebe at 328-5350. n The North Dakota Charolais Breeders Association will
have its first bull test sale. It will be held at 1 p.m. on April 1 at Farmers
Livestock Exchange in Bismarck. The bulls are all within three months of age and
have been on a growing ration for 112 days. The sale replaces the Roughrider
Sale.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2000 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              634 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            March 23, 2000 Thursday

Prairie Pasta brings escrow drive to Bismarck

BYLINE: Mark Hanson

LENGTH: 543 words


An international pasta cooperative looking to buy a pasta plant in either the
United States or Canada will bring its escrow drive to the southern part of
North Dakota next week. Organizers from Prairie Pasta Producers will be in
Washburn at Dakota Farms Restaurant at 10 a.m. on March 30 and in Dickinson at
the Elks Lodge at 2 p.m. MST on the same day. The idea started about three years
ago, but that plan was to build a plant. Now the group is looking to buy a
plant.

The escrow drive will allow the cooperative to use interest from the money it
gathers for up to 14 months to complete a business plan, hire a CEO and find the
best way to enter the pasta industry. The group has had 10 meetings in North
Dakota and Montana and four in Canada, so far. "The response has been
excellent," said Harlan Johnson, a Crosby farmer who is a cooperative board
member. "They understand the concept of an international pasta cooperative and
the concept of all North American durum farmers working together. I'm more
excited about this than I was three years ago." Farmers would commit a minimum
of $3,420 American or $5,000 Canadian to join the venture. The money would be
returned within 14 months. Producers also commit at least 2,500 bushels of
durum. The goal is to raise $5 million Canadian or $3.4 million American,
Johnson said. The escrow drive runs through April 15. The producer commitments
will help organizers gauge what type of plant it should purchase. The idea is
for the cooperative to buy durum on the open market and make pasta. Producers
who invest won't necessarily make more money on their durum, but they'll make
money off the cooperative's profits. "As farmers we have to get it through our
head that we're not raising durum anymore," Johnson said. "We're raising pasta.
Sixty-pound durum at $3 a bushel is about 5 cents a pound. A pound of pasta
sells for 30 cents. Moving up the value added chain is what we have to do."

Notes & quotes n The Ranchers-Cattlemen Action Legal Fund has mailed out ballots
to its members on resolutions passed during the group's first convention. To
receive a ballot, call 406-322-4169. Ballots must be returned to the national
office by April 3. n A crop marketing workshop is set for 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. today
in the Prairie Room at the Bismarck State College Student Union. George
Flaskerud, a grain marketing specialist in the NDSU agricultural economics
department, will talk about commodity price outlook and provide assistance in
developing producer marketing plans. n The state Agricultural Products
Utilization Commission is accepting grant applications through April 1 for the
upcoming quarterly meeting, scheduled for April 26-27 in Carrington. There are
five grant programs: Basic and applied research; marketing and use; cooperative
marketing; farm diversification; and agricultural prototype. For more
information or to receive an application package, call APUC executive director
Lance Gaebe at 328-5350. n The North Dakota Charolais Breeders Association will
have its first bull test sale. It will be held at 1 p.m. on April 1 at Farmers
Livestock Exchange in Bismarck. The bulls are all within three months of age and
have been on a growing ration for 112 days. The sale replaces the Roughrider
Sale.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2000 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              635 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Business Mirror (Philippines)

                              June 30, 2014 Monday

Pippa to government: Limit on grant of incentives may raise power rates

BYLINE: Lenie Lectura

LENGTH: 571  words


THE Philippine Independent Power Producers Association Inc. (Pippa) has warned
that electricity rates may go up by at least P0.27 per kilowatt-hour (kWh) if
government limits the grant of fiscal incentives to the power sector.

"The generation cost of electricity will increase by at least P0.27 per kWh.
This will directly impact residential consumers and also increase costs and
dampen competitiveness of industries, such as manufacturing and information
technology," Pippa President Luis Miguel Aboitiz said in a letter addressed to
Chairman on Senate Committee on Ways and Means Juan Edgardo Angara.

There are three proposed bills filed at the Senate aimed at rationalizing
existing investment and incentive laws.  "However, upon closer scrutiny of the
provisions of the pending bills, it is apparent that the bills have limited
fiscal incentives for domestic enterprises," said Pippa, which stressed that
fiscal incentives are crucial to ensure that the country's power-generation
capacity will be developed at a pace conducive to economic development and that
power prices will be reasonable.

"Power plants are capital intensive to build, maintain and operate. Yet, return
on investment is uncertain unless the full capacity of the plant is contracted
for a fixed period of time. As such, to attract necessary investments into the
sector, government assistance, through grant of incentives, is indispensable,"
Aboitiz said.

In Senate Bill (SB) 2048, an Act Rationalizing the Grant and Administration of
Fiscal Incentives for the Promotion of Investments and Growth by Sen. Loren
Legarda, existing incentives will only be enjoyed for a period of not more than
four years from effectivity of the law. Pippa said limiting the effect of the
existing incentives to only four years will unjustly prejudice investors that
responded to the calls of the government to build much-needed power
infrastructures.

SB 35, or the Investment and Incentives Code of the Philippines by Sen. Cynthia
Villar and SB 987, or an Act of Harmonizing the Grant and Administration of
Fiscal and Non-Fiscal Incentives and for other Purposes by Sen. Ralph Recto,
both propose to establish a system for refund of value-added tax (VAT) and
customs duties on imported capital equipment and raw materials.  In relation to
this, Pippa said SB 2048 seeks to create a tax expenditure fund, from which
granted incentives may be drawn.

"The system of tax refund, particularly for VAT, has evolved to be complicated
and riddled with technicalities. This only created uncertainty among investors.
If a new incentives law would follow the same path, such might only add to the
problem of low foreign direct investments and slow growth in the power
generation and infrastructure sectors," Pippa said.

Pippa recommended that in rationalizing fiscal incentives,  focus must be on
streamlining documentary requirements and approval procedures for registration
and in availing of fiscal and non fiscal incentives.

"Instead of setting up a complicated refund system or a tax expenditure fund,
income, VAT or duty free incentives may be granted automatically under strict
and clear guidelines," Aboitiz said.

The group strongly appealed that "the needs of the power-generation sector will
be considered, vested rights to existing incentives will be respected, a level
playing field will be assured to industry players, and unnecessary confusion and
bureaucracy will be eradicated."

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 Business Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                              636 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          Intellinews - Ukraine Today

                           December 8, 2016 Thursday

Ukrainian poultry farmer MHP could receive $39mn in state subsidies in 2017

LENGTH: 381  words


Ukraine's largest poultry producer MHP stands to receive the greatest share of a
proposed injection of state support for agriculture, amounting to up to UAH1bn
($38.8mn) of UAH4bn in possible subsidies.

The finance ministry in Kyiv, as well as industry lobbyists, already submitted
proposals on amending legislation to allow the government to give subsidies to
compensate losses from the cancellation of the special value-added tax (VAT)
regime.

This is a requirement of Ukraine's $17.5bn bailout programme secured in March
2015 with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). In 2016, the VAT refund will be
halved, based on amended tax legislation. In 2017, based on agreement with the
IMF, the VAT refund should be completely removed.

MHP could bag a quarter of the proposed subsidies, the epravda.com.ua calculated
in a report published on December 7. The company's board chairman Yuriy Kosyuk
is a close friend to President Petro Poroshenko, and the news website hinted
that Kosyuk was likely personally involved in the lobbying efforts.

Analysts took a wait-and-see position on the proposed cancellation of the tax
regime in favour of subsidies.

"In and of themselves, we don't see anything wrong about direct subsidies," Igor
Zholonkivskyi of the Concorde Capital brokerage in Kyiv wrote in a note on
December 7, citing the example of direct fiscal support provided to agricultural
companies in the EU in the framework of the Common Agricultural Policy.
"However, in terms of the value-added tax, EU farmers are largely treated the
same as regular businesses."

"In our view, the probability of the Ukrainian government actually implementing
the direct subsidies instead of VAT refund is higher than 50%," Zholonkivskyi
added.

The main question now is what legal framework will be used to maintain
preferential treatment of Ukrainian agricultural producers, and what will be the
amount of subsidies, Concorde believes, maintaining its neutral view on MHP
Eurobonds.

Regarding the impact of the proposed tax changes on MHP's finances, the
brokerage noted that VAT refunds and other state grant income amounted to $263mn
in 2013-15, or an average of $87mn per year. In 2015, MHP's VAT refund amounted
to $75.4mn, while its Ebitda was $459mn, making the VAT refund contribution
quite substantial.


LOAD-DATE: December 09, 2016

LANGUAGE: English

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2016 Emerging Markets Direct Media Holdings LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              637 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                        Intellinews - Ukraine This Week

                                December 8, 2016

Ukrainian poultry farmer MHP could receive $39mn in state subsidies in 2017

LENGTH: 381  words


Ukraine's largest poultry producer MHP stands to receive the greatest share of a
proposed injection of state support for agriculture, amounting to up to UAH1bn
($38.8mn) of UAH4bn in possible subsidies.

The finance ministry in Kyiv, as well as industry lobbyists, already submitted
proposals on amending legislation to allow the government to give subsidies to
compensate losses from the cancellation of the special value-added tax (VAT)
regime.

This is a requirement of Ukraine's $17.5bn bailout programme secured in March
2015 with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). In 2016, the VAT refund will be
halved, based on amended tax legislation. In 2017, based on agreement with the
IMF, the VAT refund should be completely removed.

MHP could bag a quarter of the proposed subsidies, the epravda.com.ua calculated
in a report published on December 7. The company's board chairman Yuriy Kosyuk
is a close friend to President Petro Poroshenko, and the news website hinted
that Kosyuk was likely personally involved in the lobbying efforts.

Analysts took a wait-and-see position on the proposed cancellation of the tax
regime in favour of subsidies.

"In and of themselves, we don't see anything wrong about direct subsidies," Igor
Zholonkivskyi of the Concorde Capital brokerage in Kyiv wrote in a note on
December 7, citing the example of direct fiscal support provided to agricultural
companies in the EU in the framework of the Common Agricultural Policy.
"However, in terms of the value-added tax, EU farmers are largely treated the
same as regular businesses."

"In our view, the probability of the Ukrainian government actually implementing
the direct subsidies instead of VAT refund is higher than 50%," Zholonkivskyi
added.

The main question now is what legal framework will be used to maintain
preferential treatment of Ukrainian agricultural producers, and what will be the
amount of subsidies, Concorde believes, maintaining its neutral view on MHP
Eurobonds.

Regarding the impact of the proposed tax changes on MHP's finances, the
brokerage noted that VAT refunds and other state grant income amounted to $263mn
in 2013-15, or an average of $87mn per year. In 2015, MHP's VAT refund amounted
to $75.4mn, while its Ebitda was $459mn, making the VAT refund contribution
quite substantial.


LOAD-DATE: December 09, 2016

LANGUAGE: English

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2016 Emerging Markets Direct Media Holdings LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              638 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          Intellinews - Ukraine Today

                           December 8, 2016 Thursday

Ukrainian poultry farmer MHP could receive $39mn in state subsidies in 2017

LENGTH: 381  words


Ukraine's largest poultry producer MHP stands to receive the greatest share of a
proposed injection of state support for agriculture, amounting to up to UAH1bn
($38.8mn) of UAH4bn in possible subsidies.

The finance ministry in Kyiv, as well as industry lobbyists, already submitted
proposals on amending legislation to allow the government to give subsidies to
compensate losses from the cancellation of the special value-added tax (VAT)
regime.

This is a requirement of Ukraine's $17.5bn bailout programme secured in March
2015 with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). In 2016, the VAT refund will be
halved, based on amended tax legislation. In 2017, based on agreement with the
IMF, the VAT refund should be completely removed.

MHP could bag a quarter of the proposed subsidies, the epravda.com.ua calculated
in a report published on December 7. The company's board chairman Yuriy Kosyuk
is a close friend to President Petro Poroshenko, and the news website hinted
that Kosyuk was likely personally involved in the lobbying efforts.

Analysts took a wait-and-see position on the proposed cancellation of the tax
regime in favour of subsidies.

"In and of themselves, we don't see anything wrong about direct subsidies," Igor
Zholonkivskyi of the Concorde Capital brokerage in Kyiv wrote in a note on
December 7, citing the example of direct fiscal support provided to agricultural
companies in the EU in the framework of the Common Agricultural Policy.
"However, in terms of the value-added tax, EU farmers are largely treated the
same as regular businesses."

"In our view, the probability of the Ukrainian government actually implementing
the direct subsidies instead of VAT refund is higher than 50%," Zholonkivskyi
added.

The main question now is what legal framework will be used to maintain
preferential treatment of Ukrainian agricultural producers, and what will be the
amount of subsidies, Concorde believes, maintaining its neutral view on MHP
Eurobonds.

Regarding the impact of the proposed tax changes on MHP's finances, the
brokerage noted that VAT refunds and other state grant income amounted to $263mn
in 2013-15, or an average of $87mn per year. In 2015, MHP's VAT refund amounted
to $75.4mn, while its Ebitda was $459mn, making the VAT refund contribution
quite substantial.


LOAD-DATE: December 09, 2016

LANGUAGE: English

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2016 Emerging Markets Direct Media Holdings LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              639 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                          November 15, 1995 Wednesday
                                  Late Edition

Ultimate deal by ultimate dealer;
ABACUS

BYLINE: ELIZABETH KNIGHT

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 789 words


IF ROBERT Champion de Crespigny manages to convince the minorities in Gold Mines
of Kalgoorlie, Posgold and North Flinders that having a smaller slice of a
bigger company is a good idea then he is almost sure to force index investors
and international gold funds into his new supercompany.

As far as Champion de Crespigny is concerned it is a clever deal.

The cynics - and there are plenty of them - say that this is the ultimate deal
in a long line of Normandy group restructurings and asset shufflings which
guarantee that one can never compare one year to the next.

It also provides an opportunity for Normandy publicists to make grandiose
statements about the size and strength of a combined group: the fifth largest
gold producer outside South Africa and among the world's top 10 producers.

However, this does ignore that the parent company has control over all these
assets already and the actual production from these assets will not change when
the deal is complete.

As one observer noted, this is a deal about accounting not production.

Nevertheless, the structural spring-cleaning advantages should not be ignored
and will probably outweigh the hype. In fact, there is little doubt that this
outmoded 1980s structure was in dire need of some simplification.

Essentially, Normandy Mining is the parent company and it owns 51 per cent of
Posgold which in turn has 31 per cent of GMK and 49 per cent of North Flinders
and 75 per cent of Mt Leyshon.

The market has long disliked the multi-layered corporate structure and has
marked down Normandy as the parent because of a particular aversion to holding
companies.

Additionally, many investors were reluctant to buy into the downstream
companies, unsure of when and what Champion de Crespigny had in store for those
companies. Now they know the answer.

By offering the minorities in Posgold, North Flinders and GMK shares in the new
merged parent, in return for backing the assets into the new group, then all
will become shareholders in the one company which will own all the assets.

This is with the exception of Mt Leyshon, which Poseidon has attempted to take
over a couple of times without success. So it has not been included in this
deal.

Perhaps the most interesting and possibly the most ingenious aspect of this deal
is that Champion de Crespigny is allowing the market to determine the price.

Although corporate valuer Grant Samuel will be undertaking a valuation it will
depend to a large extent on the prevailing share prices of the various companies
included in the deal.

Thus investors will ascribe values to these companies over the next few weeks
which will be a guide for Grant Samuel in determining the values.

In addition, the completion of the GMK and North Flinders deals is conditional
on Posgold being successful.

All the mergers will be completed via a scheme of arrangement, which means the
minorities will determine the outcome.

If the various mergers are completed then Minorco's stake in Normandy will fall
from 18 per cent to about 8.5 per cent and Champion de Crespigny will fall from
11 to about 3.7 per cent.

This will not only leave a free float of almost 90 per cent but it will remove
the control which Minorco and Champion de Crespigny currently have.

With a projected capitalisation of $3 billion it will be too big a target for
another Australian gold producer but could be added to the shopping list of some
larger international mineral producers.

The new company has a 1996-97 forecast gold production of 1.52 million oz and
net profit of $158 million which represents earnings per share of 9.9c.

While there will be limited administrative cost savings associated with the
four-way merger - given the companies are run together - there will some
advantages from merging cash flows to increase the size of projects that can be
undertaken. A hefty balance sheet will allow the company to participate in
projects that were previously too ambitious.

Although the success of the mergers do not immediately seem fraught with danger
there is a chance that some of the shareholders in GMK and North Flinders might
not want to part with the fairly direct investment in some of the projects these
companies

own.

The value of these smaller companies is that investors can target a few major
mines and exercise more control over their investments.

However, the advantages of holding a more liquid stock with better growth
prospects will probably convince the larger institutional investors of the
benefits of the deal.

The fact that the stock will be liquid and dominate the Gold index will
virtually guarantee it will experience a rerating in terms of share price as the
major funds who often ignore Australian gold stock, due to illiquidity, feel
more free to take a holding.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1995 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              640 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                               November 28, 1998

This is pie in the sky we must try to reach

BYLINE: By Joe Watson

SECTION: Agriculture, Pg.21

LENGTH: 723 words


SOME have already dismissed it as pie-in-sky, but the initiative announced this
week to put power back into livestock marketing by seven Banffshire and
Morayshire farmers deserves more than a cursory glance and immediate dismissal.

Jim Innes, Alistair Nairn, Derek Atkins, Andy Grant, Danny Leslie, Fred
Hutcheson and Jim Wilken are attempting to right a wrong that should never have
been allowed to happen in the first place.

And more power to their elbow.

Their concept, the Scottish Livestock Initiative on Marketing (SLIM), might
never come to fruition, but at least it's an attempt by farmers themselves to
resolve their own problems rather than go bleating to Government for more money
to address a short-term problem that in the main has been caused by the industry
itself.

The seven have seen the light.

But it is a light that the majority of the country's thrawn, staunchly
independent and utterly powerless livestock producers have yet to see.

The vision of unity is still alien to the dinosaurs that unfortunately still
abound in their thousands. But we all know what happened to dinosaurs.

The North-east endeavour is to simply put power back into the farmers' hands
through everyone working together to ensure a fair price for a quality, niche
product that every retailer wants, but for which they are only prepared to pay
the farmer a pittance.

The consumer, however, still pays through the nose for Scotch Beef, Lamb and
Pork.

Farmers have been weak sellers for generations, and have allowed the power in
the marketplace to be taken over by someone else.

That could, however, change if SLIM has its way. It claims the price-discovery
system has been completely eroded through farmers selling direct to abattoirs,
instead of through the auction mart ring.

The group said: "The doomsday scenario is about to begin. Many producers are now
beginning to plan reductions in the breeding herd, and yet the demand for Scotch
is as great as ever within a British market that is only 80% self-sufficient in
beef.

"Scotch Beef and Scotch Lamb has more brand value than the current market is
providing. It is essential that a mechanism is created to move more of the brand
value back to producers.

"Farmers can utilise their ownership and stakeholding of their own
infrastructure to best effect. It means co-operating nationally. This is not the
same as developing a national co-operative.

"It is an absolute must for all sectors of the farming industry to pull
together. Remember, if the end price of our produce leaving the farm is right,
the healthy economics of the whole agricultural infrastructure, including
ancillary industries, falls into place."

Its aim is simple - to increase numbers of finished animals going through the
auction ring, and to develop deadweight selling.

It wants farmers, auction marts and producer groups to develop a national
deadweight selling organisation owned and controlled by the industry for the
industry.

It's a simple concept developed by a group of forward-thinking farmers, who
deserve the right to be listened to by everyone.

Scottish Office mandarins appear to doubt the industry's ability to make the
necessary restructuring changes that are undoubtedly required to put Scottish
farming back on the correct financial footing and on the road to good profits.

One has also called into question the country's agricultural journalists for not
accepting the need for change. Only one apparently has the "aptitude" for it -
and it isn't me.

Let us all be in no doubt. Change is needed, and those who are not fit to face
the future should get out now, if they can. Everyone knows that, and everyone is
already doing what they can to adjust.

I've being saying for months that massive changes are required.

The Government six months ago didn't believe it had to change its message on
agriculture, but it did.

Agriculture, unfortunately, took a dramatic turn for the worse during its
ineptitude, and the change that is about to be made will be accomplished with
far more casualties than anyone could have originally thought possible.

Contact numbers for the seven are: Jim Innes (01807) 590207; Alistair Nairn
(01807) 590266; Derek Atkins (01343) 543667; Andy Grant (01807) 50035; Danny
Leslie (01343) 850278; Fred Hutcheson (01343) 549801; Jim Wilken (01542) 850359.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

                   Copyright 1998 Aberdeen Press and Journal


                              641 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                   The Blair Press (Blair-Taylor, Wisconsin)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                 March 3, 2011

DATCP encourages dairy farmers to apply for farm management teams

BYLINE: The Blair Press-Taylor staff

LENGTH: 339  words


MADISON The Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection

(DATCP) encourages farmers to apply now for the Dairy Farm Management Team
program. This program is designed to assist producers with future planning to
innovate and modernize their farms to increase profitability.

"Dairy Farm Management Teams are an additional tool producers can use to improve
their operating efficiency by identifying challenges and opportunities," said
DATCP Secretary Ben Brancel. "The purpose of this program is to help dairy
farmers strengthen their management tools and provide the resources needed to
move forward."

Participating producers will work with a facilitator,

Who will bring together a team of professionals tailored to the farm's
individual situation. The management team may include lenders, agronomists,
nutritionists, veterinarians, and other specialists. Over three meetings, the
team will discuss issues, develop a strategy, and provide input for
decision-making and long-term planning. Technology, growth, herd health, milk
quality, financial success, and sustainability are some issues that may be
considered.

The cost-share program will provide up to $2,000 to cover costs such as
consultant fees and agronomic, milk quality, or veterinary testing. Capital
expenses are not eligible. Farmers will contribute 10 percent of these costs as
part of the program.

All Wisconsin dairy farmers, who do not already have management team advisors in
place, are eligible to apply, regardless of herd size or setup. The application
is only one page.

Sixty-five Dairy Farm Management Teams have been formed since this program
launched in late 2009. Producers have shared these reflections on their
participation on the program:

This program is made possible through the Value Added Dairy Initiative, which is
funded by a Federal-State Marketing Improvement Program (FSMIP) grant from the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)

For application materials, visit http://www.growwiscon-sindairy.org/apply_
grants/dair y_management/default. asp

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Dairy

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BLP

                      Copyright 2011 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2011 The Blair Press Taylor


                              642 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                    The Blair Press (Alma Center, Wisconsin)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                 March 3, 2011

DATCP encourages dairy farmers to apply for farm management teams

BYLINE: The Blair Press-Alma Center staff

LENGTH: 339  words


MADISON The Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection

(DATCP) encourages farmers to apply now for the Dairy Farm Management Team
program. This program is designed to assist producers with future planning to
innovate and modernize their farms to increase profitability.

"Dairy Farm Management Teams are an additional tool producers can use to improve
their operating efficiency by identifying challenges and opportunities," said
DATCP Secretary Ben Brancel. "The purpose of this program is to help dairy
farmers strengthen their management tools and provide the resources needed to
move forward."

Participating producers will work with a facilitator, who will bring together a
team of professionals tailored to the farm's individual situation. The
management team may include lenders, agronomists, nutritionists, veterinarians,
and other specialists. Over three meetings, the team will discuss issues,
develop a strategy, and provide input for decision-making and long-term
planning. Technology, growth, herd health, milk quality, financial success, and
sustainability are some issues that may be considered.

The cost-share program will provide up to $2,000 to cover costs such as
consultant fees and agronomic, milk quality, or veterinary testing. Capital
expenses are not eligible. Farmers will contribute 10 percent of these costs as
part of the program.

All Wisconsin dairy farmers, who do not already have management team advisors in
place, are eligible to apply, regardless of herd size or setup. The application
is only one page.

Sixty-five Dairy Farm Management Teams have been formed since this program
launched in late 2009. Producers have shared these reflections on their
participation on the program:

This program is made possible through the Value Added Dairy Initiative, which is
funded by a Federal-State Marketing Improvement Program (FSMIP) grant from the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)

For application materials, visit http://www.growwiscon-sindairy.org/apply_
grants/dair y_management/default. asp

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Dairy

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BLA

                      Copyright 2011 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                   Copyright 2011 The Blair Press Alma Center


                              643 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Western Magazine

                                  May 15, 2016

Serving up online resources

BYLINE: TAYLOR JURD

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 397  words


When Airlie Trescowthick turned to the online world to access agricultural
information she saw a number of gaps in the resources available for farmers
needing to gather data quickly, so she developed her very own website The Farm
Table.

Not only is the website a one-stop shop full of resources, but it is a place
where farmers can go to connect with other producers and where agricultural
students can gather information quickly and easily in a user-friendly format.

Ms Trescowthick first started developing the idea for The Farm Table about 18
months ago.

Now based in Orange, she hopes to expand the website even further.

"I can't wait for the content to continue to develop. I want to keep building
and expanding the Central Information Station, the Sheep and Cattle Toolboxes.
Then, my real passion is to get research and trial information to farmers in an
accessible and meaningful way," she said.

"Also, I would love to create a podcast that looks at major issues and themes
confronting producers and speak with experts and farmers to create an
informative and engaging podcast that people can listen to on the road (I do a
lot of driving and listening to a lot of podcasts), on the tractor or on the
motorbike whilst mustering stock."

Being the creator and developer of the website Airlie has spent countless hours
learning about small business, web design and development, market research,
financial and business management, and social media and marketing.

"I was fortunate enough to be named an AMP Tomorrow Fund Grant Recipient in
2015, which afforded me a grant to continue to develop the site," she said.

"The AMP Tomorrow Fund will assist me in developing the content for The Farm
Table website, enable me to engage with as many farmers as possible to ensure
the content is what they want, and to market the website successfully."

The site is now approaching 16,000 visitors.

Ms Trescowthick's ultimate goal for The Farm Table is to continue to coordinate
the industry's information in a more meaningful way to assist producers to
access resources online as well as to celebrate and promote our industry to the
rest of the country.

"I'm passionate about rural and regional Australia and I hope that The Farm
Table is of value to people," she said.

"I hope The Farm Table is useful to people in linking them to online learning
and resources to assist them in their day-to-day business."

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              644 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                            January 7, 2017 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. softwood stance stokes fears of job losses in Canada

BYLINE: Ross Marowits, The Canadian Press

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL


The U.S. International Trade Commission said it has found there was a reasonable
indication that softwood lumber products from Canada materially injured American
producers, setting the stage for the imposition of preliminary duties that
softwood producers fear could affect Canadian jobs.

The commission said Friday that it made an initial determination of harm from
Canadian lumber that is "allegedly subsidized and sold in the United States at
less than fair value."

It said the U.S. Commerce Department will continue antidumping and
countervailing duty investigations launched Dec. 16 into the imported products.

"In the final phase, which is a much longer and much more indepth investigation,
the commission will make a determination whether the U.S. industry is injured by
reason of the imports," said spokeswoman Peg O'Laughlin.

The preliminary finding could force U.S. importers of Canadian lumber to pay
cash deposits to cover preliminary countervailing duties in early March,
followed in mid-May with deposits for any anti-dumping duties, unless the
deadlines are extended.

Canadian softwood producers said the duties would result in job losses and plant
closures north of the border.

International Trade Minister Chrystia Freeland said Canada is prepared for any
situation and the government will vigorously defend the interests of Canadian
workers and producers. "Our lumber producers and workers have never been found
in the wrong; international bodies have always sided with our industry in the
past," she said in a statement.

The decision to investigate is in response to petitions filed in November from
the U.S. Lumber Coalition, which alleges provincial governments, which own most
of Canada's vast timberlands, provide trees to Canadian producers at rates far
below market value, along with other subsidies.

Softwood producers in Canada dispute the U.S. Lumber Coalition's allegations.
Montreal-based Resolute Forest Products said producers in Quebec and Ontario pay
market prices and should have access to free trade with the U.S.

The B.C. Lumber Trade Council has said the claims levelled by the U.S. lumber
lobby are based on unsubstantiated arguments that were previously rejected by
independent NAFTA panels.

Paul Quinn of RBC Capital Markets said the Americans will likely initially
impose a high duty to get Canada to negotiate a deal over a long period that's
favourable to the U.S.

"The reality is everybody's making money so just the initial determination of
harm is a difficult one in an environment where everybody was making money," he
said from Vancouver.

Resolute spokesman Seth Kursman said the company hopes the federal and
provincial authorities won't be "intimidated and bullied" by U.S. action given
the importance of the forest products industry to the economy.

"Support of the industry in the form of loan guarantees and other measures of
assistance will be critically important as this dispute continues to unfold," he
said. Canada exported $4.7 billion US in lumber to the U.S. last year.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Darryl Dyck, The Canadian Press; A worker stands on lengths of cedar at
a sawmill in Delta on Friday.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Times Colonist
                              All Rights Reserved


                              645 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                     Belfast News Letter (Northern Ireland)

                           October 4, 2003, Saturday

WELCOME FOR POUNDS 1.4M BOOST TO CEREALS INDUSTRY FORUM

SECTION: FARMING LIFE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 611 words


IN what is a significant success for the cereals industry, the Cereals Industry
Forum has been awarded a major Government grant of pounds 1.4 million over the
next three years to improve efficiency and competitiveness in the grain chain.

The funds will be provided jointly by the Department of Trade and Industry and
the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs.

The Forum, co-founded by the Home-Grown Cereals Authority and the Food Chain
Centre, will use the grant to determine what adds value for consumers and where
cost savings could be made, and will pass on to the whole industry lessons from
two main activities:

o Eight supply chains will be selected across the range of cereal products.
Supported by the expertise of Cardiff Business School, a team drawn from the
companies concerned will map each supply chain in detail. They will focus on
what really adds value for consumers and identify opportunities for cost
savings.

o Up to 60 cereal businesses will receive free access to CBI's PROBE. This is a
business diagnostic tool that helps companies in their quest to be world-class.
PROBE allows each business to compare its practices such as customer service,
management style, staff recruitment, information systems and product development
against many of the world's most successful companies. The outcome of this
exercise is an improvement action plan.

The chairman of the Cereals Industry Forum and deputy chairman of HGCA,
Professor Chris Ritson, said: "The recent agreement on the reform of the Common
Agricultural Policy highlights the fact that the UK cereal sector must be
internationally competitive if it is to survive.

"In today's global markets, all businesses need to be at least as efficient as
their overseas competitors. The Cereals Industry Forum is designed to help
everyone along the British cereals chain in this mission - from those that grow
the crops to those that sell the final product. This grant will give us access
to a wealth of expertise."

The chair of the Food Chain Centre Steering Group, Deirdre Hutton, added: "I am
delighted that the Cereals Industry Forum has received this major grant and very
grateful to both DTI and DEFRA. It parallels initiatives underway in red meat,
dairy and horticulture with the Food Chain Centre operating as the link between.
Together, this programme represents a big opportunity for British food producers
to respond positively to the challenges of CAP reform."

Welcoming the announcement of the grant, Lord Whitty, Parliamentary Under
Secretary at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: "We
need to strengthen the competitiveness of the British farming and food industry
in the global market.

"This Government grant will contribute to achieving the goals of our Sustainable
Farming and Food Strategy. It will help our cereals industry to look critically
at issues of efficiency and competitiveness using techniques that have already
proved successful in other sectors.

"The broad membership of the Cereals Industry Forum will enable this to be done
through the entire grain chain, from primary producer to final products. I will
watch with keen interest the progress of the project and look forward to it
producing real benefits."

Lessons from both of these activities will be passed on to everyone involved in
the cereals industry once the project has been completed.

The three-year project is being funded jointly by the DTI and DEFRA. Subject to
endorsement under State aid rules, work will commence this autumn. The Cereals
Industry Forum consists of representatives from the major cereals trade bodies.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                   Copyright 2003 Century Newspapers Limited


                              646 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                     Belfast News Letter (Northern Ireland)

                           October 4, 2003, Saturday

WELCOME FOR POUNDS 1.4M BOOST TO CEREALS INDUSTRY FORUM

SECTION: FARMING LIFE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 611 words


IN what is a significant success for the cereals industry, the Cereals Industry
Forum has been awarded a major Government grant of pounds 1.4 million over the
next three years to improve efficiency and competitiveness in the grain chain.

The funds will be provided jointly by the Department of Trade and Industry and
the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs.

The Forum, co-founded by the Home-Grown Cereals Authority and the Food Chain
Centre, will use the grant to determine what adds value for consumers and where
cost savings could be made, and will pass on to the whole industry lessons from
two main activities:

o Eight supply chains will be selected across the range of cereal products.
Supported by the expertise of Cardiff Business School, a team drawn from the
companies concerned will map each supply chain in detail. They will focus on
what really adds value for consumers and identify opportunities for cost
savings.

o Up to 60 cereal businesses will receive free access to CBI's PROBE. This is a
business diagnostic tool that helps companies in their quest to be world-class.
PROBE allows each business to compare its practices such as customer service,
management style, staff recruitment, information systems and product development
against many of the world's most successful companies. The outcome of this
exercise is an improvement action plan.

The chairman of the Cereals Industry Forum and deputy chairman of HGCA,
Professor Chris Ritson, said: "The recent agreement on the reform of the Common
Agricultural Policy highlights the fact that the UK cereal sector must be
internationally competitive if it is to survive.

"In today's global markets, all businesses need to be at least as efficient as
their overseas competitors. The Cereals Industry Forum is designed to help
everyone along the British cereals chain in this mission - from those that grow
the crops to those that sell the final product. This grant will give us access
to a wealth of expertise."

The chair of the Food Chain Centre Steering Group, Deirdre Hutton, added: "I am
delighted that the Cereals Industry Forum has received this major grant and very
grateful to both DTI and DEFRA. It parallels initiatives underway in red meat,
dairy and horticulture with the Food Chain Centre operating as the link between.
Together, this programme represents a big opportunity for British food producers
to respond positively to the challenges of CAP reform."

Welcoming the announcement of the grant, Lord Whitty, Parliamentary Under
Secretary at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: "We
need to strengthen the competitiveness of the British farming and food industry
in the global market.

"This Government grant will contribute to achieving the goals of our Sustainable
Farming and Food Strategy. It will help our cereals industry to look critically
at issues of efficiency and competitiveness using techniques that have already
proved successful in other sectors.

"The broad membership of the Cereals Industry Forum will enable this to be done
through the entire grain chain, from primary producer to final products. I will
watch with keen interest the progress of the project and look forward to it
producing real benefits."

Lessons from both of these activities will be passed on to everyone involved in
the cereals industry once the project has been completed.

The three-year project is being funded jointly by the DTI and DEFRA. Subject to
endorsement under State aid rules, work will commence this autumn. The Cereals
Industry Forum consists of representatives from the major cereals trade bodies.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                   Copyright 2003 Century Newspapers Limited


                              647 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright (c) 2011 Chapman University School of Law
                    Nexus: Chapman's Journal of Law & Policy

                                  2011 / 2012

                    Nexus: Chapman's Journal of Law & Policy

                               17 Nexus J. Op. 3

LENGTH: 18016 words

FOOD FIGHT!: THE LEGAL DEBATE OVER THE OBESITY EPIDEMIC, FOOD LABELING, AND THE
GOVERNMENT'S INVOLVEMENT IN WHAT YOU EAT: Locating the Boundaries of Sustainable
Agriculture

NAME: Megan Galey<i> and A. Bryan Endres<ii>

BIO: <i> Legal Research Associate, University of Illinois, Department of
Agricultural and Consumer Economics.


<ii> Associate Professor of Agricultural Law, University of Illinois Department
of Agricultural and Consumer Economics. This research was supported in-part by
the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture, Hatch Project No.
ILLU-470-309. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the view of the funding agency. The authors thank the Nexus Journal
Board for the invitation to present at a very informative symposium on the
myriad of legal issues surrounding the production, distribution and consumption
of food.

TEXT:
 [*3]

   The agricultural landscape in the United States has changed dramatically
during the past 100 years. Early 20th century agriculture was labor intensive
and involved a large number of diversified, small-scale farms in rural
communities where nearly half of the U.S. workforce was employed. n1 After World
War II, American agriculture began a transition toward large-scale farming
operations. Productivity soared due to new technologies, mechanization,
specialization, and a shift in federal agricultural policies. n2

   For example, pre-WWII depression-era farm policy targeted efforts to decrease
supply in order to support sagging commodity prices. n3 The supply shortages
driven by the war effort and post-war reconstruction needs, however,
precipitated a significant shift in federal agricultural policy toward
encouraging high-yield, large scale production and consolidation. n4 While these
changes have had positive effects, such as creating a relatively reliable and
inexpensive domestic food supply, industrial-scale agriculture supported by
government subsidies generates an array of negative externalities. Prominent
[*4]  among these are environmental degradation and the disintegration of
economic and social conditions in rural communities. n5

   In recent years, consumer demand for local and regional agricultural products
has surged, stimulating a market-based response by farmers and supply chains to
source products in a more localized manner. However, many farmers, particularly
small producers, face obstacles such as an overly complex regulatory scheme and
a dearth of processing and distribution infrastructure needed to support local
and regional food system initiatives. n6 Beneficial changes in federal programs,
however, have begun to emerge. The most recent Farm Bill - the Food,
Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 - expanded and established new funding
opportunities intended to support the growth of local food systems.

   This article will discuss the array of federal programs designed to rekindle
a more locally focused food supply chain within the context of this increased
consumer demand for local and sustainable products. Section I seeks to define
what is meant by the term "local food" and explores the motivations of the local
food movement, specifically, aspects of environmental altruism, rural
development and social justice. Section II analyzes these motivations within the
framework of other sustainability initiatives in the agricultural context. Often
the underlying motivations of these two movements - local foods and
sustainability - intersect, but as is discussed below, there are significant,
although not necessarily irreconcilable, differences between the two models. In
this section the emergence of sustainability and local food provisions within
federal and state legislation are also discussed. Section III explores the
impact of this legislative array on the growth of local and regional food
systems. Section IV concludes with a discussion and initial recommendation of
how to better align the local food movement within the broader sustainability
agenda of future legislative efforts.

   I. The Local Food Movement

 During the last decade, many Americans have become increasingly interested in
thinking about what they eat and about the health and environmental consequences
of the American food system. As the local food movement has gained recognition,
ating local, adopting the 100 Mile Diet, or being a "locavore" have gained a
place in popular discourse. . While some have described the local food movement
as a relatively recent phenomenon, n7  [*5]  the roots of the movement date back
decades, sprouting from the organic and health food movements of the 1970s. n8

   The local foods movement confronts numerous challenges as it strives to
implement a massive overhaul of the American food system. Advocates involved in
the movement have differing motives and goals, and as the movement grows in
popularity, advocates are still struggling to form a cohesive movement with a
clear set of policy goals and recommendations. One of the continuing challenges
for local food advocates is the vagueness of the term "local." Rather than
settle on a single definition, most legislation and policy documents - at least
at the federal level - simply define local within the context of a specific
document, resulting in conflicting definitions and consumer confusion. These
inconsistent definitions further add to the challenge of a robust discussion of
local food policy.

   A. What Is Local Food?

 The definition of local food has been debated extensively throughout academic
literature. n9 The primary challenge with defining local is that, as a spatial
term, it is a poor descriptor of what many local food advocates seek -
connections to farmers, environmental sustainability, and healthy foods.

   Deciding where one spatial scale ends and where the next begins has proven to
be challenging in the local foods context. State and federal statutes and
regulations define local food based on political borders or the geographical
location of where the food is grown and marketed. States typically define local
food as food grown within state borders. n10 The Farm Bill blurs the distinction
between local and regional via a collective definition of local and regional
foods as foods grown within 400 miles or the same state in which it is marketed.
n11 In a country with states of vastly different sizes, 400 miles can be one
state or an entire region. For instance, California is 770 miles long and 250
miles wide. On the east coast, however, a 400 mile radius includes the group of
states that are commonly referred to as the New England Region.

   Similarly, many grocery stores, restaurants, and farmers' markets have
developed their own local food definitions. These private or quasi-private (in
the form of farmers' markets) entities typically base the definition of local on
geographical  [*6]  distance or state borders. n12 Whole Foods, for example,
designates products as local if the products have traveled seven hours or less
by car or truck. n13 Individual Whole Foods stores can create more stringent
criteria, and according to the retailer, "most stores have established even
shorter maximum distances." n14 Similarly, Safeway determined that local foods
are those that travel eight hours or less, whereas Kroger defines local food as
grown in the same state or within the same region. n15 While the precise
definitions vary, many of them appear to have been arbitrarily decided without
much serious thought as to what consumers may view as local.

   Local food could just as easily, however, be defined by qualities other than
distance and political boundaries. For example, surveys have reported that
consumers have a variety of motivations for purchasing local food but have
consistently found that consumers buy local foods because of their interest in
sustainable or organic farming practices and a desire to support their
community's local economy. n16 Numerous definitions that address how and by whom
food is produced, distributed, and marketed have been suggested as a more
accurate demarcation of the bounds of a local food system. n17 One popular view
asserts that local foods "are rooted in particular places, aim to be
economically viable for farmers and consumers, use economically sound production
and distribution practices, and enhance social equity and democracy for all
members of the community." n18 In other words, the concept of local foods
centers on direct marketing, and a definition should therefore account for the
social proximity between  [*7]  producers and consumers, rather than rest solely
on spatial considerations. n19

   While some may argue that harping on the need to define local food is
unnecessary, it would behoove the local food movement to establish what they
mean by local food for two practical reasons. First, the word local has no
inherent meaning. It is a human construct that possesses whatever meaning is
given to it. Local food advocates or policymakers cannot simply dwell on the
word in hopes of discovering what its real meaning is. If the local food
movement fails to coalesce around a generally accepted definition, someone else
will (most likely the commercial-scale grocery sector), with the result unlikely
to be what grass-roots advocates had in mind. For example, in the absence of a
definition of local, Wal-mart stores are able to advertise commodity crops
retailed within the state in which they were grown as local, leading to charges
that that the company is "doing industrial local." n20

   Second, the act of attempting to define local food is an opportunity to
analyze if "local" is the best term for measuring or describing what the overall
goals of the local food movement are. As noted above, local is a spatial term
that exists alongside regional, national, and global constructs. The question is
whether the concept of local foods should be solely about selling foods that are
grown at a particular area or if it is prudent to include goals related to
broader sustainable agricultural practices - practices that incorporate
environmental, economic, and social sustainability considerations.

   B. Identifying the Goals of the Local Food Movement

 A variety of concerns have been articulated by local food advocates - both
academic and lay - and many of these concerns arise from dissatisfaction with
the national organic standard and the increasing dominance of large
corporations, such as Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), Coca-Cola, Dole, Heinz,
ConAgra, and Kraft, in the organic market. n21 Local food systems are seen as an
appealing strategy for moving beyond organics to achieve sustainable food
systems. n22 While ideas about what a sustainable food system should look like
vary, the concept addresses three primary areas: environmental degradation,
economic development in local communities, and access to healthy foods. The
following sections briefly discuss these issues.

[*8]

   1. Environmentally Sound Food Systems

 The most widespread concern among local foods advocates is the relationship
between industrial agriculture and environmental degradation. In the United
States, agriculture accounts for approximately sixteen percent of total energy
consumption, energy which is primarily derived from burning fossil fuels that
emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. n23 Tilling practices and
monocropping have contributed to a decline in soil fertility and exacerbated
soil erosion. For example, ninety percent of cropland in the United States is
losing soil faster than the replacement rate, causing the U.S. to lose one inch
of topsoil every sixteen years. n24 In 2001, researchers estimated that soil
erosion costs the United States $ 37.6 billion annually in productivity losses.
n25 Moreover, agriculture runoff is a substantial and ongoing contributor to
water quality problems. Nitrogen loading in the Mississippi River and Chesapeake
Bay watersheds has contributed to ecological dead zones in the Gulf of Mexico
and the Chesapeake Bay. n26 Frustrated with the environmental challenges of
post-modern industrial agriculture and the perceived failure of federal
regulations to adequately address the problems, environmental advocates have
looked to local foods as a way to promote a more environmentally sustainable
agricultural system.

   If a sustainable food system must be environmentally sound, how does one
determine what constitutes a sustainable or environmentally sound agricultural
system? n27 Not surprisingly, opinions abound on this topic. Human-centric
definitions envision agricultural sustainability as a measure of the
productivity of the human environment and the environment's capacity to rebound
from stresses and avoid collapse while maintaining output. n28 In 1987 the World
Commission on Environment and Development (The Brundtland Commission) provided
the most widely cited definition, defining sustainable development  [*9]  as
development that "meets the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs." n29 Others have asserted
more bio-centric definitions that describe sustainable farming systems as one
that maintains the long-term ecological and biological integrity of natural
resources. n30

   2. Economic Development in Local Communities

 Local food advocates also describe a sustainable food system as a system with
the capacity to sustain economically viable livelihoods for farmers. Critics
argue that engaging in more environmentally benign agricultural practices may
result in increased production costs, and regardless of consequences, farmers
still must generate a profit to remain in business. n31 Local food advocates
counter that small and mid-sized farms that sell directly to consumers or to
schools, restaurants, and governmental institutions are more profitable per acre
as farmers retain a larger share of the sale price. n32 In a 2011 report, USDA's
Economic Research Service reported that local vegetable, fruit, and nut farms
generate higher gross sales per acre than commodity crop or livestock farms, n33
but also noted that farmers who market local foods spend more time engaging in
farming activities and earn seventeen percent less, on average, in off-farm
income. n34

   A more localized food system also may have positive economic effects on local
economies. n35 Researchers have found that buying locally can support the local
economy by stimulating development in rural areas, n36 directing a larger share
of revenue to farmers by eliminating multiple distribution layers, n37 and,
perhaps  [*10]  most critically, facilitating import substitution: replacing
food produced nationally or internationally with more local alternatives. n38
Other studies have found that each dollar spent at farmers' markets in Iowa
generated fifty-eight cents in induced n39 and indirect n40 income in the
surrounding community, and that each full-time equivalent job created by a
farmers' market supported almost half of an additional full-time equivalent job
in other sectors of the economy. n41

   2. Social Justice

 Lastly, local food advocates tend to associate sustainable food systems with
practices that are socially just. n42 Supporters for alternative agricultural
practices, particularly organic and fair trade labeling, have long been critical
of industrial agriculture for disproportionately exposing minorities and
low-income individuals to dangerous working conditions n43 and low wages. n44 As
large-scale producers have acquired a greater share of the organic industry,
some have expressed concerns over the replication of labor conditions found in
conventional agriculture. n45 It is important to note that organic certification
under USDA's National Organic Program does not include standards for labor
practices. n46

   Advocates of local food systems further assert that local food systems can
remedy other social justice issues such as  [*11]  food deserts in urban areas
and the high cost of fruits and vegetables. n47 Higher rates of obesity and
chronic diet-related diseases in low income neighborhoods present similar social
justice issues. One strand of thought within the local food movement is to
improve health by increasing access to healthy foods to low-income individuals
in the urban core. n48

   While some view sustainable food systems as a means to address environmental
degradation, economic development, or social justice, others envision
sustainability in a more holistic form. For instance, a panel from the Board on
Science and Technology for International Development of the National Research
Council (NRC) established a four part description of sustainable agricultural
systems. A sustainable farming system (1) maintains the long-term ecological and
biological integrity of natural resources, (2) is an integral part of a nation's
economic development strategy, (3) "provides ample economic returns for farmers,
and farm-related industries to support investments in farm production activities
such as conservation tillage, planting, and ongoing resource conservation
practices," and (4) contributes to the health and vitality of rural agricultural
communities. n49 As analyzed below, recent efforts to shift agriculture toward a
more sustainable system have focused on providing incentives to voluntarily
change production practices and supply chain arrangement through certification
programs and financial incentives, both public and private, rather than via
government mandate such as the Swampbuster n50 and Sodbuster n51 provisions in
past farm legislation.

   II. Voluntary and Incentive-Based Methods for Achieving Sustainable Food
Systems

 For local food advocates desiring to move beyond organics and establish
sustainable food systems, determining how to create local and sustainable food
systems has remained elusive. Currently, in the absence of a widespread
understanding of what local food systems should look like, there are many ad hoc
efforts being made to achieve competing visions of local and sustainable food
systems. The following  [*12]  sections analyze three variations: the private
sector (including NGO) development of sustainable agricultural standards,
federal incentive programs embedded within farm bill legislation and, more
recently, state-level initiatives to capture economic returns from local food
production and processing.

   A. Sustainable Agricultural Certification Standards

 Despite the ongoing debates surrounding what sustainability looks like, various
sustainability standards for agriculture are emerging. Certification to a
standard is "the process whereby an independent third-party assesses the quality
of management in relation to" n52 an established set of "rules, guidelines, or
characteristics for activities or their results." n53 The emerging standards
discussed below are performance based, relying on best management practices to
achieve primarily environmental goals, such as erosion prevention and
preservation of biodiversity. Some standards, however, also incorporate economic
sustainability along with social and food quality goals, such as safe workplaces
and elimination of pesticide residues and contaminants in foods. n54

   Although initially slow to develop, particularly in the United States,
several private organizations are formulating sustainability tools for
agriculture, including the Stewardship Index for Specialty Crops, the Leonardo
Academy's Sustainable Agriculture Standard (an American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) process), and the Scientific Certification Systems Sustainable
Agriculture Practice Standard. n55 A brief description of each standard follows.

   1. Stewardship Index for Specialty Crops

 The Stewardship Index for Specialty Crops is a set of outcome-based metrics
intended to enable operators at any point along the supply chain to self-monitor
performance. n56 Rather than provide a standard that identifies a particular
level of performance as actually sustainable, the project serves as a tool for
measuring sustainable outcomes to promote the broader implementation of
sustainable values in terms of people, planet, and profit. n57 As of this
writing, workgroups for each metric are determining specific elements to include
in each issue and measurement options. For example, the  [*13]  planet category
will measure air quality, biodiversity and ecosystems, energy use, GHG
emissions, nutrients, packaging, pesticides, soils, waste, water quality, and
water use issues. Under people, the Index will measure human resources and
community issues, such as worker health and safety, along with local sourcing
and hiring practices. n58

   2. Scientific Certification Systems and Leonardo Academy

 After analyzing the different sustainable agricultural programs in operation,
in 2003, Scientific Certification Systems (SCS) began developing the SCS
Sustainable Agriculture Practice Standard and launched an initiative to develop
a voluntary national standard for sustainable agriculture through ANSI. n59 The
purpose of the SCS Sustainable Agriculture Practice Standard was to create a
comprehensive set of environmental, social, and quality requirements for
demonstrating that an "agricultural product has been produced and handled in a
sustainable manner, from soil preparation and seed planting through production,
harvest, post-harvest handling, and distribution for sale." n60 The proposed
standard contained eight key elements of sustainability: "sustainable crop
production, ecosystem protection, resource conservation and energy efficiency,
integrated waste management, fair labor practices, community benefits, product
quality, and product safety and purity." n61 For advocates of local food
systems, the SCS Standard was notable for its inclusion of guidelines and
requirements for agricultural producers regarding their relationship to local
communities. n62 Certification under the SCS standard required producers to
assess their environmental impact on local and regional communities, seek
cooperative strategies for minimizing their impacts on areas of historical,
religious, or cultural interest, and implement improvement strategies. n63
Additionally, the standard credited producers for supporting local communities
through charitable giving and assisting with the maintenance of community
infrastructure, as well as preferential hiring and procurement. n64 Finally, the
proposed standard required producers to demonstrate economic viability, defined
as financially able to operate in accordance with the management plan without
compromising environmental protection and social sustainability objectives. n65

    [*14]  The SCS standard is not an operationalized certification standard.
Rather, it is being used as a resource in the development of an ANSI standard
for sustainable agriculture administered by the Leonardo Academy. n66 The
purpose of the Leonardo Academy Sustainable Agriculture Standard is to encourage
the adoption of environmentally responsible, socially just, and economically
viable agricultural production and handling practices by creating "a
comprehensive, continuous improvement framework and common set of economic,
environmental and social metrics." n67 Started in 2009, Leonardo Academy seeks
to develop a national standard that will support producer "efforts to adopt
sustainable production practices, establishing a framework for continuous
improvement along the agricultural supply chain." n68

   Although both Leonardo Academy and the Stewardship Index for Specialty Crops
have made significant advances in developing principles, criteria, and metrics
for agricultural sustainability, much work remains to be done before
operationalizing a certification system for sustainable agricultural production.
Furthermore, in neither system do local foods have an inherent advantage. In
contrast, recent initiatives at the federal and state level include explicit
preferences for local food, in addition to other sustainability programs.

   B. The Emergence of Sustainability and Local Food Systems in the Farm Bill
and Related Federal Programs

 Farming in the United States has changed dramatically during the past 100
years. Although small family farms still account for ninety-one percent of all
agricultural operations, approximately ninety-eight percent of the food
purchased by consumers is produced by multinational agribusinesses. n69 Between
1935 and 2002, the total number of U.S. farms declined by seventy percent, while
the total acreage of all farms remained the same - a consequence of
consolidation with larger farms purchasing or renting the land of their smaller
neighbors. Farm bill provisions intended to stabilize prices and control
production of commodity crops provided significant incentives for the
industrialization of farming. n70 Although throughout the years the farm bill
[*15]  provisions underwent numerous changes, such as the policy shift from
controlling production to promoting an increase in production and consumption,
its focus remained almost exclusively on commodity crops until the Food Security
Act of 1985, when Congress inserted a new conservation title and allocated
funding for sustainable agriculture research and new conservation programs,
including Sodbuster, Swampbuster, and Conservation Compliance, and the
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). n71 Five years later, the Food, Agriculture,
Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 established the Wetlands Reserve Program
(WRP). n72

   The two largest conservation programs, the CRP n73 and WRP, provided
financial incentives to producers to take agricultural lands out of production.
n74 During the next twenty-five years, Congress established several smaller
conservation programs for "working land" that provided incentives for farmers to
voluntarily embed conservation practices in their farming operations. n75
Although encouraging environmental stewardship, critics fault this suite of
incentives for failing to adequately addressing the underlying environmental
problems associated with industrial agriculture, primarily because the CRP and
WRP do  [*16]  not require agricultural management practices. n76

   The 2008 Farm Bill, in a change from previous iterations, included numerous
programs intended to facilitate the development of local food systems in order
to promote local economies and increase access to fruits and vegetables for low
income individuals in urban and rural food deserts. By passing a new version of
the Farm Bill in 2012, Congress will extend the long succession of federal
legislation designed to achieve conflicting objectives - providing income
security to farmers, increasing production of commodity crops, addressing the
environmental consequences of agriculture, increasing consumption of commodity
crops, and addressing nutrition concerns. n77

   As noted above, the 1985 Farm Bill authorized sustainable agriculture
research, and four years later USDA created the Low-Impact Sustainable
Agriculture Program, later renamed the Sustainable Agriculture Research and
Education Program. n78 Until the 1990 Farm Bill, however, sustainable
agriculture received little attention. The Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and
Trade Act of 1990 provided the first statutory definition of sustainable
agriculture, declaring that sustainable agriculture is:



    an integrated system of plant and animal production practices having a
site-specific application that will, over the long-term - (A) satisfy human food
and fiber needs; (B) enhance environmental quality and the natural resource base
upon which the agriculture economy depends; (C) make the most efficient use of
nonrenewable resources and on-farm resources and integrate, where appropriate,
natural biological cycles and controls; (D) sustain the economic viability of
farm operations; and (E) enhance the quality of life for farmers and society as
a whole. n79



    More recently, the 2008 Farm Bill provided several programs to facilitate
development of sustainable, local and regional food systems, falling into the
following categories: (1) increasing production or improving infrastructure, (2)
increasing consumer demand, and (3) easing regulatory barriers. This Section
briefly introduces each category of programs, summarizes significant examples,
and highlights the most important changes that are anticipated in the 2012 Farm
Bill under the proposed Local Farms, Food, and Jobs Act n80 and the Beginning
Farmer and Rancher Opportunity Act. n81

   Programs Aimed at Increasing Production and Improving Infrastructure

    [*17]  The Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 added several new
programs and amended existing programs to facilitate the expansion of local and
regional food systems. Collectively, these programs strive to increase the
production and sale of local and regional foods by providing funding to small
farm businesses and developing the necessary infrastructure.

   a. Value-Added Producer Grant Program

 The Value-Added Producer Grant Program (VAPG) is intended to facilitate the
processing and marketing of value-added agricultural products by providing
planning and working capital grants to agricultural producers. n82 USDA
regulations define a "value-added" product as any agricultural commodity that
(1) has undergone a change in physical state, was produced or physically
segregated in a manner that enhances it value, or was aggregated and marketed as
locally produced, and (2) the above resulted in expansion of the customer base
with the producer receiving a greater portion of revenue. n83 Planning grants
provide funds to develop business plans or perform feasibility studies to
establish viable marketing opportunities for value-added agricultural products,
while working capital grants assist with acquiring working capital to operate a
value-added agricultural product business venture. n84 The inclusion of mid-tier
value chains n85 in the 2008 Farm Bill as entities eligible for funding under
VAPG Program benefited small and mid-sized farms and ranches that were too small
to profitably engage in high volume commodity production, but too large or
remote for direct-to-consumer marketing. n86

   The 2008 act authorized $ 15 million in mandatory funding and an
appropriation of $ 40 million for each fiscal year between 2008 and 2012. n87
The actual amount available through the program doubled between fiscal years
2009 and 2011. In 2009 the Rural Business Cooperative Service announced the
availability of $ 18 million in grant funding, but awarded 191 grants totaling $
22.4 million. n88  [*18]  In 2011 Congress increased the amount of grant funding
available to $ 37 million. n89 Congress additionally directed USDA on how to
allocate part of the program's funding. The Rural Business Cooperative Service
must reserve ten percent of the funds for projects that benefit beginning or
socially disadvantaged farmers or ranchers and an additional ten percent for
funding mid-tier value chain projects. n90 Although agency regulations encourage
businesses of all sizes to apply, the Rural-Business-Cooperative Service has
given priority to mid-tier value chains, beginning or socially disadvantaged
farmers and ranchers, and operators of small and medium-sized farms and ranches
n91 structured as family farms. n92

   A provision included in the Local Farms, Food, and Jobs Act proposal for the
2012 Farm Bill renews mandatory VAPG funding at $ 30 million a year. n93 The
bill also proposes retaining priority for projects that benefit beginning
farmers and ranchers and renewing the mandatory ten percent reservation of
funding for beginning farmers and ranchers as well as mid-tier value chains. n94
The proposal also broadens the reach of the beginning farmer and rancher
programs by clarifying that only a quarter of the beneficiaries of a program
need to be beginning farmers or ranchers. In a shift from prior policy, projects
that benefit socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers would no longer receive
priority or a portion of the reserved funding. n95 Instead, the proposal
includes language that directs USDA to engage in "special outreach" in
underserved states and areas. n96

   b. Local and Regional Food Enterprise Guaranteed Loans Program

 In response to the increased demand for locally and regionally produced foods
and the difficulties that producers in many parts of the country have finding or
establishing markets, processing channels, and distribution channels, the 2008
Farm Bill created a new loan and loan guarantee authority for local and regional
food enterprises under the Business  [*19]  and Industry Loan Program. n97 The
purpose of the new program is to facilitate the development of business and
employment opportunities in rural areas by bolstering the private credit market
through federal guarantees. n98 The Local and Regionally Produced Agricultural
Food Products Subprogram is tailored to facilitate the development of
communities, particularly underserved communities, n99 and improve farm and
ranch incomes by supporting development of local food systems. n100 Under the
Subprogram, the Rural Development Branch of USDA may issue or guarantee loans to
individuals, businesses, cooperatives, and other entities "to establish and
facilitate enterprises that process, distribute, aggregate, store, and market
locally or regionally produced agricultural food products." n101

   The program is intended to be particularly beneficial to small farm business
owners. Many retail grocers and institutions need high volumes of local and
regional food and prefer the efficiency of contracting with a single producer,
but because individual small farms often cannot meet such a demand, institutions
generally contract with medium and large farms. n102 Opportunities to sell to
intermediated outlets such as retail grocers, regional distributors, and
institutions, however, are particularly advantageous relative to
direct-to-consumer sales as farmers need not spend valuable time engaged in
multiple consumer interactions. The Local and Regionally Produced Agricultural
Food Products Subprogram attempts to address this problem by creating
opportunities for small farmers to work with distributors, retail outlets and
institutions to provide more robust marketing channels for locally  [*20]  and
regionally produced foods. n103 A unique feature of the program is that it
requires recipients of a loan or loan guarantee to inform consumers that they
are purchasing or consuming locally or regionally produced agricultural food
products. n104 The proposed Local Farms, Food, and Jobs Act of the 2012 Farm
Bill would broaden the scope of the loan program to include both rural and
non-rural retail facilities that sell locally and/or regionally produced
agricultural products.

   Under the current program, loans are available primarily to individuals or
entities in rural areas, n105 but cooperatives may receive grants for value
-added processing facilities in non-rural areas if the facility provides
employment opportunities and assists agricultural producers within an eighty
mile radius of the facility. n106 The proposal for the 2012 Farm Bill removes
the eighty mile radius requirement, and funds projects that benefit agricultural
producers and provide employment opportunities for residents of rural areas
regardless of their proximity to the facility.

   c. Farmers' Market Promotion Program

 Congress created the Farmer's Market Promotion Program through an amendment of
the Farmer-to-Consumer Direct Marketing Act of 1976. The purpose was to increase
domestic consumption of agricultural commodities purchased from direct farm
businesses, such as new farmers markets, roadside stands, community-supported
agriculture programs, and agri-tourism activities, by providing funding to
create, expand, and promote direct producer-to-consumer marketing channels. n107
Eligible entities include agricultural cooperatives, producer networks, producer
associations, local governments, nonprofit corporations, public benefit
corporations, economic development corporations, regional farmers' market
authorities, and tribal governments. n108 Congress directed program funding "to
assist in organizing, marketing, training, business plan development, community
outreach and education, and other associated activities designed to establish or
improve direct marketing opportunities for farmers and ranchers." n109

   During the 2010 and 2011 grant cycles, USDA gave priority to projects that
[*21]  increased the availability of healthy food n110 in food deserts in urban
and rural areas. n111 Projects received additional priority if they were located
in one of USDA-identified food desert census tracts n112 or a low-income area
with at least a twenty percent poverty rate. n113

   Recognizing that direct farm marketing activities offer important economic
opportunities for farmers and ranchers, the 2008 Farm Bill increased the
program's funding. It provided $ 3 million for fiscal year 2008, $ 5 million for
2009 and 2010, and $ 10 million for 2011 and 2012. n114 In light of the growing
role that farmers' markets and CSAs play in providing access to fresh, healthy,
and local foods, the Bill mandated that USDA spend at least ten percent of the
program's budget to support the use of electronic benefits transfer systems at
farmers' markets. n115 The Local Farms, Food, and Jobs Act proposal for the 2012
Farm Bill hopes to increase the Farmers' Market Promotion Program's mandatory
funding to $ 30 million per fiscal year. n116 Additionally, the proposal creates
a new subsection to provide grants for supporting local and regional food
systems, including processing, distributing, aggregating, storing, and
marketing. n117

   d. Community Food Project Grants Program

 The 2008 Farm Bill also established the Community Food Project Grants Program
(CFPGP), which seeks to increase underserved communities n118 access to healthy,
affordable foods, including locally produced agricultural products. n119 The
five million dollar program awards grants to projects that need "a 1-time
contribution of Federal assistance to become self-sustaining" and are designed
to: meet the food needs of low-income individuals; increase the self-reliance of
communities to meet their food needs; promote comprehensive responses to local
farm, food, and nutrition issues; meet specific neighborhood, local, or state
agriculture  [*22]  needs, including infrastructure development and improvement,
long-term solution planning, and marketing activities that mutually benefit
agricultural producers and low-income consumers. n120

   Although private non-profit organizations may receive funding directly,
Congress directed priority to projects that develop links between profit and
non-profit food system sectors or projects that encourage "multisystem,
interagency approaches with multi-stakeholder collaborations." n121 As part of
the CFPGP, the 2008 Farm Bill also established the Healthy Urban Food Enterprise
Development Center, which provides sub-grants to eligible entities that process,
distribute, aggregate, store, and market healthy and affordable foods. n122 In
awarding sub-grants, the Center allocates priority to projects that benefit
underserved communities and develop market opportunities for small and
medium-sized farm and ranch operations. n123 A proposal for the 2012 Farm Bill
seeks to increase the annual mandatory funding from $ 5 million to $ 10 million
and increase the maximum term of grants from three years to five years. n124

   e. Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development Program

 The Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development Program provides grants to
regional, state, and local networks and partnerships for programs that provide
education, extension, outreach, and technical assistance initiatives for
beginning farmers and ranchers. n125 The program especially targets
collaborative networks and partnerships that support financial and
entrepreneurial training, mentoring, and apprenticeship programs, as well as
"land link" programs that connect retiring farmers with new farmers; innovative
farm transfer and transition practices; and education, outreach, and curriculum
development activities to assist beginning farmers and ranchers. The 2008 Farm
Bill provided the program with first-time mandatory funding of $ 75 million,
with an additional $ 30 million a year authorized for appropriations, n126 and
set aside twenty-five percent of annual funding for projects that benefit
socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers, which include minority, immigrant,
and women farmers and ranchers, as well as farmworkers desiring to become farm
owners. n127 As a result of these funding opportunities, many land grant
university extension programs have launched  [*23]  beginning farmer and rancher
education programs. n128

   1. Programs Aimed at Increasing Demand

 In addition to several efforts, both direct and indirect, to facilitate
production of local food, the federal government has sought to increase demand
by incorporating local food provisions into federal nutritional programs and
encouraging the public to actively participate in the development of local and
regional food systems through the "Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food" initiative.
In its effort to increase consumption of local and regional foods, Congress made
changes to three federal programs: the Senior Farmers' Market Nutrition Program,
n129 the Women, Infant, and Children Farmers' Market Nutrition Program, n130 and
the Farm-to-School Program. n131

   Under the Farmers' Market Nutrition programs, the federal government provides
grants to state governments to provide qualifying low-income seniors and women
with coupons to purchase fresh, unprepared local fruits, vegetables, and herbs
at direct market outlets, including farmers' markets, roadside stands, and
community supported agriculture programs. n132 The 2008 Farm Bill increased the
mandatory funding for the Senior Farmers' Market Nutrition Program from $ 15
million to $ 20.6 million per year. The Women, Infants, and Children Farmers'
Market Nutrition Program received $ 19.96 million for the 2011 fiscal year.

   The Farm-to-School Program began in 1997 n133 as the Small Farms/School Meals
Initiative with the purpose of encouraging schools to purchase fresh fruits and
vegetables from small farms. n134 The Farm-to-School Program provides grants and
technical assistance to eligible schools, state and local agencies, agricultural
producers, and nonprofit entities to improve access to local foods in schools.
n135 Priority is given to programs that put local food products on school menus
and incorporate experiential nutrition education activities as a component of
farm and garden-based agricultural education  [*24]  activities. n136 The 2008
Farm Bill directed the Secretary of Agriculture to encourage institutions
operating Child Nutrition Programs to purchase unprocessed, locally produced
agricultural products. n137 The Healthy, Hungry-Free Kids Act of 2010 renewed
the Farm-to-School grant program and provided $ 5 million in mandatory funding.
n138

   With the assistance of Farm-to-School Tactical Teams to assist with the
development of farm-to-school projects and provide guidance to school
administrators and local farmers as they transition to serving locally grown
foods in schools, 2,305 school districts in forty-seven states have sucessfully
implemented the program. n139 Moreover, it continues to be seen as a way to
benefit all involved parties: children have healthier food options, small
farmers gain access to new markets with reduced transaction costs, and school
districts receive healthy foods at a lower cost.

   In 2009, USDA created the "Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food" (KYF2)
initiative with the mission of supporting local and regional food systems by
informing the public of the benefits of local and regional food systems and
connecting consumers with local and regional producers. USDA intended the
initiative to serve as a means to engage the public in creating and supporting
local and regional food systems. In a YouTube video announcing the launch of the
initiative, U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Vilsack stated that by supporting
local and regional food systems, Americans can use less energy to ship food
around the world, create new income activities for farmers, and generate wealth
that will stay in rural communities. n140 As a clearinghouse of information
about USDA programs, the KYF2 website is a useful research tool for the public.
Beyond the website itself, the utility of the initiative is unclear but likely
quite limited; as of this writing two years later, there is no office, staff, or
budget dedicated to the KYF2 program. n141

   2. Programs Aimed at Easing Regulatory Barriers

 For the majority of farmers engaging in direct sales to consumers, perhaps the
most beneficial component of the 2008 Farm Bill was provisions amending the
[*25]  Federal Meat Inspection Act n142 and the Poultry Products Inspection Act.
n143 Prior to the 2008 amendment, both Acts prohibited selling state-inspected
meat and poultry products across state lines. In contrast to meat and poultry,
state-inspected dairy, fruit, vegetable, and fish products could be sold across
state lines. Rather than eliminating the restriction altogether, the new
provision creates a voluntary cooperative program under which state-inspected
establishments with twenty-five or fewer employees are eligible to ship in meat
and poultry products beyond state borders. n144 The provision authorizes USDA to
appoint a state coordinator and select state-inspected meat and poultry
processing plants to participate in the new program. n145 Although state
employees will retain inspection responsibilities, the USDA state coordinator
will oversee training and inspection activities to ensure complete compliance
with all federal standards under the respective federal statutes. n146 If the
USDA state coordinator finds a facility in non-compliance, the coordinator must
deselect the facility or suspend inspection, thereby eliminating the ability to
engage in interstate sales. n147

   As of 2008, twenty-eight states had meat and poultry inspection programs that
inspected more than 2,000 state-inspected meat processors. n148 Providing
producers of state-inspected meat and poultry products access to interstate
marketing channels benefits small, family-owned processing businesses and small
farmers and ranchers who are often either not located near federally inspected
processing plants or are turned away due to the small size of their lots.

   It is too early to determine exactly how beneficial this regulatory change
will be for the broader local food movement. In May 2011, the Food Safety and
Inspection Service (FSIS) issued its final rule on amending the Federal Meat and
Poultry Products Inspection Regulations. n149

   C. State Initiatives

 The increased interest in local food systems by consumers and policy groups has
caught the attention of many state legislatures. Increased support among state
legislators for legislation in support of local foods can be attributed to
growing public concern regarding health and nutrition issues, such as obesity
and lack of access to fruits and vegetables in food deserts, as well as a desire
to improve state economies by increasing the amount of food dollars spent on
products  [*26]  grown, processed, and distributed in-state. Multiple states
have enacted legislation that facilitates the development of local food systems
and supports direct farm businesses and small farmers by creating local food
councils, passing cottage food bills, and increasing state procurement. Although
a full discussion of state measures is beyond the scope of this article, n150
the following section describes Illinois' efforts, one of the leading states
seeking to invigorate local food systems and recapture the economic benefits for
rural communities.

   In 2007, the Illinois General Assembly passed the Illinois Food, Farms, and
Jobs Act, declaring that Illinois "should be the Midwest Leader in local and
organic food and fiber production." n151 The Illinois General Assembly passed
the Act after finding that Illinois consumers spend $ 48 billion annually on
food, the majority of which is grown and produced outside of the state. n152 The
Act created the Illinois Local and Organic Food and Farm Task Force to develop
policy and funding recommendations for expanding and supporting the production
of local foods with the intention of creating jobs and promoting economic growth
in rural communities. The Task Force subsequently recommended the creation of an
Illinois Local Food, Farms, and Jobs Council to facilitate local farm and food
system development throughout the state. n153 The General Assembly responded and
established the Council in 2010 to "facilitate the growth of an Illinois-based
local farm and food product economy that revitalizes rural and urban
communities, promotes healthy eating with access to fresh foods, creates jobs,
ensures a readily available supply of safe food in an emergency event and
supports economic growth through making local farm or food products available to
all Illinois citizens." n154

   As a result of the Task Force's recommendations, the General Assembly
established state procurement goals for local food products in the Local Food,
Farms, and Jobs Act of 2009. n155 By 2020, twenty percent of the food purchases
made by state agencies and state-run facilities should be local farm and food
products, and ten percent of the food purchases made by entities that receive
state funding and spend more than $ 25,000 per year on food or food products
should be local  [*27]  farm and food products. n156 The Task Force has created
its own goal of capturing ten percent of Illinois consumers' food dollar
expenditures by 2010 and twenty percent by 2030. n157

   Following the lead of at least twenty-five other states, n158 Illinois took
an additional step to assist the development of direct-to-consumer sales of
local foods by passing the Local Food Entrepreneur and Cottage Food Operation
Act in August 2011. n159 By creating exemptions to certain health code
regulations, the Act increases the ability of small food producers and
entrepreneurs to enter the burgeoning local foods market. The exemption only
applies to cottage food operators whose annual gross receipts from sales of
cottage foods do not exceed $ 25,000. n160 Cottage food operators are defined as
persons "who produce or package non-potentially hazardous food in a kitchen of
that person's primary domestic residence for direct sale by the owner or a
family member, stored in the residence where the food is made." n161 The
exemption only applies if the cottage food processor is selling non-potentially
hazardous baked goods, jams or jellies, fruit butters, dried herbs, or dried tea
blends at farmers' markets, n162 the cottage foods are appropriately labeled,
n163 a placard at the point of sale informs consumers that the product was
produced in a home kitchen, n164 and the operator has an Illinois Food Service
Sanitation Manager Certificate and has registered with the proper local health
department. n165

   At the state level, procurement incentives, such as entity goals to purchase
a specified percentage of locally produced food, and regulatory relief for
small-scale entrepreneurs engaged in cottage food production, can provide
significant structural reform to support local food production. To date,
however, more complex sustainability provisions, such as environmental and/or
social justice criteria, have not been part of the legislative landscape.
Rather, states have focused on the economic returns to a more localized food
supply chain. n166

[*28]

   III. Are Government Programs Growing Local and Regional Foods?

 Local food advocates who seek change in the agricultural sector have been
turning to the federal and state governments to implement policy changes to
further the development of sustainable local and regional food systems. Despite
a variety of new programs and changes to existing programs, without a clear
definition of local and sustainable, as well as what comprises a small or
mid-sized farm, it is difficult to formulate a coherent policy strategy to make
substantial and lasting improvements in the sustainability of the nation's food
supply chain - including development of a robust local/regional food system.

   A. Local Food Sales: Direct and Intermediated Marketing Channels

 Measuring the effectiveness of the current policy mix in support of local food
system initiatives depends greatly on how the term is defined. If
direct-to-consumer marketing sales are separated from sales made through
intermediated marketing channels n167 and only direct-to-consumer sales are
treated as local food sales, the value and growth of the local foods market
sector substantially changes. Additionally, if stakeholders define local food
systems to only include sales from small and medium-sized farms, the
effectiveness of current policies also changes.

   The 2008 Agricultural Resource Management Survey estimated that gross sales
of local foods sold through direct-to-consumer and intermediated marketing
channels represent 1.9 percent of all farm sales. n168 The most visible form of
local foods, direct-to-consumer sales, however, comprised less than one percent
of total farm sales. Sales through intermediated marketing channels account for
up to seventy-five percent of the value of all local foods. n169 Accordingly,
the value of the local foods sector substantially decreases if intermediated
marketing channels are not included in the definition of local food systems.

   Researchers frequently assert that there has been substantial growth in
direct-to-consumer sales in the last decade. Timmons and Wang, for example,
reported direct-to-consumer sales grew by fifty-nine percent between 1997 and
2007. n170 Others have warned against drawing such conclusions due to the
paucity of data available on direct-to-consumer sales during the past thirty
[*29]  years. n171 The USDA Census of Agriculture included data on
direct-to-consumer sales in 1982, did not include it in the 1987 Census, and
then resumed measuring including direct-to-consumer sales in 1992. n172
According to the 1982 Census of Agriculture, 143,492 farms engaged in
direct-to-consumer sales. n173 Total sales for direct-to-consumer goods were
over $ 500 million and represented 0.4 percent of all agricultural sales. Ten
years later, the number of farms participating in direct marketing had decreased
to 86,432, with total sales falling to just over $ 400 million, or approximately
0.3 percent of all agricultural sales. n174 The number of farms engaged in
direct marketing rose to 136,817 in 2007. n175 Direct-to-consumer sales reached
$ 1.2 billion and represented 0.4 percent of agricultural sales. n176 While
there has been resurgence in direct marketing in the last twenty years, the
current number of farms participating in direct marketing is still slightly
below the 1982 peak. Inflation adjusted sales may have been slightly higher in
2007 than 1982, but in both years, sales of direct marketed goods accounted for
the same percentage of all agricultural sales. n177

   Local food advocates and government officials seeking to facilitate local and
regional food systems need to consider this historical trend as they develop new
plans and policies. The popularity of direct marketing in 1982 has been
attributed to the Federal Direct Marketing Program under the Farmer-to-Consumer
Direct Marketing Act of 1976. n178 If this explanation is correct, then the
changes to the Act and other similar programs under the 2008 Farm Bill may lead
to a similar increase in direct marketing sales. The primary problem, however,
may not be achieving an increase in direct marketing sales similar to 1982, but
in maintaining a consistent number of farms engaging in direct marketing and a
steady supply of consumers interested in purchasing local and regional foods.
From an economic sustainability perspective, it is important to consider the
degree of turnover in the farms engaged in direct marketing and local sales.
Aggregate numbers provided by the USDA's Census provide a measure of the scale,
but not the durability of a direct marketing business strategy.

   Moreover, without data on the number of farms engaged in direct marketing
prior to 1982, it is hard to explain the 1982 peak, relative to later years. The
Farmer to Consumer Direct Marketing Act may explain the popularity of direct
marketing in 1982 and the decline seen in 1992. The Farmer to Consumer Direct
[*30]  Marketing Act of 1976 authorized $ 3 million to fund initiatives that
developed and expanded direct marketing of agricultural commodities as part of
the Federal Direct Marketing Program. n179 In fiscal year 1978, Congress
appropriated only $ 1.5 million to administer these programs and an additional $
0.5 million to conduct a survey of direct marketing methods. The Federal Direct
Marketing Program, however, expired after the 1980 growing season. n180

   B. The Role of Farm Size in Marketing Channels

 According to the Economic Research Service (ERS), small farms account for
eighty-one percent of all farms reporting local food sales, with medium and
large farms accounting for seventeen and five percent, respectively. n181 Small
farms primarily rely on direct-to-consumer marketing channels, accounting for
fifty-nine percent of the farms engaged in direct marketing, and earn, on
average, $ 7,800 annually in local food sales. n182 Although the majority of
sales by small farms are through direct-to-consumer outlets, twenty-two percent
of sales are through intermediated outlets. n183 Medium-sized farms averaged $
70,000 annually in local food sales, and sold approximately seventy percent of
their food through direct-to-consumer outlets with the remaining thirty percent
sold through intermediated outlets. n184 Large-sized farms, however, averaged $
770,000 annually in local food sales and accounted for over ninety percent of
sales generated exclusively through intermediated marketing channels. n185
Accordingly, large-sized farms sell more food through intermediated outlets
overall than small and medium-sized farms, but there is a substantial difference
between sales to regional distributors and to grocers and restaurants. Large
farms sell twenty-one percent of their food to regional distributors. n186 By
comparison, small farms sell just under five percent, and medium-sized farms
sell just over three percent of their food to regional distributors. n187 Sales
to restaurants and grocery outlets provide a different picture. Medium-sized
farms have the highest percentage of sales to grocers and restaurants, selling
twenty-six percent of their food. n188 Large farms sell less than twenty-four
percent, and small farms sell seventeen percent of their food to grocers and
restaurants.

   Interpreting the significance of this data in relation to the Farm Bill
provisions  [*31]  intended to facilitate the development of mid-tier value
chains is tricky since the Farm Bill programs and the ERS Report use different
definitions of small, medium, and large farms. Under the Farm Bill, a small farm
is an entity with less than $ 250,000 in gross annual sales, a medium sized farm
has gross annual sales between $ 250,001 and $ 1,000,000, and a large farm is
generates gross annual sales over $ 1,000,000. n189 ERS relies on a
substantially different definition. It defines small farms as operations with
gross annual sales below $ 50,000, medium sized farms fall between $ 50,000 and
$ 250,000 in annual sales, with large farms more than $ 250,000. n190

   The direct marketing sector includes more than smaller sized farms; it
includes farms of diverse sizes. This data should be used to design national and
state policies on local food systems. But, should assistance and policy focus on
the larger farms that probably could most easily expand or on attempting to
mover smaller farms into the mid-tier level? The answer depends not only on how
local food is defined, but the underlying motivations for expanding the local
food system. Do advocates of local foods seek to expand this market as a means
to foster rural development and increase farm income? Is so, then a positive
policy outcome would be a shift toward increased numbers of medium and large
farms selling into intermediated markets. On the other hand, if local food
advocates seek a more sustainable production system that incorporates
environmental, social, and economic considerations, as well as greater personal
interactions between farmer and consumer, then desired policy may be a series of
incentives to support small-scale farm operations rather than moving local foods
to a more industrial scale.

   C. Problems with the Farm Bill

 Despite the lack of a clear policy goal, USDA continues to award a potpourri of
Farm Bill funded grants with limited programmatic success. Individual grants
undoubtedly have helped to develop marketing channels to make local foods more
widely available to consumers. For example, through the Value-Added Producer
Grant Program, USDA awarded 191 grants that totaled $ 22.4 million in 2009, and
the amount available under the program has doubled between 2009 and 2011. n191
Individual grants for 2009 ranged from $ 3,962 to the statutory maximum of $
300,000. n192 An example of the types of programs funded include a $ 150,000
grant to a small farm to brand and expand their marketing from forty to sixty
restaurants and grocery stores. The  [*32]  Local and Regional Food System
Enterprise Guaranteed Loans Program announced the availability of $ 49.7 million
in funding for fiscal year 2011 and $ 41.1 million for fiscal year 2012. An
example of the types of programs funded include a dairy processing facility that
received a loan for $ 650,000 to purchase an adjacent property to expand it
operation to meet growing demand. As of October 2011, the Farmers' Market
Promotion Program had awarded a total of $ 23 million in grants to farmers'
markets across the country to support direct-to-consumer marketing and local
food projects. The Program awarded $ 9.2 million in grants in fiscal year 2011.
n193 USDA awarded grants to organizations such as the Board of Trustees of
Southern Illinois University to establish a state farmers' market association,
or the Kohala Center in Kamuela, Hawaii to provide EBT access to farmers'
markets and to promote farmers' markets to SNAP recipients. n194

   While the grants have certainly helped individual grantees, making the broad
based changes necessary to develop sustainable local and regional food systems
requires the federal government to provide substantially more funding for these
programs and, even more importantly, to modify the core commodity crop
provisions that continue to promote unsustainable agricultural practices.
Although the 2008 Farm Bill contained working land conservation programs that
promote more sustainable agricultural practices and provisions that promote the
accessibility of local foods, many critics have argued that any reform contained
in the 2008 Farm Bill was superficial because the status quo of major subsidies
to large-scale, industrialized producers of commodity crops was preserved. n195
The grant programs that benefit local food systems are not sufficiently funded
to cover the number of farms that want to participate, and without adequate
funding, any changes that are made will not be the type of long lasting changes
that are necessary for creating sustainable agricultural systems. The problem
with modifying existing programs to promote more sustainable agricultural
practices is that it does not address the root of the problem - subsidies that
encourage the unfettered use of environmental and energy resources to grow
surpluses of commodity crops that are used as livestock feed or not used to meet
nutrition needs at all. Merely increasing a limited amount of funding for
developing niche agricultural markets is not enough.

[*33]

   IV. Where to from Here? Aligning the Local Foods and Sustainability Movements


 Creating a more holistic and sustainable food system will require making
structural changes at all phases of production and distribution. While ushering
in a sustainable agricultural system would require an enormous overhaul of the
American food system, incremental changes could enhance near-term sustainability
and provide a path toward continual improvement over the long run. The two
primary deficiencies with current farm bill programs are the lack of a clearly
articulated objective of improving sustainability and programmatic gaps that
foreclose even an incremental shift away from the preoccupation with supporting
industrial-scale production of commodity crops rather than sustained (and
substantial) effort directed to support development of local and regional food
systems. Moreover, without the coordinated assistance of the federal purse,
state efforts to promote more sustainable and localized agricultural systems
will continue to be dwarfed and overwhelmed by the sheer scale, both in terms of
direct financial subsidies, as well as indirect support through research and
outreach activities conducted by the land grant university system.

   In the current political climate, privately developed certification standards
present the avenue most likely to generate a significant contribution to the
widespread implementation of sustainable agricultural practices. These include
the Stewardship Index and Leonardo Academy efforts discussed above. Political
scientists have described the shift in the latter half of the twentieth century
in how societies are governed as a shift from government to governance, n196
meaning the emergence of new styles of governing in which the boundaries between
the public and private sectors have blurred and cooperative partnerships
complement authoritative, top-down regulation. n197 A recent analysis of
certification standards and other market-driven policy tools have concluded that
the tools supplement, rather than supplant, governmental regulation. n198
Similar to other certification schemes, sustainable agricultural certification
standards could supplement the current disparate menu of federal and state
initiatives presented in farm bill programs and state legislation.

   The connection between sustainable agricultural certification standards and
addressing environmental degradation, economic development in local communities,
and access to healthy foods is fairly straightforward. The development of
private certification standards raises awareness and elevates the discourse on
sustainable agriculture by attracting input from a wide variety of stakeholders,
[*34]  including farmers, food processors, retailers, environmentalists and
other interested parties. Agricultural producers, seeking access to this
differentiated market, would modify their management practices to meet
certification standards. Similar to the current marketing efforts directed
toward "local" designations, consumers could express their preference for
sustainable agricultural practices by selecting products with "sustainable"
labels. Auditing by third-parties would enhance compliance with the standards
among certified agricultural producers and promote continuous improvement.

   Relying on privately developed certification standards as the primary means
of achieving sustainable food systems, however, is not without potential
pitfalls. Certification standards are a voluntary, undemocratic, market-driven
tool. A rational and utility maximizing producer is only going to participate in
a sustainable certification program if the net benefits of the certification
outweigh the costs. Consequently, creating a standard stringent enough to
generate substantial and lasting improvements, but not so onerous so as to
discourage participation by agricultural producers, is a significant challenge,
especially in an untested and evolving market. Moreover, a skeptical public,
ever more aware of "green washing," may not trust a privately developed
standard, especially a standard primarily conceived by commodity groups and
multi-national food processors and retailers. In contrast, the transparent ANSI
standard development process adopted by the Leonardo Academy's sustainability
standard development effort, although troubled by delays inherent in obtaining
consensus from a broad array of constituents, may hold the best hope of consumer
acceptance.

   Potentially lost in this sustainability discourse is the explicit
consideration of local food networks. Will as "sustainably grown" peach from
Georgia satisfy the New York consumer's demand for local produce and thus crowd
out development of more local produce networks? Will the concept of
sustainability displace "certified organic" as the primary specialty product in
conventional retailers? Or will sustainability standards provide differential
weights to localized marketing efforts, in essence providing a preference in
certification scoring for local sourcing and distribution? Perhaps building
local into the sustainability construct ultimately may prove too complex to
operationalize and of lesser importance so long as the underlying motivations of
the local food movement - environmental protection, rural development and social
connections to the farm - are embedded within the sustainability certification
standards. At the end of the day, however, development of both sustainably
produced and locally sourced food products will depend on consumer demand
pulling the agricultural industry away from the current federally supported
march toward an ever more industrialized and consolidated agricultural system.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Energy & Utilities LawConservationGeneral OverviewEnvironmental LawNational
Environmental Policy ActGeneral OverviewGovernmentsAgriculture & FoodGeneral
Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  Carolyn Dimitri, Anne Effland & Neilson Conklin, The 20th Century
Transformation of U.S. Agriculture and Farm Policy, 2 Econ. Res. Serv. (June
2005).





n2.  Anne B. W. Effland, U.S. Farm Policy: The First 200 Years, Econ. Res. Serv,
24-25 (Mar. 2000).





n3.  Willard W. Cochrane, The Curses of American Agricultural Abundance 65-68
(U. Neb. Press 2003).





n4.  Lizzie Collingham, The Taste of War, 75-88 (2011) (discussing US
agricultural production during WWII).





n5.  See Charles W. Abdalla, The Industrialization of Agriculture: Implications
for Public Concern and Environmental Consequences of Intensive Livestock
Operations, 10 Penn St. Envtl. L. Rev. 175 (2002) (discussing environmental
externalities of large scale livestock production); Joseph D. Coffey,
Implications for Farm Supply Cooperatives of the Industrialization of
Agriculture, 75 Am. J. Agric. Econ. 1132 (1993) (discussing impact of
industrialization on farm supply cooperatives and independent farmers).





n6.  Nina W. Tarr, Food Entrepreneurs and Food Safety Regulation, 7 J. Food L. &
Pol'y 35 (2011); Nicholas R. Johnson & A. Bryan Endres, Small Producers, Big
Hurdles: Barriers Facing Producers of "Local Foods," Hamline J. Pub. L. & Pol'y
(forthcoming 2012).





n7.  Gabby Wood, Interview: Joel Salatin, The Guardian, Jan. 30, 2010, available
at http://www.guardian.
co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jan/31/food-industry-environment.





n8.  C. Clare Hinrichs, The Practice and politics of food system localization,
19 J. Rural Stud. 33, 37-8 (2003).





n9.  See, e.g., Michael S. Hand & Stephen Martinez, Just What Does Local Mean?,
25 Choices (2010), available at
http://www.choicesmagazine.org/magazine/article.php?article=108.





n10.  See Nicholas R. Johnson and A. Bryan Endres, Small Producers, Big Hurdles:
Barriers Facing Producers of "Local Foods," Hameline J. Pub. L. & Pol'y
(forthcoming 2012).





n11.  7 U.S.C. § 1932(g)(9)(A)(i) (2011); 7 C.F.R. § 4284.902 (2011).





n12.  See Steve Martinez et al., Local Food Systems: Concepts, Impacts, and
Issues, Econ. Res. Serv., 13, tbl.4 (2010), available at
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Publications/ERR97/ERR97.pdf (showing a table of the top
ten grocery retailers' definitions of local foods).





n13.  Locally Grown: The Whole Foods Market Promise,
http://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/products/locally-grown/ (last visited January
31, 2012).





n14.  Id.





n15.  Ariel Schwarts, Safeway Supermakets Putting a Spotlight on Local Foods,
Fast Company (June 22, 2009), available at
http://www.fastcompany.com/blog/ariel-schwartz/sustainability/safeway-supermarke
ts-put-up-spotlight-local-foods; Miguel Bustillo & David Kesmodel, 'Local' Grows
on Walmart, Wall St. J., (Aug. 1, 2011), available at
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702304223804576448491782467316.html.





n16.  Joan Brehm & Brian Eisenhauer, Motivations for Participating in
Community-Supported Agriculture and Their Relationship with Community Attachment
and Social Capital, 23 S. Rural Soc. 94, 103 (2008) (stating that the strongest
motivations were a desire for fresh food, food free of pesticides, supporting
local community members, supporting local economy, organic food products,
reduced packaging, and supporting sustainable agriculture); Cheryl Brown &
Stacey Miller, Impacts of Local Markets: A Review of Research on Farmers'
Markets and Community Supported Agriculture (CSA), 90 Am. J. Agric. Econ. 1296
(2008).





n17.  See Clare Hinrichs, Embeddedness and Local Food Systems: Notes on Two
Types of Direct Agricultural Market, 16 J. Rural Stud. 295 (2000) (stating that
the definition should account for social proximity between producers and
consumers); Terry Marsden, Jo Banks & Gillian Barstow, Food Supply Chain
Approaches: Exploring Their Role in Rural Development, 40 Sociologia Ruralis 424
(2000) (stating that local food has short supply chain).





n18.  Gail Feenstra, Local Food systems and Sustainable Communities, 12 Am. J.
Alternative Agric. 28, 28 (1997).





n19.  Clare Hinrichs, Embeddedness and Local Food Systems: Notes on Two Types of
Direct Agricultural Markets, 16 J. Rural Stud. 295, 296 (2000).





n20.  Stacy Mitchel, Eaters, Beware: Wal-Mart Is Taking Over Our Food System,
Grist, Dec. 30, 2011, available at
http://www.grist.org/food/2011-12-30-eaters-beware-walmart-is-taking-over-our-fo
od-system?fb ref=gl1.





n21.  Michael Sligh & Carolyn Christman, Who Owns Organic? Global Status,
Prospects, and Challenges of a Changing Organic Market, 19 Rural Advancement
Foundation Int'l USA (2003), available at http://www.
rafiusa.org/pubs/OrganicReport.pdf.





n22.  Nina Planck, Organic and Then Some, N.Y. Times, Nov. 23, 2005, available
at http://www.edenfoods. com/articles/view.php?articles id=71.





n23.  Patrick Canning et al., Energy Use in the U.S. Food System, Econ. Res.
Serv. (2010) (discussing that from a greenhouse gas (GHG) perspective,
agriculture accounts for approximately seven percent of domestic GHG emission,
primarily comprised of methane emissions from animal production and nitrous
oxide emissions from fertilizer application); See U.S. Energy Information
Administration, Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the United States 2008 at 6,
31, 36 (Dec. 2009).





n24.  David Pimental, Soil Erosion: A Food and Environmental Threat, 8 Env't,
Dev. & Sustainability 119, 124 (2006).





n25.  Noel Uri, Agriculture and the Environment - The Problem of Soil Erosion, 6
J. Sustainable Agric. 71 (2000).





n26.  Simon D. Donner & Christopher J. Kucharik, Corn-Based Ethanol Production
Compromises Goal of Reducing Nitrogen Export by the Mississippi River, 105 Proc.
Nat'l. Acad. Sci. U.S. a.m. 4513 (2008); Great Waters Program: Chesapeake Bay,
EPA, http://www.epa.gov/oaqps001/gr8water/xbrochure/chesapea.html (last visited
Dec. 28, 2011).





n27.  Charles V. Kidd, The Evolution of Sustainability, 5 J. Agric. & Envtl
Ethics 1, 23 (1992) (concluding, after tracing the history of term
sustainability, that seeking agreement on single definition is futile and that
multiple meanings are tolerable if term is defined when used).





n28.  Donald Worster, The Wealth of Nature: Environmental History and the
Ecological Imagination 149 (1993).





n29.  World Comm'n on Env't & Dev., Our Common Future to One World, 8-9 (1987).





n30.  Nat'l Research Council Bd. on Sci. & Tech. for Dev., Sustainable Agric.,
Comment by a BOSTID Panel for the AID Research Advisory, Committee Meeting, Jan.
14-15.





n31.  See James Stephen Carpenter, Farm Chemicals, Soil Erosion, and Sustainable
Agriculture, 13 Stan. Envtl. L.J. 190 (1994).





n32.  Sarah A. Low & Stephen Vogel, Direct and Intermediated Marketing of Local
Foods in the United States, 8 Econ. Res. Serv. (Nov. 2011).





n33.  Id. supra note 10, at 8 (stating "vegetable, fruit, and nut farms, on
average, generate $ 1,338 per acre in sales on 76 acres, which is four to six
times the revenue per acre on a farm that is 33-50 percent the size of the
average field crop or livestock farm.").





n34.  Id. at 8-9.





n35.  Martinez et al., supra note [12], at 6.





n36.  Id. at 43 (citing Nancy J. Ross et al., Trying and Buying Locally Grown
Produce at the Workplace: Results of a Marketing Intervention, 14 Am. J.
Alternative Agric. 171 (1999); Marketumbrella, Catalysts for Growth, Farmers'
Markets as a Stimulus for Economic Development,
http://www.marketumbrella.org/uploads/file/gpCataylsts 1999.pdf; Terry Marsden,
Jo Banks & Gillian Bristow, Food Supply Chain Approaches: Exploring their Role
in Rural Development, 40 Sociologia Ruralis 424 (1999); John Ikerd, Eating
Local: A Matter of Integrity, presentation at The Eat Local Challenge, Portland,
OR, June 2, 2005).





n37.  Lydia Zepeda & Jinghan Li, Who Buys Local Food?, 37 J. Food Distribution
Res. 3 (2006); Kim Darby et al., Decomposing Local: A Conjoint Analysis of
Locally Produced Foods, 90 Am. J. Agric. Econ. 476 (2008); Lawless et al., The
Farmer-Food Buyer Dialogue Project
(1999),http://www.uwcc.wisc.edu/info/ffbuyer/toc.html; Amory Starr et al.,
Sustaining Local Agriculture: Barriers and Opportunities to Direct Marketing
Between Farms and Restaurants in Colorado, 20 Agric. & Human Values 301 (2003).





n38.  Dave Swenson, Estimating the Production and Market-Value Based Impacts of
Nutritional Goals in NE Iowa (2008), available at
http://www.econ.iastate.edu/sites/default/files/publications/papers/p11216-2008-
04-01.pdf; Dave Swenson, Investigation the Potential Economic Impacts of Local
Foods for Southeast Iowa (2009), available at
http://www.leopold.iastate.edu/pubs-and-papers/2010-01-local-foods-southeast-iow
a) [hereinafter Swenson, SE Iowa].





n39.  Swenson, SE Iowa, supra note 38, at 44
http://www.leopold.iastate.edu/pubs-and-papers/2010-01-
local-foods-southeast-iowahttp://www.leopold.iastate.edu/pubs-and-papers/2010-01
-local-foods-southeast-iowa (discussing that induced income or induced effects
"accrue when workers in the direct and input supply sectors spend their earnings
in the region").





n40.  Id. (discussing that indirect income or indirect effects "measure the
total value of locally supplied inputs and services provided by businesses that
serve the producers (e.g., machinery, feed, seed, fertilizer, financial
services")).





n41.  Id. at 43 (citing to Daniel Otto & Theresa Varner, Consumers, Vendors, and
the Economic Importance of Iowa Farmers' Markets: An Economic Impact Survey
Analysis, (2005), available at http://www.leopold.
iastate.edu/pubs-and-papers/2005-05-farmers-markets).





n42.  Charles V. Kidd, The Evolution of Sustainability, 5 J. Agric. & Envtl
Ethics 1, 23 (1992).





n43.  See William S. Eubanks II, A Rotten System: Subsidizing Environmental
Degradation and Poor Public Health with Our Nation's Tax Dollars, 28 Stan.
Envtl. L.J. 213, 276 (2009) (discussing the health effects of exposure to high
levels of pesticides on farmworkers and their families); See Eric Schlosser,
Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal 172, 186 (2005)
(discussing why meatpacking is the most dangerous job in the United States).





n44.  See, e.g., Sherry Linkon, Why the Food Justice Movement Matters, Center
for Working-Class Studies at Youngstown State University, July 25, 2011,
available at
http://workingclassstudies.wordpress.com/2011/07/25/why-the-food-justice-movemen
t-matters/.





n45.  See Julie Guthman, Agrarian Dreams: The Paradox of Organic Farming in
California 182 (Berkeley: Univ. of CA Press2004).





n46.  See A. Bryan Endres, An Awkward Adolescence in the Organics Industry:
Coming to Terms with Big Organics and Other Legal Challenges for the Industry's
Next Ten Years, 12 Drake J. Agric. L. 17, 44-5 (2007) (discussing fair labor
practices in organic standards).





n47.  See, e.g., Just Food.org, Food Justice,
http://www.justfood.org/food-justice (last visited Jan. 10, 2012).





n48.  Michael Pollan, The Food Movement, Rising, N.Y. Times Review of Books,
June 10, 2010, available at
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/jun/10/food-movement-rising/?pagin
ation=false.





n49.  Nat'l Res. Council, Comment by a BOSTID Panel for the AID Research
Advisory Committee Meeting, Jan. 14-15.





n50.  16 U.S.C. § 3821-3824 (stating that the Swampbuster provisions of the 1985
Food Security Act prohibit federal farm program payments to farmers who convert
wetlands to agricultural or other uses after December 23, 1985); see also Daryn
McBeth, Wetlands Conservation and Federal Regulation: Analysis of the Food
Security Act's "Swampbuster" provisions as amended by the Federal Agricultural
Improvement and Reform Act of 1996, 21 Harv. Envt'l L. Rev. 201 (1997). .





n51.  16 U.S.C. § 3811 (codifying that, similar to the Swampbuster program, the
Sodbuster provisions of the 1985 Food Security Act prohibit federal farm program
payments to farmers who convert highly erodible land to agricultural or other
uses); see also Galen Fountain, Land Use Related Restrictions and the
Conservation Provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985: Sodbuster and
Swampbuster, 11 U. Ark. Little Rock L.J. 553 (1988).





n52.  Ewald Rametsteiner & Markku Simula, Forest Certification - An Instrument
to Promote Sustainable Forest Management?, 67 J. Envtl. Mgmt. 87, 88 (2003).





n53.  What is a standard?, Am. Nat'l Standards Inst., http://www.ansi.org/about
ansi/faqs/faqs.aspx? menuid=1 (last visited Dec. 28, 2011).





n54.  Jody M. Endres, Agriculture at a Crossroads: Energy Biomass Standards and
a New Sustainability Paradigm?, 2011 U. Ill. L. Rev. 503, 517 (2011).





n55.  I. Lewandowski & A.P.C. Faaij, Steps Towards the Development of a
Certification System for Sustainable Bio-Energy Trade, 30 Biomass & Bioenergy
83, 86-88 (2006) (discussing different definitions on sustainable production
methods).





n56.  See Frequently Asked Questions, Stewardship Index for Specialty Crops,
http://www.stewardship index.org/about faqs.php (last visited Dec. 28, 2011).





n57.  See id.





n58.  See What We're Measuring, Stewardship Index for Specialty Crops,
http://www.stewardshipindex. org/what we are measuring.php (last visited Dec.
28, 2011).





n59.  See Sustainable Agriculture, Scientific Certification Sys.,
http://www.scscertified.com/fff/sustaina ble agriculture.php (last visited Jan.
3, 2012).





n60.  VeriFlora Certification Standard, Scientific Certification Sys., 1 (Apr.
2007) http://www.scscerti fied.com/docs/VeriFlora Version3 0407.pdf (last
visited Feb. 4, 2012).





n61.  Id.





n62.  See id. at 60-62.





n63.  See id. at 60.





n64.  See id. at 61-62.





n65.  See id. at 62.





n66.  See Key Elements of Sustainable Agriculture, Scientific Certification
Sys., http://www.scscertified. com/fff/sustainable ag key principles.php (last
visited Feb. 4, 2012); See also Standards Committee Members, LEO-4000
Sustainable Agric. Standard Wiki,
https://sites.google.com/site/sustainableagstandards/stan
dards-committee-members-1 (last visited Feb. 4, 2012) (listing SCS as one of the
many stakeholders participating as a Standards Committee Member in the Leonardo
Academy standard development process).





n67.  About the Sustainable Agriculture Standard, Leonardo Acad.,
http://www.leonardoacademy.org/programs/standards/agstandard/development.html
(last visited Feb. 4, 2012).





n68.  Id.





n69.  Jean M. Rawson, Organic Agriculture in the U.S.: Program and Policy
Issues, CRS Report of Cong. (Nov. 3, 2005), available at
http://assets.opencrs.com/rpts/RL31595 20051103.pdf.





n70.  See David Hosansky, Farm Subsidies: Do They Favor Large Farming
Operations?, 12 CQ Researcher 433, 436 (2002) (discussing that the large
operations receive the benefit of the governmental control of crop
overproduction) .





n71.  See Ralph E. Heimlich & Roger Claassen, Agricultural Conservation Policy
at a Crossroads, 27 Agric. & Res. Econ. Rev. 95, 97 (1998) (discussing the
history of farm bills); See also Zachary Cain & Stephen Lovejoy, History and
Outlook for Farm Bill Conservation Programs, 4th Quarter, Choices 37, 39-40
(2004), available at http://www.choicesmagazine.org/2004-4/policy/2004-4-09.pdf
(arguing that "the change in the language [Congress] uses to describe the
importance of soil conservation for reasons other than productivity gains" was a
breakthrough for conservation).





n72.  See Wetlands Reserve Program, 74 Fed. Reg. 2321 (Jan. 15, 2009)
(discussing the history of WRP and changes made to the program under the Food,
Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008).





n73.  16 U.S.C.§§3831-3836a (2011); See also Tadlock Cowan, Conservation Reserve
Program: Status and Current Issues, Cong. Research Serv., RS21613, available at
http://www.cnie.org/nle/crsreports/10Oct/RS21 613.pdf (discussing an overview of
the Conservation Reserve Program).





n74.  16 U.S.C.§§3837-3837f (2011).





n75.  16 U.S.C. § 3839aa (2008) (codifying that the Environmental Quality
Incentives Program provides financial and technical assistance to agricultural
producers for conservation and environmental improvements on lands being used
for agricultural production); 16 U.S.C. § 3839aa-9 (2008) (codifying that the
Agricultural Water Enhancement Program provides payments to agricultural
producers for water enhancement activities); 16 U.S.C. § 3838d, 3838e (2008)
(codifying that the Conservation Stewardship Program provides payments to
agricultural producers for implementing or maintaining conservation activities.
This program was reenacted by Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008); 7
U.S.C. § 1524(b) (2009) (codifying that the Agricultural Management Assistance
Program provides incentive and cost-share payments to producers for implementing
conservation measures to address water management, water quality, and erosion
control issues. Additionally, the Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program, the
Conservation of Private Grazing Lands, the Grassland Reserve Program, and the
Cooperative Conservation Partnership Initiative provide incentives to preserve
particular types of habitats or lands); See also Natural Resources Conservation
Service, U.S. Dep't of Agric., 2008 NCRS Farm Bill Conservation Programs,
available at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/
programs/farmbill (last visited Dec. 26, 2011) (detailing a complete list offarm
bill conservation programs; See Tadlock Cowan, Renee Johnson & Megan Stubbs,
Conservation Provisions of the 2008 Farm Bill, Cong. Res. Serv., RL34557,
(2009), available at http://www.nationalaglawcenter.org/assets/crs/RL34557.pdf
(detailing changes of conservation programs made in 2008).





n76.  See, e.g., Stanley R. Johnson et al., The 1995 Farm Bill: Issues, Options,
and an Analytical Framework for Integrated Economic and Environmental Policy
Assessment, 6 (1994) (explaining that CRP land is frequently returned to
production after initial contract ends); Allen H. Olson, Federal Farm
Programs-Past, Present and Future-Will We Learn from Our Mistakes?, 6 Great
Plains Nat. Res. J. 1, 27-28 (2001).





n77.  42 U.S.C. § 1751 (1989) (codifying Congress' intent to "safeguard the
health and well-being of the Nation's children and to encourage the domestic
consumption of nutritious agricultural commodities and other food").





n78.  7 U.S.C. § 5801 (1986).





n79.  7 U.S.C. § 3103 (2008).





n80.  Local Farms, Food, and Jobs Act of 2011, S. 1773, 112th Cong. (2011).





n81.  Beginning Farmer and Rancher Opportunity Act, S. 18550, 112th Cong.
(2011).





n82.  7 U.S.C. § 1632a(b) (2008).





n83.  7 C.F.R. § 4284.902 (2011).





n84.  7 U.S.C. § 1632a(b)(3) (2008); 7 C.F.R. § 4284.902 (2011).





n85.  7 U.S.C. § 1632a(a)(3) (2008) (defining mid-tier value chains as "local
and regional supply networks that link independent producers with businesses and
cooperatives that market value-added agricultural products in a manner that: (1)
targets and strengthens the profitability and competitiveness of small and
medium-sized farms and ranches that are structured as a family farm; and (2)
obtains agreement from an eligible producer group, farmer or rancher
cooperative, or majority-controlled producer-based business venture that is
engaged in the value chain on a marketing strategy. (3) [...] applicant
ownership of the raw agricultural commodity and value-added product from raw
through value-added is not necessarily required, as long as the mid-tier value
chain proposal can demonstrate an increase in customer base and an increase in
revenue returns to the applicant producers supplying the majority of the raw
agricultural commodity for the project"); 7 C.F.R. § 4284.902 (2011).





n86.  Joint Explanatory Statement of the Committee of Conference, Food,
Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-246, 122 Stat. 1651.





n87.  7 U.S.C. § 1632a(b)(7)(A), (B) (2008).





n88.  Announcement of Value-Added Producer Grant Application Deadlines, 74 Fed.
Reg. 20,900 (May 6, 2009).





n89.  Announcement of Value-Added Producer Grant Application Deadlines, 76 Fed.
Reg. 37,774 (June 28, 2011).





n90.  7 U.S.C. § 1632a(b)(7)(C)(i), (ii) 2008).





n91.  7 C.F.R. § 4284.902 (2011) (defining small farm as "a farm or ranch that
is structured as a Family Farm that has averaged $ 250,000 or less in annual
gross sales of agricultural products in the previous three years," and
medium-sized farm as "a farm or ranch that is structured as a family farm that
has averaged $ 250,001 to $ 1,000,000 in annual gross sales of agricultural
commodities in the previous three years").





n92.  Announcement of Value-Added Producer Grant Application Deadlines, 76 Fed.
Reg. 37,774 (June 28, 2011).





n93.  Local Farms, Food, and Jobs Act of 2011, S. 1773, 112th Cong. (2011).





n94.  Id.





n95.  Id.





n96.  Id.





n97.  See e.g. The Food, Conservation, and Energy and Conservation Act of 2008,
H.R. 6124, 110th Cong. (2008) (requiring USDA to reserve at least five percent
of the Business and Industry Loan Program funding for the Local and Regional
Food Enterprise Loan Guarantees Program. The Local and Regional Food Enterprise
Loan Guarantees Program received $ 50 million per year for fiscal years 2009
through 2012. The 2012 Farm Bill is expected to raise the funds reserved for the
Local and Regional Food Enterprise Loan Guarantees Program from five percent to
ten percent. Under the 2008 Bill, the maximum loan guarantee is eighty percent
for loans of $ 5 million or less, seventy percent for loans between $ 5 million
and $ 10 million, and sixty percent for loans exceeding $ 10 million. The 2012
Bill would give USDA the discretionary authority to waive or reduce loan fees
and to provide a ninety percent guarantee for small-scale projects and projects
located in communities with low or declining populations, low income levels, or
low access to healthy foods).





n98.  7 U.S.C. § 1932(g)(6)(A).





n99.  7 U.S.C. § 1932(g)(9)(A)(ii), (B)(iii) (giving priority to projects that
benefit underserved communities, which is defined as a community that has
limited access to affordable, healthy foods in grocery stores or direct markets,
and has a high poverty rate or high rate of hunger or food insecurity).





n100.  7 U.S.C. § 1932(g)(9)(A).





n101.  7 U.S.C. § 1932(g)(9)(B)(i); See USDA, Rural Business and Development
Information Sheet, http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/ne/gbifsht.pdf (stating that loans
can be used for a wide variety of purposes: construction, conversion, expansion,
repair, modernization or development costs; purchase of equipment, machinery, or
supplies; startup costs and working capital; purchase of startup cooperative
stock for family sized farms where commodities are produced to be processed by
the cooperative).





n102.  Low & Vogel, supra note [32], at 8.





n103.  Joint Explanatory Statement of the Committee of Conference, Food,
Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, H.R. 2419, 110th Cong. 129 (2008).





n104.  7 U.S.C. § 1932(g)(9)(B)(ii).





n105.  7 C.F.R. § 1942.304 (2011) (defining rural areas as areas with a
population below 50,000 that are not contiguous or adjacent to urban areas).





n106.  7 U.S.C. § 1932(g)(6)(A).





n107.  7 U.S.C. § 3005(a).





n108.  7 U.S.C. § 3005(c).





n109.  Joint Explanatory Statement of the Committee of Conference, Food,
Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, 110th Cong. 249 (2008).





n110.  See Dietary Guidelines for Americans, USDA, available at
http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/Publications/DietaryGuidelines/2010/PolicyDoc/PolicyDoc
.pdf (last visited Feb. 4, 2012) (discussing healthy foods to be defined as
nutrient-dense foods and beverages encouraged by USDA's 2010 Dietary Guidelines
and whole foods, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, fat free or low-fat
dairy, and lean meats).





n111.  Notice of Funds Availability Inviting Applications for the Farmers'
Market Promotion Program, 76 Fed. Reg. 31, 571-31, 581 (June 1, 2011).





n112.  See Food Desert Locator, USDA, http://www.ers.usda.gov/data/fooddesert/
(last visited Jan. 3, 2012).





n113.  Notice of Funds Availability Inviting Applications for the Farmers'
Market Promotion Program, 76 Fed. Reg. 31, 571-02 (June 1, 2011).





n114.  7 U.S.C. § 3005(e)(1).





n115.  7 U.S.C. § 3005(e)(2).





n116.  Local Farms, Food, and Jobs Act of 2011, S. 7001(m)(2), 112th Cong.
(2011).





n117.  Id.





n118.  7 U.S.C. § 2034(a)(3) (defining an underserved community as a community
that has "(A) limited access to affordable, healthy foods, including fresh
fruits and vegetables; (B) a high incidence of a diet-related disease (including
obesity) as compared to the national average; (C) a high rate of hunger or food
insecurity; or (D) severe or persistent poverty").





n119.  7 U.S.C. § 2034(h)(3).





n120.  7 U.S.C. § 2034(a)(1).





n121.  7 U.S.C. § 2034(d).





n122.  7 U.S.C. § 2034(h)(4)(B).





n123.  7 U.S.C. § 2034(h)(5).





n124.  Local Farms, Food, and Jobs Act of 2011, S. 3008, 112th Cong. (2011).





n125.  7 U.S.C. § 3319f.





n126.  7 U.S.C. § 3319f(h)(1).





n127.  7 U.S.C. § 3319f(c)(8).





n128.  See Beginning Farmers, www.beginningfarmers.org (listing several training
opportunities for beginning farmers and ranchers).





n129.  Seniors Farmers' Market Nutrition Program, 7 U.S.C. § 3007.





n130.  The WIC Farmers' Market Nutrition Program was created by an amendment to
the Child Nutrition Act of 1966; See WIC Farmers' Market Nutrition Act of 1992,
Pub. L. No. 102-314, 102nd Cong., H.R. 3711, Oct. 1, 1991 (codified at 42 U.S.C.
§ 1786).





n131.  The Farm-to-School Program was created by an amendment to the Richard B.
Russell National School Lunch Act; See The Child Nutrition and WIC
Reauthorization Act of 2004, Pub. L. No. 108-265, 108th Cong., S. 2507, June 30,
2004 (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1769).





n132.  42 U.S.C. § 1786(m)(1); 7 U.S.C. § 3007(b).





n133.  See USDA Food and Nutrition Service, Legislative History Related to Farm
to School, http://www. fns.usda.gov/cnd/F2S/pdf/F2Sleg history.pdf (giving a
history of the National School Lunch Program and the Farm-to-School Program).





n134.  USDA Food and Nutrition Service, Small Farms/School Meals Initiative
(2000).





n135.  42 U.S.C. § 1769(g)(2).





n136.  42 U.S.C. § 1769(g)(5)(A), (C); Healthy, Hungry-Free Kids Act of 2010,
Pub. L. No. 111-296, 111th Cong., S. 3307, Dec. 13, 2010 (codified at 42 USC §
1769(g)(8)).





n137.  42 U.S.C. § 1758(j).





n138.  Healthy, Hungry-Free Kids Act of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-296, 111th Cong.,
S. 3307, Dec. 13, 2010 (codified at 42 USC § 1769(g)(8)).





n139.  The National Farm to School Program, Center for Food & Justice,
http://www.farmtoschool.org/index.php (last visited Dec. 20, 2011).





n140.  Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food, YouTube,
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tms8ye8mw k (last visited Dec. 20, 2011).





n141.  Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food, USDA,
http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome? navid=KYF MISSION (last visited
Jan. 6, 2012) (stating that "while there is no office, staff, or budget
dedicated to KYF2, Deputy Secretary Kathleen Merrigan chairs a task force of
USDA employees representing every agency within the Department in order to break
down bureaucratic silos, develop common-sense solutions for communities and
farmers, and foster new partnerships inside USDA and across the country").





n142.  21 U.S.C. § 683.





n143.  21 U.S.C. § 472.





n144.  21 U.S.C.§§683(b), 472(b).





n145.  21 U.S.C.§§683(d)(1), 472(d)(1).





n146.  21 U.S.C.§§683(d)(3)(c), 472(d)(3)(c).





n147.  21 U.S.C.§§683(h), 472(g).





n148.  National Conference of State Legislators, Food Safety Rules,
http://www.ncsl.org/documents/agri/foodsafetylaws.pdf.





n149.  Cooperative Inspection Programs: Interstate Shipment of Meat and Poultry
Products, 76 Fed. Reg. 24,714 (May 2, 2011) (codified at 9 C.F.R.§§321, 332,
381).





n150.  See Martinez et al., supra note 12, at 39-41 (citing National Conference
of State Legislatures, Healthy Community Design and Access to Healthy Food
Database, http://www.ncsl.org/?tabid=13227 (last visited Jan. 6, 2011)); Derrick
Braaten & Marne Coit, Legal Issues in Local Food Systems, 15 Drake J. Agric. L.
9 (2010) (discussing state procurement legislation and local foods); See Tarr,
supra note 6 (providing an overview of state cottage food laws).





n151.  Illinois Food, Farms, and Jobs Act, Pub. Act No. 95-145, 95th General
Assembly, H.B. 1300, Aug. 14, 2007 (codified at 505 Ill. Comp. Stat. 84/5).





n152.  The Illinois Local and Organic Food and Farm Task Force, Local Food,
Farms & Jobs: Growing the Illinois Economy, 13 (2009), available at
http://www.agr.state.il.us/newsrels/taskforcereport-outside.pdf.





n153.  Id. at 39. .





n154.  Local Food, Farms, and Jobs Act, Pub. Act No. 96-579, 96th General
Assembly, H.B. 3990, Aug. 18, 2009 (codified at 30 Ill. Comp. Stat. 595/10).





n155.  Id.





n156.  Id.





n157.  Task Force, supra note [152], at 13.





n158.  See, e.g., Tarr, supra note [6], at 56-66 (comparing state cottage food
bills).





n159.  410 Ill. Comp. Stat 625/4.





n160.  410 Ill. Comp. Stat 625/4(b)(3).





n161.  410 Ill. Comp. Stat 625/4(a).





n162.  See 410 Ill. Comp. Stat. 625/4(b)(1) (detailing specific lists of allowed
and prohibited food products).





n163.  410 Ill. Comp. Stat. 625/4(b)(4) (codifying that a label must include:
(A) name and address of cottage food operation; (B) common or usual name of
product; (C) all product ingredients; (D) the phrase: "This product was produced
in a home kitchen not subject to public health inspection that may also process
common food allergens;" (E) processing date; (F) allergen labeling as required
by federal law).





n164.  410 Ill. Comp. Stat. 625/4(b)(7) (stating that the placard must state:
"This product was produced in a home kitchen not subject to public health
inspection that may also process common food allergens").





n165.  410 Ill. Comp. Stat. 625/4(b).





n166.  Nicholas R. Johnson and A. Bryan Endres, Small Producers, Big Hurdles:
Barriers Facing Producers of "Local Foods," Hamline J. Pub L. & Pol'y.
(forthcoming 2012).





n167.  See Low & Vogel, supra note [], at 3 (discussing that sales to
restaurants, regional distributors, grocery stores, and schools are examples of
intermediated marketing channels).





n168.  Id.





n169.  Id. (estimating that sales through intermediated channels accounted for
50 to 66 percent of local food sales in 2008); Larry Lev & Laurent Gwin, Filling
in the Gaps: Eight Things to Recognize about Farm-Direct Marketing, 25 Choices
(2010) (estimating that direct-to-consumer sales accounted for 25 percent of
local food sales in 2007).





n170.  David Timmons & Qingbin Wang, Direct Food sales in the United States:
Evidence from State and County-Level Data, 34 J. Sustainable Agric. 229, 229
(2010) (measured in constant 2007 dollars).





n171.  Lev & Gwin, supra note [] (estimating that direct-to-consumer sales
accounted for 25 percent of local food sales in 2007).





n172.  Id.; see also Low & Vogel, supra note [32], at 2.





n173.  Levin & Gwin, supra note 167.





n174.  Id.





n175.  Id.





n176.  Id.





n177.  See Timmons & Wang, supra note [], at 229-30.





n178.  7 U.S.C. § 3001 (1976).





n179.  U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, CED-80-65, Direct Farmer-to-Consumer
Marketing Program Should Be Continued and Improved (1980),
http://www.gao.gov/assets/130/129917.pdf





n180.  Id.





n181.  Low & Vogel, supra note 32, at 5 tbl.1.





n182.  Id.





n183.  Id. at 6 tbl.2.





n184.  Id.





n185.  Id. at 5 tbl.1.





n186.  Id. at 6 tbl.2.





n187.  Id.





n188.  Id. at 6 tbl.2.





n189.  See, e.g.  7 C.F.R. § 4284.902 (2011).





n190.  Low & Vogel, supra note [32], at iii.





n191.  Rural Business-Cooperative Service, 74 Fed. Reg. 20900 (Sept. 1, 2009)
(announcing the availability of 18 million dollars in grants); Rural
Business-Cooperative Service (June 28, 2011) (to be codified at 7. C.F.R. pt.
4284) (announcing the availability of 37 million dollars in grants).





n192.  FY 2009 Value Added Producer Grant Awards - Listed by State,
http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/rbs/coops/FY%202009%20VAPG%20AWARDS.pdf (last visited
Feb. 4, 2012).





n193.  Farmers Market Promotion Program - FY 2011 Awards,
http://www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/getfile ?dDocName=STELPRDC5094638&acct=fmpp
(last visited Feb. 4, 2012).





n194.  Farmers Market Promotion Program - FY 2011 Awards (Summary of Awards),
http://www.ams. usda.gov/AMSv1.0/getfile?dDocName=STELPRDC5094639&acct=fmpp
(last visited Feb. 4, 2012).





n195.  See, e.g., Mary Jane Angelo, Corn, Carbon, and Conservation: Rethinking
U.S. Agricultural Policy in a Changing Global Environment, 17 George Mason L.
Rev. 593, 650 (2010); Sustainable Agriculture Coalition, The Sustainable
Agriculture Coalitions Grassroots Guide to the 2008 Farm Bill (Oct. 2008),
http://sustainableagriculturecoalition.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/sac-farm-b
ill-guide.pdf (last visited Feb. 4, 2012).





n196.  See e.g., Jon Pierre, Debating Governance: Authority, Steering and
Democracy, 5 (2000); Gerry Stoker, Governance as Theory, 155 Int'l. Soc. Sci. J.
17 (1998).





n197.  Pierre, supra note [196], at 3-4.





n198.  Andrew Jordan, Rudiger K.W. Wurzel & Anthony R. Zito, 'New' Instruments
of Environmental Governance: Patterns and Pathways of Change, 12 Envtl. Pol. 3
(2010).


                              648 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           The Advertiser (Australia)

                             June 26, 2007 Tuesday
                                 State Edition

WINEMAKERS 60pc of the industry's newcomers in SA;
Struggling after oversupply

BYLINE: MEREDITH BOOTH

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 412  words


ACTIVITY in South Australia's wine sector remained strong in the past year, with
two thirds of the nation's newest winemakers setting up in the state.

Winetitle magazine's Australian and New Zealand Wine Industry Directory shows
138 new wineries opened in Australia, about 60 per cent of them in SA, for a new
total of 2146.

Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation information and analysis manager Lawrie
Stanford said Winetitle's figures included ''virtual'' wineries - or labels
produced at contract wineries as well as at new sites - but was a good indicator
of activity.

Actual wineries processing 50 tonnes or more, about 5000 cases, climbed to 392
this year, he said.

''It's an indication of how much activity there is and an indication of how many
labels there are,'' Mr Stanford said. ''I would say 138 (new wineries) is a
pretty healthy number for 2007 but the heady days of growth were 2000-05 . . .
when we went into oversupply.''

The oversupply had been the cause of ''challenging'' and ''tough'' domestic
market sales with the biggest publicly listed winemakers such as Lion Nathan,
Foster's and McGuigan Simeon facing shrinking profits and wanting to increase
premium-wine export sales to improve margins.

Tough drought conditions were expected to swallow Australia's 1.5 billion-tonne
oversupply by 2008, helping to lift the value of wine exports but putting
pressure on some producers.

Hardy Wine Company president John Grant said said cool-climate wine producers
would bare the brunt of that pressure.

With 80 per cent of Hardy wines sourced from irrigated regions, cool-climate
growers were heading for years of oversupply.

''I suspect, in 2009-10-11, there will be a surplus of cool-climate grapes,'' Mr
Grant said.

This would be bad for producers but good for larger wine companies able to
obtain high-quality cool-climate fruit at cheaper prices to make better wines.

Meanwhile, there has been some fallout from the industry with a number of
vineyards and wineries up for sale, including McGuigan Simeon's 100,000tonne
Loxton winery in SA's Riverland.

Vineyard and winery broker Gaetjens Langley director Toby Langley said sales
activity was constant at the high end of the market. However, Wine Grape Growers
Association executive director Mark McKenzie said many growers were considering
walking away from their properties amid the combination of low prices for grapes
during years of oversupply and zero or poor water allocations this year in
irrigated regions.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV


                   Copyright 2007 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              649 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 7, 2017 Saturday
                                Ontario Edition

COMMODITIES;
Early U.S. lumber finding stokes fear in Canada

BYLINE: ROSS MAROWITS, The Canadian Press

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B8

LENGTH: 479 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL


The U.S. International Trade Commission says it has found there was a reasonable
indication that softwood-lumber products from Canada materially injured American
producers, setting the stage for the imposition of preliminary duties that
softwood producers fear could impact Canadian jobs.

The trade commission announced Friday that it made an initial determination of
harm from Canadian lumber that is "allegedly subsidized and sold in the United
States at less than fair value."

It said the U.S. Department of Commerce will continue antidumping and
countervailing duty investigations launched Dec. 16 into the imported products.

"In the final phase, which is a much longer and much more indepth investigation,
the commission will make a determination whether the U.S. industry is injured by
reason of the imports," said spokeswoman Peg O'Laughlin.

The preliminary finding could force U.S. importers of Canadian lumber to pay
cash deposits to cover preliminary countervailing duties in early March,
followed in mid-May with deposits for any anti-dumping duties, unless the
deadlines are extended.

Canadian softwood producers say the duties would result in job losses and plant
closures north of the border.

International Trade Minister Chrystia Freeland said Canada is prepared for any
situation and the government will vigorously defend the interests of Canadian
workers and producers.

"Our softwood-lumber producers and workers have never been found in the wrong;
international bodies have always sided with our industry in the past," she said
in a statement.

The decision to investigate is in response to petitions filed in November from
the U.S. Lumber Coalition, which alleges that provincial governments, which own
most of Canada's vast timberlands, provide trees to Canadian producers at rates
far below market value, along with other subsidies.

Softwood producers in Canada dispute the U.S. Lumber Coalition's allegations.
Montrealbased Resolute Forest Products Inc. said producers in Quebec and Ontario
pay market prices and should have access to free trade with the United States.

The B.C. Lumber Trade Council has said the claims levelled by the U.S. lumber
lobby are based on unsubstantiated arguments that were previously rejected by
independent North America free-trade agreement panels.

Paul Quinn of RBC Capital Markets said the Americans will likely initially
impose a high duty to get Canada to negotiate a deal over a long period that's
favourable to the United States.

"The reality is everybody's making money so just the initial determination of
harm is a difficult one in an environment where everybody was making money," he
said from Vancouver.

Resolute spokesman Seth Kursman said the company hopes the federal and
provincial authorities won't be "intimidated and bullied" by U.S. action given
the importance of the forest products industry to the Canadian economy.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              650 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            September 4, 2009 Friday
                                  All Editions

USDA grants offered to farmers, ranchers

SECTION: Pg. A7

LENGTH: 295 words

DATELINE: BANGOR


Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack has announced that USDA Rural Development is
now accepting applications for grants to assist agricultural producers seeking
to add value to their commodities.

About $18 million is available nationwide, and applicants will compete based on
the agency's established procedures.

"These grants strengthen rural economies and create jobs by helping farmers and
ranchers add value to their agricultural products by using them for planning
activities such as feasibility studies, marketing and business plans, or for
working capital," Vilsack said in a statement.

"This program also supports President Obama's goal to expand our nation's
renewable energy resources by helping farmers develop renewable energy from
agricultural products."

In Maine, Peaked Mountain Farm of Dedham has used two Value-Added Grants
totaling $148,177 to market its value-added product, Bite O'Blue wild blueberry
dog treats.

Gail VanWart, who owns and operates Peaked Mountain Farm with her husband,
Daniel, says their business has increased dramatically as a result of the
grants.

"It has definitely made a positive impact on sales of our product and has opened
doors for us to expand our business beyond Maine to a global marketplace," she
said. "Our products can now be found in stores across the country."

USDA may award planning grants of up to $100,000 and working capital grants of
up to $300,000 to successful applicants.

Applicants are encouraged to propose projects that use existing agricultural
products in nontraditional ways or merge agricultural products with technology
in creative ways.

For more information on the program, contact John Sheehan at 990-9168 or view
the notice in the Sept. 1 Federal Register at
http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2009/E9-21030.htm.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2009 Bangor Daily News


                              651 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Farmers Weekly

                               December 14, 2012

BYLINE: Johann Tasker

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 490 words


The government has launched its long-awaited consultation on plans that will
allow English dairy farmers to boost their market power by forming producer
organisations.

Farm minister David Heath also launched a separate scheme allowing English dairy
farmers to apply for £5m of grants to develop new market opportunities through
cooperation.

The new rules will allow dairy farmers to come together and form producer
organisations to sell their combined milk to processing companies rather than
negotiate as individuals.

Mr Heath said the move would mean that alongside the new industry code of
practice, producers could have more influence over contractual terms, conditions
and prices.

"England's dairy industry is world-leading, yet still has so much potential to
expand, and I'm convinced that better industry collaboration is the key," he
said.

"We've already got the industry code of practice and negotiating as groups
rather than individuals will give dairy farmers an even louder voice to get
their just rewards from the marketplace.

"Our £5m dairy fund will also allow producers to develop other means of
cooperation and grab business opportunities with both hands."

The two schemes follow a critical year for the industry in which the government
helped to secure an industry agreement on a voluntary code of practice on
contracts between farmers and processors.

The plans on producer organisations are part of a six-week consultation on how
to implement the European Union's Dairy Package in England.

Currently farmers negotiate with processors as individuals. Under the new plans,
producer organisations - already widespread in other European countries -  could
cover up to one-third of UK production and would negotiate on behalf of members.

The UK currently imports £1.2bn more dairy produce than it exports, and the
government believes there is huge potential for growth in domestic and export
markets.

The £5m fund, offered through the Rural Development Programme for England, will
see grants of at least £25,000 issued to support groups of dairy farmers.

These could cover costs to establish new cooperation structures, such as
producer groups and cooperatives, and invest in technology to take advantage of
new market opportunities.

Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are holding their own consultations.

Scottish rural affairs secretary Richard Lochhead said volatility in farmgate
milk prices and outdated contractual arrangements meant farmers had faced a
challenging year.

The EU Dairy Package was a positive development for the sector and consultation
would give those with an interest the opportunity to air their views on the
implementation of the package.

A strategic review of Scotland's dairy industry would look at ways value could
be added to milk products and help pinpoint ways to drive up export volumes, as
well as domestic sales.

RELEVANT STORY:

Producer organisations - call to act

Johann Tasker on G+

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2012 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              652 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                          Sunday Times (South Africa)

                                 June 20, 2004

BYLINE: Don Robertson

SECTION: Economy, Business & Finance; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 346 words


Cheap imports a bitter pill for SA sweet makers

CONFECTIONERY

By DON ROBERTSON

THE R7-billion-a-year confectionery industry is being threatened by
under-declared imports, particularly from Brazil. More than a quarter of the
industry's employees have lost their jobs in recent months.

Neil Brimacombe, Chairman of the SA Chocolate and Sweet Manufacturers
Association (Sacsma), says the SA Revenue Service is losing between R100-million
and R150-million a year in duty.

He says local importers are required to pay duties of 25% on the free-on-board
value of confectionery, but adds that between 50% and 70% of the confectionery
landing on SA shores is declared at a value lower than true value.

This, he says, is because items such as agents' fees, interest and other
"fictional" charges are added to invoices, reducing the true value of products.

Confectionery imports often land at SA ports en route to neighbouring countries,
but considerable amounts are sold locally instead. Imported sweets are sold
between 20% and 30% cheaper than the local product.

Last year about 27 000 tons of confectionery were imported. Brimacombe is unable
to put a value on the imports.

Sacsma members employ about 9 500 people, but about 28% have been retrenched.

Sacsma has about 20 members, made up of small and large groups such as Nestle,
Cadbury, Tiger Brands, Kraft and Master Foods.

Sacsma has set up a joint venture with the SA Revenue Service, through a company
called Trade Compliance SA, to investigate the problem of under-declared goods
coming into South Africa.

Another problem facing the local industry is the price of sugar, which makes up
about 42% of costs. Local confectionery producers have to pay $ 470 a ton for
sugar, while Brazilian producers pay only $ 180 a ton for government-subsidised
sugar.

Sacsma says an amendment to the Sugar Act, which could result in lower sugar
prices, has been under review for the past few months. He is not hopeful that
any changes made as a result will be of much help to Sacsma members.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                       Copyright 2004 Times Media Limited


                              653 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                          Sunday Times (South Africa)

                                 June 20, 2004

Cheap imports a bitter pill for SA sweet makers

BYLINE: Don Robertson

SECTION: Economy, Business & Finance; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 346 words


Cheap imports a bitter pill for SA sweet makers

CONFECTIONERY

By DON ROBERTSON

THE R7-billion-a-year confectionery industry is being threatened by
under-declared imports, particularly from Brazil. More than a quarter of the
industry's employees have lost their jobs in recent months.

Neil Brimacombe, Chairman of the SA Chocolate and Sweet Manufacturers
Association (Sacsma), says the SA Revenue Service is losing between R100-million
and R150-million a year in duty.

He says local importers are required to pay duties of 25% on the free-on-board
value of confectionery, but adds that between 50% and 70% of the confectionery
landing on SA shores is declared at a value lower than true value.

This, he says, is because items such as agents' fees, interest and other
"fictional" charges are added to invoices, reducing the true value of products.

Confectionery imports often land at SA ports en route to neighbouring countries,
but considerable amounts are sold locally instead. Imported sweets are sold
between 20% and 30% cheaper than the local product.

Last year about 27 000 tons of confectionery were imported. Brimacombe is unable
to put a value on the imports.

Sacsma members employ about 9 500 people, but about 28% have been retrenched.

Sacsma has about 20 members, made up of small and large groups such as Nestle,
Cadbury, Tiger Brands, Kraft and Master Foods.

Sacsma has set up a joint venture with the SA Revenue Service, through a company
called Trade Compliance SA, to investigate the problem of under-declared goods
coming into South Africa.

Another problem facing the local industry is the price of sugar, which makes up
about 42% of costs. Local confectionery producers have to pay $ 470 a ton for
sugar, while Brazilian producers pay only $ 180 a ton for government-subsidised
sugar.

Sacsma says an amendment to the Sugar Act, which could result in lower sugar
prices, has been under review for the past few months. He is not hopeful that
any changes made as a result will be of much help to Sacsma members.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                       Copyright 2004 Times Media Limited


                              654 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                               May 5, 2014 Monday

Washington: Up to $12.3 Million in Grants and $57.8 Million in Loan Guarantees
Available In Rural Energy for America Program

LENGTH: 756  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Agriculture, The Government of USA has issued the following
news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced that USDA is seeking
applications from rural small businesses and agricultural producers for funding
to make energy efficiency improvements or to install renewable energy systems.

"Developing renewable energy presents an enormous economic opportunity for rural
America," Vilsack said. "This funding will help farmers, ranchers and rural
small business owners incorporate renewable energy and energy efficiency
technology into their operations, create jobs and help America become more
energy independent. When small rural businesses and farmers cut their energy
costs with cleaner and more efficient energy, we are both helping their bottom
lines and reducing the amount of greenhouse gas pollution that affects our
climate."

The funding announced today is being provided through USDA's Rural Energy for
America Program (REAP). Investments from programs like REAP help support the
true engine of America's economic growth - a thriving middle class. REAP is one
of many USDA programs and initiatives to support an expanded domestic energy
economy. In addition to helping to increase renewable energy production, USDA
makes investments in the bioeconomy, provides support for the emerging biobased
products industry, supports new technologies, and supports energy efficiency
improvements.

REAP funding has helped farmers expand renewable energy use in recent years. The
new Census of Agriculture shows the number of farms utilizing renewable energy
production has doubled in the last five years. More than 57,000 farms reported
using a renewable energy system in 2012, while 23,451 operations reported doing
so in 2007. Solar panels accounted for 63% of renewable energy systems on farms,
with 36,331 farms reporting their use.

REAP funding is an example of the many ways that USDA is helping revitalize
rural economies to create opportunities for growth and prosperity, support
innovative technologies, identify new markets for agricultural producers and
better utilize our nation's natural resources.

Created by the 2008 Farm Bill, REAP was reauthorized by the recently passed 2014
Farm Bill. For fiscal year (FY) 2014, USDA plans to award up to $12.3 million in
grants and $57.8 million in loan guarantees. Additional REAP funds provided by
the Farm Bill will be made available with a subsequent notice.

USDA is accepting applications for:

Renewable energy system and energy efficiency improvement loan guarantee and
grant combinations;
 Renewable energy system and energy efficiency improvement loan guarantees; and
 Renewable energy system and energy efficiency improvement grants.

Requests for grants may not exceed 25 percent of a project's cost - either for
stand-alone grant requests or for grants combined with loan guarantees.

Since the start of the Obama Administration, REAP has supported more than 8,200
renewable energy and energy efficiency projects nationwide. During this period,
USDA has provided more than $264 million in grants and $212 million in loan
guarantees to agricultural producers and rural small business owners.

Cozy Acres Greenhouse in North Yarmouth, Maine, used a $48,750 REAP grant to
help offset the cost of installing a solar and geothermal system in new
greenhouses. Owners Jeff and Marianne Marstaller needed to expand their
greenhouse operations and were determined to do so in a cost-effective and
energy-efficient way. They teamed up with USDA Rural Development to fund a
geothermal system to provide heat for the greenhouses and solar photovoltaic
panels that help offset their electricity needs. The greenhouses were completed
in fall 2013. The Marstallers plan to market their locally grown herbs and
vegetables to area restaurants and farmers markets.

Information on how to apply for REAP funding and on the application deadlines
(which vary by project type) is available on page 25564 of the May 5, 2014
Federal Register.

President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way -
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities. USDA's
investments in rural communities support the rural way of life that stands as
the backbone of our American values.

For more information please visit: http://www.usda.gov

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              655 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                            March 9, 2005 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Mining marriage presents a natural fit;
The numbers BATTLE FOR WMC

BYLINE: Alan Jury and Ian Howarth

SECTION: COMPANIES AND MARKETS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1123 words


BHP Billiton has catapulted itself further ahead of its rivals with a suite of
world class, low-cost assets which position it to exploit expectations of
"stronger for longer" commodity prices due to the long-term economic growth of
China and the Asian region.

BHP Billiton is the colossus of international mining and yesterday's $9.2
billion offer for WMC Resources will position the company as the world's
third-largest producer of nickel and second-biggest producer of copper.

It is already one of the world's largest iron ore and coal producers, and will
become the fifth-largest uranium miner.

Capitalised at about $US90 billion ($117 billion), it is roughly twice the size
of its nearest rival, Rio Tinto, and about seven times the size of WMC
Resources.

BHP Billiton is also the top performing global mining stock, rising 24 per cent
this year and outperforming the Standard & Poor's Global 1200 index by 23 per
cent. Next best is the Brazilian iron ore giant CVRD, followed by Rio then
Xstrata. This follows BHP's 21 per cent share price gain and 15 per cent
outperformance last year when it ranked behind Xstrata and CVRD.

BHP Billiton's 11th-hour move to secure control of WMC demonstrates as much
casual indifference as it does tactical brilliance. The decision to join the
bidding underscores the strategic importance of Olympic Dam's uranium content.

But it also confirms what the market has known since the day WMC Resources was
created that the two companies are a near-perfect, natural fit. At the
operational level, the Olympic Dam mine, the jewel in WMC's portfolio, fits
neatly within BHP Billiton's existing base metals business.

The base metals division operates a series of copper mines in South America,
North America and Africa, so grafting a large, operating project such as Olympic
Dam onto the existing assets will not be difficult. But BHP Billiton may alter
the uranium marketing function to fall within its existing energy unit marketing
structure, which incorporates both coal and petroleum.

BHP is offering a cash bid valuing WMC at $9.2 billion, or 6.2 times WMC's
earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation. Given that WMC
forecast only 1.6 per cent growth in EBITDA this year, it is a big number 12 per
cent higher than Xstrata's present bid, 28 per cent higher than its initial bid
and 31 per cent higher than WMC had ever traded before Xstrata let the value
genie out of the bottle.

BHP is proposing to lift its net debt by about $10 billion from $7 billion to
$16.6 billion to buy WMC, a company whose revenue in the year to December 31,
2004, was just 10 per cent that of BHP's for the same period. To enable a
like-for-like comparison, The Australian Financial Review has restated BHP
Billiton's accounts to a December year end, and converted reported US dollar
results to Australian dollars at current exchange rates.

BHP Billiton's operating cash flow of $10.9 billion is 7.6 times that of WMC,
although its total asset base is just five times larger.

Such is the strength of the balance sheets of both BHP and WMC that gearing net
debt as a percentage of shareholders' equity will remain comfortably below 1 per
cent if the WMC acquisition is successful, and its theoretical debt payback
period less than two years.

Interest payments are likely to be at least nine times covered by EBITDA. This
is unlikely to negatively affect BHP's A+ credit rating.

Interestingly, BHP is estimating annual corporate cost efficiencies of $115
million close to the controversial $110 million figure used by Grant Samuel in
its independent valuation. As pointed out by Xstrata, these cost savings were
only available to a company that also had corporate offices in Australia.

In fact, the savings for BHP could be even greater.

Grant Samuel actually identified $175 million of corporate overheads, $110
million of which were shared services charged to the individual business units,
$40 million of which were directly associated with the businesses, with $25
million to maintain a listed WMC.

Apart from the benefits of adding Olympic Dam to BHP's extensive pipeline of
long-life, low-cost major development projects, it also gets a little more
balance in its business base. Petroleum is diluted from 23 per cent of group
revenue to 19 per cent, based on a pro forma 2004 calendar year consolidation.
Base metals will now include uranium, produced in conjunction with copper, gold
and silver from Olympic Dam its share of revenue will rise from 15 per cent to
17 per cent. Stainless Steel Metals will be boosted by the addition of WMC's
nickel division and will rise from seven per cent to 12 per cent of group
revenue. The uranium now produced is being sold on low fixed-price contracts
that don't expire until 2009, so BHP has plenty of time to review Olympic Dam's
development options.

WMC's nickel operations are also a neat fit for BHP Billiton. BHPB is
establishing a large laterite nickel mine and pressure acid leaching processing
plant at Ravensthorpe, south-west of Kalgoorlie.

Product from Ravensthorpe will be refined at BHPB's Yabulu refinery in
Queensland and while the WMC nickel assets will have little operational
connection the marketing clout of the combined companies will be significant.

Of the undeveloped assets, BHP Billiton will have been closely following WMC
Resources' feasibility study on the Corridor Sands mineral sands project in
Mozambique.

BHP, through its merger with Billiton, acquired the Richards Bay Minerals
project, where it produces heavy mineral sand mines and operates a smelter in
northern KwaZulu-Natal in South Africa.

Richards Bay Minerals is jointly owned on a 50-50 basis with Rio Tinto and is a
major producer of titania slag, high purity pig iron, rutile and zircon. But it
is well known that Rio Tinto has long eyed the Corridor project as a potential
acquisition or joint-venture deal.

IN PLAY
WMC Resources valuation summary
    VALUATION ($USm) VALUATION ($m)
    LOW  HIGH LOW  HIGH
Olympic Dam   3700 4100 4868 5395
Nickel business unit   2400 2700 3158 3553
    350 380 461 500
Queensland fertiliser operation   8487 9448
Exploration and development projects   385 590
Other      100 130
Corporate overheads    (150) (100)
Total enterprise value    8822 10,068
(Debt)    (700) (700) (921) (921)
Cash      407 407
Other receivables     106 126
Value of net assets     8414 9680
Shares on issue (millions)    1171 1171
Net value per share     7.18 8.26
Net value per share Â¿ diluted for options   7.17 8.24

Merged BHP-WMC revenue
Aluminium  16%
Stainless steel
materials   12%
Energy coal  9%
Diamonds & specialty
products   7%
Other   1%
Base metals (includes
uranium)   17%
Carbon steel
materials  19%
Petroleum  19%  (appeared as graph)


Source: Grant Samuel, Bloomberg, Company data


LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: TWO GRAPHS: WMC Resources share price, daily Oct-Feb; Merged BHP-WMC
financials Source: Grant Samuel, Bloomberg, Company data

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2005 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              656 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2016 Zoom Information Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                            Zoom Company Information

                                   July 2016

                          Hartley Film Foundation Inc

                       49 Richmondville Avenue  Suite 204
                              Westport,  CT 06880
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: (203) 226-9500
FAX: (203) 869-1905
URL: www.hartleyfoundation.org

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EMPLOYEES: 7

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   The Hartley Film Foundation provides support through seed grants for
documentaries that the Foundation fiscally sponsors.  Hartley awards grants for
documentaries in the areas of world religions, spirituality, ethics and
well-being. In conjunction with its grants, Hartley also provides filmmakers
with fiscal sponsorship services and in return the fiscal sponsees agree to pay
to Hartley a small percentage of any net profits derived from the film project.
Hartley recoups funding in proportion to its pro rata share of the approved
production budget. That is, if Hartley contributes 15% of the approved budget,
then Hartley is entitled to receive 15% of all net receipts until it has been
reimbursed for the full amount of its contribution.  In determining the
percentage of Hartley's contribution to the approved budget, the filmmaker
and/or producer's time invested are given full credit. It has been our
experience that filmmakers/producers too frequently place too low a value on the
time contributed to a project. After Hartley has recouped the full amount of its
grant, the percentage that Hartley would be entitled to receive from net
receipts would be reduced by 50%.  The Foundation recognizes that a number of
the documentaries that the Foundation funds might not be in a position to return
in full the amount of Hartley's investment in a film.  Please peruse the In
Development section of our Web site for a roster of Hartley's fiscal sponsees.
To apply for a grant, please send a prop

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2016


                              657 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                                 March 24, 1999

Switch to organic crops gets a boost

SECTION: Supplement: Farming

LENGTH: 327 words


FARMERS in Devon looking to switch to organic production will be given more help
under a new scheme aimed at promoting greener farming and a sustainable rural
economy.

Devon Food Links will be officially launched today at the opening of the Taste
of the West show.

The project aims to stimulate the rural economy by creating a network of organic
producers and promoting the increasingly popular box schemes and farmers
markets, and encouraging sales of local produce in village shops throughout the
county.

Jointly funded with private sector, local authority, MAFF and EU Objective 5b
money, the project will run for three years.

It will be managed by Devon County Council, but will also receive input from
other project partners, including the Soil Association, local business, Devon
health authorities and the Rural Development Commission.

By increasing local food production for local consumption, and developing
marketing opportunities for organic producers, Devon Food Link's organisers hope
to safeguard rural employment, improve the value of sales and retain more money
within the Devon economy.

By providing a more stable rural economy the scheme hopes to attract more young
entrepreneurs into agriculture and horticulture.

Areas designated by the European Union as eligible for funding under South West
Objective 5b programme, including much of the northern, western and some
southern parts of rural Devon, will benefit from the scheme.

Amanda Woolley of Devon Food Link said the scheme was already generating
interest with people looking to start or switch to organic methods of farming.

The project will provide grants for machinery and equipment, adding value to
organic products farmed in Devon, which would not normally benefit the Devon
economy, she added.

Farms and businesses looking to switch to organic production will be supported
by mentor schemes, using existing organic farmers, to ease the passage of
conversion.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: FIELD CRAFT: Organic producers are to be given help and encouragement
under new scheme

                      Copyright 1999 Western Morning News


                              658 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Weekly Times (Australia)

                            April 23, 2008 Wednesday
                               1 - FIRST Edition

Biofuel aid `unfair'

BYLINE: DAVID McKENZIE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 436 words


THE feedlot sector has called for an end to government support for the
grain-based ethanol industry after a new report cast doubt over the net benefits
to Australia.

The report, Bio-fuels: At What Cost?, by the International Institute of
Sustainable Development, said the industry received $95 million in assistance
last financial year, through fuel excise rebates and capital grants.

This was more support, as a proportion of value added, than what any industry
received, and higher per litre than what US producers were given, the report
said.

And it could grow substantially in coming years -- ``to several hundred million
dollars a year'' -- as new production plants came on line, it said.

While biofuels could help reduce fossil fuel use and greenhouse gas emissions,
the net gains were reduced by the extra non-renewable fuel needed to grow,
transport and process the grain needed to produce ethanol.

``This report demonstrates these gains are relatively small in comparison with
their subsidy cost,'' it said.

Australian Lot Feeders' Association vice president Jim Cudmore said the report
added to the ``considerable weight of evidence'' backing a rethink of support
for biofuels, especially grain-based ethanol.

The report showed effective government support for ethanol produced from sorghum
(240 per cent of value added) was ``massively higher'' than the 5 per cent going
to intensive livestock producers who had to compete for grain, he said.

``The situation is distortionary, unfair and inconsistent with Australia's
stance in support for deregulation and reduced government protection.''

The objectives of biofuels could be achieved more cheaply in other ways, such as
buying carbon equivalents on the Chicago Climate Exchange, Mr Cudmore said.

The Rudd Government cut support for the ethanol industry with a $16 million cut
in production and distribution grants as part of pre-Budget savings announced in
February.

Government sources would not comment on whether further changes were being
considered as part of the May 13 federal budget.

Victorian Farmers Federation grains group Geoff Nalder accused the feedlot
sector of ``having its cake and eating it too'' with its attitude on ethanol.

``The wheat distillers grain produced as a byproduct of ethanol is ready-made
for use as feed and has been used in overseas feedlots with good results,'' he
said.

Mr Nalder said it was important that governments develop a viable biofuels
industry to reduce reliance on fossil fuels.

But he supported a move away from grain-based ethanol towards new cellulosic
technologies, which were close to being available for practical use.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: WKT


                   Copyright 2008 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              659 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 18, 2015 Wednesday

West Virginia: New land-grant impacts site highlights WVU Extension's mission to
bring trusted resources to local communities

LENGTH: 782  words

DATELINE: Charleston


West Virginia University, The state of West Virginia has issued the following
news release:

Learning how West Virginia University Extension Service's people and programs
help to better the lives of West Virginians is just one benefit of the new land-
grant Impacts website launched this month.

WVU Extension Service Interim Director Steve Bonanno said that while the site
doesn't take into account all of Extension's programming or public value, the
portal is a good representation of how the land-grant system works.

"As a land grant university, we're committed to making our research and programs
beneficial and accessible to people across the state," he said. "The land-grant
impacts site takes the same approach, showing the benefit of your tax dollars in
action."

The site specifically highlights the teaching, research and learning efforts of
land-grant universities. It can be searched by topic area, geographic region or
even simplified to a specific state. The site also informs users about the
history of the land-grant university system and how its mission has evolved
since the systems' founding.

"This new tool will better inform people of the significant agricultural
research, education and Extension impacts taking place at land grant
universities across our nation, which offer practical solutions to today's
critical societal challenges," said Sonny Ramaswamy, director of the National
Institute of Food and Agriculture, U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Ramaswamy says that the website will help policy makers and the public learn
more about the work that is partially supported with NIFA funding, too.

WVU is one of the 238 public research universities, land-grant institutions,
state university systems and affiliated organizations represented by The
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities. The Land-grant university
system has affiliations in all 50 states, the four U.S. territories, the
District of Columbia, Mexico and Canada.

To learn more about WVU Extension Service, visit ext.wvu.edu, or contact your
local county office.

Some recent accomplishments of WVU Extension include:

2013, The Energy Express program increases literacy skills and provides summer
foods for low-resource children. 121,338 meals were served to children
participating in the program and 9,378 meals were served to community youth.
2013, Youth improve healthy lifestyle skills and practices. The Family Nutrition
Program (SNAPed and EFNEP) in West Virginia enrolled 17,294 youths in its
programs. Eighty-four percent of youths in the SNAPed program improved their
ability to choose foods according to Federal Dietary Recommendations.
Thirty-three percent of youths in the SNAPed program improved their physical
activity practices. Eighty-five percent of the youths in the EFNEP program
improved their abilities to choose foods according to the Federal Dietary
Recommendations. Thirty-seven percent of the youths in the EFNEP program
improved their physical activity practices.
2013, STEM ambassadors are role models for 4-H youth. During the combined
2012-2013 camping seasons, STEM Ambassadors provided over 3,000 hours of applied
instruction in science and engineering to more than 10,000 K-12 students
statewide.
WVU-ES has implemented programs designed to train adults and youth to implement
programs designed to improve skills in avoiding use of illegal and/or addictive
substances such as the Health Rocks program for 4-H youths. As a result, in the
Health Rocks program, over 88 percent of youth participants were confident that
they would be able to say "no" if other people, such as their friends or peers,
offer them drugs. In addition, over 85 percent of youth participants were
confident that they would be able to deal with stress by using stress management
skills, such as talking about it with someone they trust.
West Virginians improve skills in farm management. The 2013 WVU Extension
Service Small Farms Conference was held from February 28 to March 1. Over 800
participants in farm management workshops in West Virginia improved their skills
in the business side of agritourism and other small farm operations.
2013, Improved cattle quality through increased participation in state's cattle
marketing pools. West Virginia University Extension staff help organize beef
producers into marketing pools that assist producers in selling improved cattle
that command a premium price, thus increasing income and state revenues. One
hundred sixteen producers participated in the marketing pools in 2013 and
benefited from the analysis of cattle though a livestock database.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              660 of 998 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright (c) 2016 UC Hastings College of the Law
             Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal
                                   (Comm/Ent)

                                  Winter, 2016

             Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal

                        38 Hastings Comm. & Ent. L.J. 39

LENGTH: 11472 words

ARTICLE: Adopting Subsequent Remuneration Right in Chinese Copyright Law

NAME: by Xi Chen*

BIO: * Xi Chen, Candidate of JSD at Chicago-Kent College of Law and Attorney at
Law in Beijing Zhongzi Law Office. I would like to thank Professor Edward Lee
and Professor Patrick Goold for their valuable advice and help, as well as all
of the classmates in the legal writing course of IIP.

TEXT:
 [*40]

   I. Introduction

 The Chinese government has intended to amend its current Copyright Law of the
People's Republic of China since 2012. n1 One of the major proposals for the
amendments is the rearrangement of the authorship of audiovisual work and the
addition of "the subsequent remuneration right" ("SRR") n2 for authors
("Drafts"). n3 The Drafts are welcomed among authors who contribute to
audiovisual works. Li Shaohong, the president of China Director Association,
said in her Weibo (Chinese Twitter) that "the China Film Association has
submitted its proposal to the General Administration of Press and Publication to
allege that 1) directors shall be the author of the audiovisual works; 2)
authors shall enjoy the subsequent remuneration right." n4 Upon the SRR, the
author can enjoy the sustainable remuneration when their work is reused. n5
Using Spiderman as an example, if Spiderman is developed into a video game or
displayed on media channels other than the theatre, the authors will be paid
subsequent remuneration proportional to the license fee or other revenue. The
Drafts encountered fierce  [*41]  opposition from producers, represented by one
of the leading film production companies - Huayi Brothers Media Group ("HBMG").
HBMG alleged "when such Drafts are legally in effect, it will be a devastating
blow to the whole movie industry, because "the subsequent remuneration right'
disrupts the already well-established profit model in the industry." n6

   Indeed, it is not easy to balance the conflicting interest in the movie
industry because the audiovisual work involves different parties with a related
interest. Under the current Chinese Copyright Law, n7 the producer enjoys
authorship of audiovisual works. n8 The author who contributed to the works only
reserves the right of attribution and one lump-sum of compensation pursuant to
the agreement with the producer. n9 When films acquire huge successes -
especially small budget films - directors and scriptwriters, n10 who are of
paramount importance in the successes of the films, receive little remuneration
for their unbalanced contribution, while producers reap huge profits. This
problem became increasingly more acute as the Chinese movie industry experienced
burgeoning growth and ever-increasing profit margins. The authors advocate that
the legislation should grant SRR, while the producers argue that SRR will
unfairly burden the producers with all of the risk for investing and producing
an audiovisual work.

   A main focus of discussion in this article is how to balance the various
contending interests in audiovisual works. In order to balance the beneficial
interests in such an enormously ever-increasing revenue stake, the Chinese
legislature proposed this amendment in an attempt to empower authors with more
legal rights by adding a special SRR. If the amendment comes into effect, it
would give authors the right to acquire sustainable remuneration when their
works are reused in the subsequent exploitation of the audiovisual works.

   Part I of this article analyzes the problem that the movie industry in China
confronts under the current China Copyright Law, and juxtaposes the  [*42]
solution adopted by U.S. and France with that of the draft proposal. Part I
presents the main content of each of the three versions of Chinese Copyright Law
Drafts and discusses briefly the criticisms and ambiguity inherent within the
draft clause. Part II of the paper provides a flexible proposal to balance the
various contending interests in an audiovisual work. Based on the contractual
freedom principle, the presumption of transfer should be a better solution than
the current one. Part II also discusses the scope and the definition of SRR, and
methodologies for enforcing SRR in practice. Part III discusses potential flaws
of this proposal, and alternative remedies to the problem.

   II. Authorship and Remuneration in Audiovisual Works

 To promote the development of the Chinese movie industry and balance the
conflicting interests between the producer and the author, n11 the Chinese
government proposed to grant a SRR to the author in all three draft versions of
the amendment of Copyright Law. This proposal is the most disputed part of the
amendment. When compared with U.S. and France's legislative practices on the
subject matter, despite multiple alterations, the SRR mentioned in the drafts
still exhibits a high degree of ambiguity and lacks enforceability in practice.

   A. The Problem of Remuneration in Movie Industry n12

 China's movie industry has exploded in recent years; nevertheless, the
producers' monopolistic position granted by Copyright Law has caused
dissatisfaction among authors. According to the recent research, in 2013, the
Chinese movie industry generated RMB 27.68 billion ($ 4.5 billion) in revenue,
an 18% increase from 2012, most of which came from box office revenue, reaching
RMB 21.77 billion ($ 3.5 billion). n13 When facing the ever-increasing economic
interests, the authors argue that they deserve  [*43]  more remuneration, and
legislators need to break the producers' monopolistic position granted by the
existing Copyright Law. The most critical problem is how to distribute profit
created by audiovisual works fairly.

   Under Article 15 of the current Chinese Copyright Law, China has adopted the
"hybrid regimes" to protect the economic interest of producers and the
attribution right of authors. n14 On one hand, to respect the intelligence of
creators in audiovisual works, the law specifies the author of audiovisual works
to be "the scriptwriter, director, cameraman, lyricist, composer, and other
authors"; and the authors enjoy the rights of attribution and are entitled to
compensation pursuant to the agreement concluded with the producer. On the other
hand, considering producers bear the investment risk by contributing funds,
devices, organization, and other investments, they are granted the authorship of
audiovisual works (hereinafter "ownership"), but not the right of attribution.
Thus, in actuality, the producers enjoy all economic rights and the exploitation
right of works.

   Authors complain that, under the current provision, the compensation approach
is dampening their creativity because the existing approach does not associate
the value of their work with the fair market price. n15 One incident that drew a
lot of attention from the author community happened when two Chinese directors,
Zhang Yang and He Ping, whose work was reused by the Spanish Film Copyright
Association, revealed their license fee receipt publicly on Weibo (Chinese
Twitter). n16 This incident is of paramount importance for Chinese authors
because it made authors realize that SRR has already become a legal right for
other authors in developed countries. n17 With the increase of media channels
for the movie industry other than theater, such as TV, Internet, the
international copyright transactions, and its associated derivative market, the
authors argue that they should be entitled to the profit earned from the other
channel aside from the box office. n18 Li Saohong, the President of China
Director Association, said subsequent remuneration grants the author a right to
collect the residual value of their work and provides a more stable source of
income. She argued that "if the directors in China receive the same SRR as their
developed countries counterparts, the directors will invest more time  [*44]
and effort in their work for refinement." n19 From the authors' perspective,
granting SRR is a fairer approach than the practice condoned by the existing law
because subsequent remuneration reflects the value of their work in accordance
with the market demand. On top of that, it also provides a smoother income
stream for authors.

   On the contrary, producers contend that subsequent remuneration adds
additional cost to them. n20 The additional cost would limit the competitive
advantage of producers and would suppress the development of the movie industry
and the related entertainment industry. n21 Due to this additional cost, it
becomes more difficult to raise funds for audiovisual works, and it creates an
unforeseeable risk to recoup the cost if payments for subsequent remuneration
exceeds the initial compensation, which is the only source of income Chinese
authors currently enjoy. In this case, the producer makes little profit and may
not recoup the cost. n22

   To balance the interest between the producer and the author, the Chinese
legislation administration cautiously proposed to introduce SRR in the Copyright
Law Amendment. Aside from the initial remuneration pursuant to the agreement
agreed by the author and the producer, the legislation attempts to grants
authors a legal right to enjoy sustainable benefits when their works are reused
in subsequent exploitation. n23 Since countries with more developed movie
industries have already adopted similar measures, either in legislation or via
private orderings, useful legislative practices can be learned from these
predecessors.

   B. International Solution to the Problem

   1. The U.S Solution

 In the U.S. film industry, most copyrightable contributions to a movie fall
under the work made for hire category ("WMFH"), in which the producer or
financier usually is regarded as "the author and the initial owner of the
copyright" in the audiovisual work. n24 However, there exists "a second
contractual layer of copyright attribution" as a supplement of WMFH. n25 Screen
credit, which is regulated in an agreement entered by the Alliance of Motion
Picture and Television Producers ("AMPTP") and  [*45]  Writers Guild of America
("WGA"), for example, supplies a revenue-sharing system "that compensates
writers during periods of slack employment." n26

   a.

"Work-Made-For-Hire" Doctrine

 Under the WMFH stipulated in section 201(b) of the Copyright Act, the employer,
or other person for whom the work was prepared, is considered the author for
purposes of this title. n27 The WMFH is thus the strongest stipulation in
existence that protects the rights of producers; the U.S. legal system, however,
does offer a work around that separates the moral rights n28 from the economic
rights.

   b. WGA, DGA, and the "Collective Bargain" System

 In order to protect the screen writers and directors who do not own the
copyright to their works and thus have little control over what becomes of it, a
labor union of directors (Directors Guild of America ("DGA") n29) and a labor
union of TV and film writers (Writers Guild of America ("WGA") n30) were founded
with the specific purpose of protecting the directors' and writers' rights.
Before the guilds were formed, producers and studios would "buy the rights to a
large numbers of books, plays, songs, and vaudeville sketches with familiar or
catchy titles and then pay writers a flat rate of about $ 200 per week to spin a
story around the title or the idea." n31

   Currently, a Minimum Basic Agreement ("MBA"), negotiated between the WGA and
the AMPTP, states that "credits for screen authorship shall be given only
pursuant to the terms of and in the manner prescribed in the Theatrical Schedule
A, a thirty-page addendum to the basic agreement, [which specifies] the criteria
for awarding screen credit for writers." n32 The WGA developed a system of
authorship attribution by credit, which means "[writers'] position in the motion
picture or television industry is determined largely by [their] credit [and
their] professional status depends on the quality and number of the screenplays,
teleplays, or stories which  [*46]  bear his/her name," n33 and through the
credit, screen writers are entitled to a series of residual incomes based on the
revenues generated by the audiovisual work. n34

   DGA performs a similar function for directors, and "negotiates industry-wide
agreements governing the minimum compensation (salary), benefits, working
conditions and duties of DGA members." n35 Negotiating these collective
bargaining agreements provides the DGA with the opportunity to address changes
in the industry and to negotiate further gains for DGA members. n36 Contracts
negotiated by the DGA also "provide the right to residuals for the distribution
or exhibition of feature films and most television beyond their initial
release." n37 "These residuals include television reruns, basic cable
exhibition, home video and digital exploitation," n38 and are very similar to
the aforementioned residual system negotiated between WGA and AMPTP.

   The American model is unique given the roles WGA and DGA play in collectively
representing their members. Specifically, WGA determines screen credit, which is
closely linked to future remuneration for the writers. In fact, the system is
"one of the very few forms of intellectual property in the modern economy that
is designed by workers for workers and without the involvement of the
corporations that control most intellectual property policy." n39

   2. The French Solution: Presumption of Transfer and Mandatory Collective
Management

 In the French system, the attribution of authorship follows a "presumption of
authorship," which "specifies that the physical person who directed the work is
regarded as its author, and that the author of the script, [adaptation,
dialogue, and soundtrack] composed for the work, and the director are to be
considered as authors in the absence of proof to the contrary." n40 The French
copyright laws implicitly protect both the economic and moral rights of the
authors, mainly the screenwriter and the director, without relying on the
private sector. Nevertheless, the law does allow agreements to be formed between
the authors and the producer to  [*47]  transfer exclusive exploitation rights
to the producer. n41 The producer is thus able to exert full control over
exploitations of audiovisual works.

   To protect the authors' economic rights from subsequent usage of the
audiovisual works, the French system grants authors a nonexclusive right to
remuneration in the form of a fixed rate levy on the sales of video tapes and
other media. n42 To collect and administer "all private copying levies related
to audiovisual works, and the directors, screenwriters, and writers," the law
adopted "a mandatory system of collective management," which is the "Societe des
auteurs et compositeurs dramatiques" ("SACD"), acting as "an intermediary
between Copie-France." n43

   Under the French system, SACD acts as the ultimate overseeing entity that
collects subsequent remunerations in forms of levy, and distributes the gains
evenly among the authors, interpreters, and the producers. Since the original
creators are deemed the author and the owner (for the purpose of exclusive
rights less the right for exploitation) of the audiovisual work, and the
remuneration collection process is conducted through a third party, the
potential conflict between the producers and the authors is much less acute.
Whereas, in the U.S., producers control the economic right and other exclusive
exploitation right, original creators are only compensated through residual
claims. n44 The differing compensation regimes between the U.S. and France have
important implications on who ultimately has more control over the copyrighted
work. While the French government clearly places the creative individuals at the
heart of the compensation, the U.S. system is much more producer centric, and
tends to give the producers more power, but still protects the authors' rights
by delegating such duties to the WGA and the DGA.

   3. China's Proposed Solution: The SRR

 To balance the interests of producers and authors and prevent the monopolistic
position of producers, the legislature of China intended to grant authors a
subsequent remuneration right ("SRR") in the latest amendment drafts of
Copyright Law. On March 31, 2012, China National Copyright Administration
("CNCA") released Copyright Law of People Republic of China (Amendment Draft)
["First Draft"] and the related instructions for collecting comments and
suggestions from the public. n45  [*48]  After taking the public opinions into
consideration, CNCA released a subsequent Copyright Law of People Republic of
China (Second Amendment Draft) ["Second Draft"] and Copyright Law of People
Republic of China (the Draft for Examination) ["Exam Draft"] in July and
November of 2012, respectively (collectively referred to as "Drafts"). n46

   The highlights of the aforementioned drafts are summarized on the table
below. Compared to current copyright law, the First and Second Draft grant the
SRR to authors without requiring a separate agreement. n47 Nevertheless, the
Exam Draft stipulates, in the absence of an agreement or if there is ambiguity
in a related clause, the authors have the right to share profits derived from
their works. n48 These amendments are becoming one of the most disputed parts of
the Drafts. The following table compares each key element of the SRR clauses in
the Drafts with the current Copyright Law. The key elements include the main
content of SRR, the scope of author, the beneficiary of SRR, and the authorship
of the work. The table also highlights the main changes in each version of the
Drafts.

   ]
          Content      Author       SRR          SRR          Copyright
          Highlights                             Beneficiary
Current   Authors      Scriptwriter No SRR,      No SRR       Producers
                       ,
Copyright have right   director,    unless SRR                own rights;
Law       to acquire   cameraman,   is agreed                 authors
          remuneration lyricist,    upon by                   reserve the
          ,
          per the      composer,    both parties              attribution
          contract     and other                              right.
          between      authors
          author and
          producer.
First     Authors      Screenwriter Beneficiarie Screenwriter Producers
                       ,            s            ,
Draft     have right   director,    have SRR,    lyricist,    own rights
          to acquire   cameraman,   unless       composer     absent
          reasonable   lyricist,    explicit                  proof to
          remuneration composer,    exclusion                 the
          ,
          if the       etc.         of SRR is                 contrary.
          producer                  agreed upon
          uses or                   by both
          licenses                  parties
          other
          parties to
          use the
          work.
Second    Authors      The author   Beneficiarie Author of    Producers
                                    s
Draft     have right   of existing  have SRR,    existing     own rights;
          to acquire   work,        without      work,        authors
          reasonable   screenwriter mention of   screenwriter only
                       ,                         ,
          remuneration director,    exclusion    director,    reserve the
          ,
          provided     cameraman,   clause       lyricist,    attribution
          that the     lyricist,                 and composer right.
          producer     composer
          licenses     and other
          other        authors
          parties to
          use the
          work.
[*49]
Exam      Authors       Director,     Beneficiaries All       In
Draft     enjoy the     screenwriter  have SRR,     authors   principle,
          attribution   and all       unless                  economic
          right and     musicians     explicit                right is
          the right to  who produce   exclusion of            enjoyed by
          share the     solely for    SRR is                  the producer
          profit of     the purpose   agreed upon             in absent of
          the work      of the        by both                 proof to the
                        audiovisual   parties                 contrary.
                        works, etc.

   C. Criticisms of China's Proposed Solution

 China's existing situation is not unlike the U.S. system prior to the formation
of the WGA and the DGA. By examining the history of the U.S. system, it is not
difficult to deduce the rationale behind the draft amendments proposed by the
Chinese government. Thus, the issue of focus here is not to question the
validity of including a "subsequent remuneration clause." Rather, it is to
carefully engineer specific legislation details of a subsequent remuneration to
make it practical. However, SRR mentioned in the Drafts still exhibits a high
degree of ambiguity and lacks enforceability in practice.

   1. The Authorship Has Loophole and Is Not Flexible

 Under the existing proposal, there is a gap in rights that is not covered by
the economic right and the attribution right. Specifically, the Exam Draft does
not mention the right of publication, the right of alternation, and the
integrity right of work. n49 By not attributing these omitted rights to either
the producer or the natural author, the Exam Draft is incomplete, and thus
leaves behind a loophole.

   Simultaneously, if producers only have the economic right to works, such a
legislation model for authorship will cause a "litigation flood" to some extent.
n50 To provide one example, following market demands, the producer needs to make
alterations to works from time to time, but the reality would be that the
producer lacks the right of integrity. The unclear authorship on copyright is a
dilemma for the producers and can cause a great amount of litigation when
different parties claim these unattributed rights. Another problem is that one
of the main income sources for producers is the development and distribution of
derivative works into related markets. However, due to the lack of complete
copyright ownership, the producer or the licensee developing derivative works is
[*50]  exposed to the risk of litigation, which will create a burden to every
party involved, whether it be the producer, licensee, authors, or judicial
resources.

   By not having access to the complete copyright when financing the production,
the producer is faced with a limitation on the promotion, distribution,
exploitation, and other circumstances that create unforeseeable risks for
recouping investment and generating revenue. Such distribution on the legal
right of copyright will reduce financial incentive of producers and investors.
Consequently, it is not beneficial for the development of the movie industry,
and could possibly cause suppression.

   2. The Definition and Scope of Subsequent Use Is Ambiguous

 Furthermore, the SRR stipulated by the Drafts is ambiguous and vague. In the
First Draft, it does not mention SRR explicitly. Instead, the provision only
states that, unless it is otherwise agreed upon ("the Exception"), the author
has the right to acquire reasonable remuneration. In the Second Draft,
legislators deleted the Exception stipulated in the First Draft. In both drafts,
what constitutes "reasonable compensation" is unclear. The concept of SRR
started to appear in the Brief Description of Second Draft issued by the China
National Copyright Administration ("Description"), in which it "... specified
that the author of the existing work, screenwriter, director, composer and
lyricist of audiovisual works have the SRR based on the subsequent utilization."
n51 Compared to "reasonable compensation" stipulated in the first two drafts,
the Exam Draft did not mention "reasonable compensation" but specified that
authors have the right to share profit. Although intending to adopt the SRR to
balance the rights in the audiovisual industry, in the most recent Exam Draft
the legislators did not finalize the concept of SRR explicitly; but instead used
ambiguous and vague words, such as "reasonable remuneration" and "profit
sharing." n52

   In addition, the scope of subsequent utilization is undefined in all three
drafts. In the First Draft, author(s) can have reasonable remuneration whenever
the producer uses or licenses the work to other parties, but what constitutes
"uses" is unmentioned. n53 In the Second Draft, legislators deleted the phrase
"[whenever] the producer uses" n54 in order to limit the profit sharing scope to
only when the producer licenses the work to other parties. Such amendments still
do not fix the ambiguity problem. In the  [*51]  Exam Draft, the scope of
subsequent use is completely taken out, and the Draft only stipulates that "the
authors have right to share the profit." n55

   Without confining the definition and scope of subsequent use, all of the
Drafts lack enforceability. The word "use" literally can include all exclusive
rights enjoyed by the producers (assuming there is no initial agreement
preventing the producer from obtaining exclusive exploitation rights and
authorship). However, if authors are granted the rights to share all profit from
every type of exclusive "use," then it is the equivalent of saying producers and
authors share a joint copyright, and the authors shall enjoy economic rights
that are otherwise entitled only to producers. SRR would then be deemed
superfluous in practice, or to put it another way, such a clause puts authors
and the producers on completely equal grounds. This is clearly not the intent of
the legislators but, without confining the scope of "subsequent use," such an
impractical interpretation is not completely absurd. Therefore, in order to
balance the rights of producers and authors, certain scope of exclusive rights
enjoyed solely by producers need to be explicitly excluded from the definition
of subsequent use, and must not be included in the SRR provision. n56

   3. The Scope of Beneficiary Is Unfair

 In the First Draft and Second Draft, it is unfair that legislators only grant
SRR to a restricted category of authors, including directors, screenwriters, and
musicians. All other authors are deprived of their SRR rights and have no
negotiation power under the law to allege subsequent compensation from the
producer. Contribution of authors is different in different types of work. For
example, in most documentaries relating to nature, cinematographers will play a
vital role and have much artistic control over other authors. n57 The other
example is animation work. The character designer, animator, modeler, and other
artist make a greater contribution to the work. n58 However, these creative
contributors do not fall within the scope of beneficiaries of SRR. It is obvious
this is not fair to these authors.

   On the other hand, according to the Drafts, there are no legal definitions
for "director" and "screenwriter" or the other types of authors. In a large film
casting, it is not uncommon to see more than ten directors  [*52]  responsible
for different portions of an audiovisual work casting. n59 While the audience is
only familiar with the chief director,vice directors and executive directors
also play pivotal roles in a casting. Similarly, in an audiovisual work, there
is a group of screenwriters working on a single script, and even the actors may
decide to be spontaneous and alter the script slightly during performance. n60
Does that necessarily imply every individual who is responsible for even the
slightest alteration of the script is entitled to SRR? An audiovisual work is a
complex joint effort. Every employee and every commissioner contributes to the
work, but not all of them shall be regarded as authors for the purpose of
determining subsequent remuneration.

   Without either creating legal definitions or industry standards for
terminologies such as "director," "screenwriter," or establishing a separate
institution (similar to the WGA) for determining who are entitled to screen
credits and subsequent remuneration, the legislature may be creating legal
loopholes, causing "a flood of litigation" just for determining who is entitled
to what remuneration. Perhaps the legislators themselves are not clear on what
the scope of beneficiary shall consist of, evident by the repeated changes on
the SRR beneficiary from First Draft to the Exam Draft. The ambiguity of the
scope of remuneration entitlement remains one of the biggest problems present in
all of the Drafts.

   4. The Collection Mechanism and Remuneration Standard of Subsequent
Remuneration Is Not Mentioned

 The other most important practical issue is the absence of a specific
distribution approach and a distribution rate of SRR. The lack of remuneration
standard may cause the SRR to be unenforceable in reality. Countries with more
mature legal systems with respect to copyright law have already established
specific guidelines for calculating subsequent payments entitled to the authors.
The approach adopted by the U.S., for example, takes several factors into
consideration for the residual income calculation: For television, the residual
is calculated based on the time (network prime time), and the number of
broadcasted reruns; for theatrical motion pictures, in most cases, the residual
consists of 1.2% of distributor's gross receipts for worldwide television reuse,
1.5% of the first million dollars of the company's reportable gross, and 1.8%
after for DVD/. n61

   Legislators must take steps to help establish guidelines for the SRR rates
and create a system for collecting subsequent remuneration. One  [*53]  common
theme among mature audiovisual industries overseas is the establishment of a
separate entity whose function is to act on behalf of the authors of audiovisual
works. Such an entity should represent solely the rights of the audiovisual
authors, negotiate SRR rates for authors, and collect subsequent remunerations
on behalf of authors. The Chinese legislators and film industry can potentially
adopt this model.

   III. A Model Subsequent Remuneration Right for China

 To balance the competing interests of authors and producers and solve foregoing
issues of SRR proposed in the Drafts, it is necessary to offer a clearer
provision relating to SRR. Some producers and scholars advise to delete the SRR
clause in the Copyright Law Amendment because such distributional approach is
too far ahead of China's movie industry development; n62 others suggest granting
SRR to authors by following previous approaches adopted by the U.S. and the EU.
n63 Part II of this article proposes to grant authors SRR in order to cushion
the conflict between the producer and the author.

   A. Draft of a "Subsequent Remuneration" Provision of China

 In order to fill the loophole and clarify the ambiguity of the Article with
respect to authorship of audiovisual work in the Drafts while insisting on a
market-oriented policy in the movie industry, the following proposed draft
should be added to Article 19 of the latest draft for Copyright Law Amendment in
Chinese legislative terminology:



    The Copyright and Compensation of the Audiovisual Work



The authorship of audiovisual works, other than the right of attribution, shall
be pursuant to the agreement concluded by the producer and the author. If, in
absence of such an agreement, or if the validity of such an agreement is
unclear, the ownership of the work shall be deemed to have transferred to the
producer from the authors, but the author shall have the right to reserve the
right of  [*54]  attribution, and shall have the right to receive compensation
pursuant to the agreement concluded with the producer.







Besides the above compensation, authors shall be entitled to reasonable
subsequent remunerations, if the audiovisual work is reused beyond the initial
intended market agreed by the author and producer. The remuneration rate shall
be subject to the contract concluded with the producer, and if in absence of
such a contract, or the validity of such a contract is ambiguous, with reference
to the industry standards for similar work.



Authors of movies, TV shows, and other audiovisual works include directors,
screenwriters, authors of preexisting works, composers, and lyricists for
audiovisual work, and other authors, if agreed by the both parties, whose works
contribute to the audiovisual works.


   B. Authorship and Fair Compensation System

 From the First Draft to the Exam Draft, it is noticeable that Chinese
legislators hesitated on how many exclusive rights of audiovisual works should
be granted to the producer. In the First Draft, if it is not otherwise agreed
upon in writing by both parties, the copyright of audiovisual work shall be
enjoyed by the producer, but authors shall have the right of attribution. n64 In
the Second Draft, the legislators deleted this agreement exception, and the
producer could enjoy the copyright directly by law. n65 However, in the latest
Draft, legislators made a substantial modification, which provides that if there
is no agreement or doubt, only the economic right of the audiovisual work shall
be enjoyed by the producer, and the authors reserve the attribution right and
have the right to share profit. n66 Such modification, however, as Part I
explained above, contains a loophole.

   1. The Authorship of Audiovisual Work: Contractual Freedom and Presumption of
Transfer

 To solve the lack of flexibility of current law and the existing loophole of
the latest Draft, the presumption of transferring authorship, borrowed from the
French legislative approach, provides a better resolution for the existing
problems in current law.

    [*55]  First of all, the principle puts an emphasis on the parties'
acceptability and autonomy, as well as setting the freedom of contract, as the
foremost applicable principles. The movie industry is highly market oriented. In
reality, the authorship and profit distribution, in most cases, is determined by
complex market factors, such as investment proposal, bargaining skill and power,
artistic control, etc. or based on box office success. n67 These contingent
factors shall be determined by the market. Thus, each party in the movie
industry should have the freedom to conclude an agreement to decide the
authorship and profit share method at their discretion, rather than relying on
the law to stipulate authorship mechanically.

   Moreover, only if such an agreement is absent, or if related provisions of
the agreement agreed by both parties are unclear, the existing law should be
used as a "baseline," which presumes that authors have transferred the other
exclusive rights to the producer, except the right of attribution.

   This approach is consistent with the authorship of work doctrine stipulated
by Copyright Law, in which the copyright of work belongs to authors in the first
place. n68 It is also beneficial for the movie industry because producers have
the complete legal right to exploit the market. Therefore, this article suggests
that "the presumption of transfer" approach should be applied to the Copyright
Law on audiovisual works in China.

   2. Granting an Explicit SRR to Authors

 Granting authors an explicit SRR will alleviate the conflict between producers
and authors. SRR associates authors' compensation with the subsequent revenue of
work instead of one-lump compensation. On the one hand, the SRR approach is more
favorable to authors because it reflects the value of their work more fairly
based on market demand. If the market has more demand for the authors' work then
their works shall be deemed more valuable, and they should be entitled to more
compensation and vice versa.

   On the other hand, the SRR will not add any additional cost on the producer
as producers argued. n69 First, subsequent remuneration is not an uncertain risk
for the producer or investor. Although the amount of subsequent remuneration is
unpredictable, it is feasible to assess the amount of first compensation, which
shall be covered by the producer's budget. Based on the budget allowance, and
taking SRR into consideration, producers can adjust authors' initial
compensations within an acceptable range; on the contrary, it gives the producer
more bargaining power and freedom to adjust her cost basis. Second, the cost of
SRR is not borne by the producer but ultimately passed on to the consumer
through  [*56]  actual market demand. n70 Actually, subsequent remuneration will
not generate additional cost for the producer but will be paid by the licensee
or end user as proportional of the license fee.

   Since the amount of subsequent remuneration associates the remuneration with
the market demand, it aligns the interest of both the producer and the authors
together. A SRR compensation scheme results in a win-win scenario for both the
author and the producer. Thus, to balance the right between the producer and
authors and to provide an economic incentive to encourage creativity of authors,
it is an effective and fair approach to grant authors a legal right to
participate in the subsequent profit distribution beyond the initial
compensation.

   C. Condition on Claiming SRR

   1. What Is SRR?

 In China, many people misunderstood SRR to be an equivalent of acquiring
remuneration for a second time. As Tencent Entertainment reported (one of the
major Chinese entertainment media), the right of second remuneration (a
mistranslation of SRR) is a normal profit distribution approach in the current
movie industry. n71 Some dominant creators agreed to be paid a small amount of
compensation at first, but they are entitled to get compensation in certain
proportions from the box office revenue. For example, Feng Xiaogang, one of the
top directors in China, receives only a modest amount of first compensation for
his movies; however, he has the right to share the revenue from the box office.
n72 Nevertheless, no matter how many times authors acquire remuneration in the
above circumstances, such remuneration, in fact, comes from the same revenue
source. Such an arrangement differs from SRR.

   The scope of SRR will be much wider than what the current law covers. The
current provision already specified that authors are entitled to compensation
subject to the contract agreed by both parties. If the sources of the first and
the second remunerations are identical, it is not necessary to stipulate the
details from a legislative perspective. Thus, the subsequent remuneration that
legislators intend to grant to authors in this amendment process is not
equivalent to a second time or multiple time remuneration. The amendment should
necessarily allow subsequent remunerations to come from different revenue
sources. Therefore, the scope that it covers  [*57]  will be much wider than
both the one-time lump-sum the law (hereinafter referred to as "initial
compensation") currently stipulates, and the second remuneration covered by
individual author-producer agreements.

   2. The Scope of SRR: Initially Intended Market ("IIM") Test

 The boundary between the initial compensation and subsequent remuneration
should be determined by whether the scope of exploration is within the initial
intended market ("IIM"). When a producer engages in a new movie or other
audiovisual works, she evaluates the cost and profit based on the IIM, and bases
her budget, which covers the authors' initial compensation, n73 on the market
feedback conducted in only the IIM. Generally speaking, to reach breakeven and
to mitigate risk, a good producer will not, nor can they afford to, offer
compensation more than the budget estimated based on the IIM, but agree on a
profit sharing plan. n74 The initial compensation, which is covered by the
budget, and paid to authors, shall be regarded as initial, or first
remuneration, on which Article 15 of current Copyright Law has already granted
the authors. The "profit sharing," which is a contingent portion of the
compensation, is much more difficult to forecast and the portion depends on
complex and comprehensive factors in the market, such as feedback from audience,
ease of adoption in other derivative market environments, funding and business
cycles, distribution cost, advertising cost, and other contingent factors. Such
contingent compensation, based on more volatile market factors, shall be deemed
the subsequent remuneration. The aforementioned way of separating initial
compensation from subsequent remuneration is the IIM test. The IIM test provides
an effective and objective line to distinguish the initial compensation from
subsequent remuneration.

   D. Scope of Beneficiaries and Remuneration Rate of SRR

   1. Scope of Beneficiaries

 The categories of authors proposed in the Drafts are not flexible and fair.
Every individual who made contributions to the work should be respected and
their authorship and compensation should depend on their contribution, artistic
control, bargaining skill, and other market factors, rather than be mechanically
determined by law.

   Moreover, the restricted category of authors cannot keep pace with the
technical developments in the movie industry. In the modern movie industry, high
tech is widely used during filming and post-production. For instance, in Life of
Pi, directed by Ang Lee, the tiger, a main antagonist of the movie, was a
virtual character designed by graphics engineers during  [*58]  the
post-production. n75 In fact, in most blockbuster movies, such as Avatar, King
Kong, Spiderman, etc., visual effect artists and coordinators, who are masters
of cutting edge technology, designed many of the scenes. n76 There is no doubt
that these artists play an indispensable role in the movie, and their works also
meet the elements of originality. Thus, the Copyright Law should grant such
individuals, who contribute to the emerging field of high-tech within the movie
industry, authorship. By stipulating a narrow category of authors, the law will
necessarily lose flexibility and cannot meet the developing needs of the movie
industry.

   The authors listed in this article should adopt the existing remuneration
approach, but the list needs to allow for opened categories - adding the other
authors as the catch-all clause to put all type of authors in an equal position.
Aside from the five categories of traditional authors, n77 who normally make the
main contribution criteria in an audiovisual work, the other authors who are
potentially entitled to SRR should meet the following prerequisites. The first
prerequisite for SRR is to determine whether the work is copyrightable. To use
an example, in some cases, the actor may argue that he, as an author, should be
entitled to SRR because he changed some lines in the performance. However, if
such alteration does not meet the copyrightable standard, he cannot be regarded
as an author of the work. The second prerequisite is to reach a consensus with
the producer. If an author does not have any artistic control or other
bargaining leverage to ask for subsequent remuneration, it is likely that such
an author does not play a vital role in a production. In this circumstance,
depending on the author's contribution, the producer may not even need to
consider granting her an SRR. This approach does not deprive the author of the
SRR, but limits the number of authors who can enjoy SRR.

   2. Remuneration Rate of SRR

 Remuneration rate of SRR was not mentioned in the Drafts, but it is necessary
to establish an applicable standard to determine the remuneration rate. As a
civil law country, China needs to specify a basic standard for remuneration rate
in the absence of contractual agreements. It is consistent with a "statute-law"
system where the country must provide a minimum baseline in the statutes in
order to restrict the judicial randomness. The remuneration rate is undoubtedly
complex, and depends on the amount of contribution from the author, the
subsequent contribution channel or media,  [*59]  target audience market, and
other elements. Normally, if there is an agreement to decide the rate, then it
is easy to implement SRR by every party. But, if there is no agreement, or if
such provision is ambiguous, deciding an applicable compensation rate is a
difficult issue. Nevertheless, the industry standard can always be used as a
reference to be the baseline; stipulating a baseline offers some legal certainty
to the public.

   E. Implementation and Administration of SRR by Collective Management System

 The collective management system is an effective and common approach to collect
and administer SRR in the world. First, due to the weak bargaining power of
individual authors, the collective organizations balance the bargaining power
between producers and authors. The union of authors from each field of the movie
industry, no doubt, has more bargaining power to break up the monopolistic
position of producers and gain fairer SRR rates based on the market economy. n78
Furthermore, because the value of authors' contribution is intangible, it is
necessary to establish widely recognized evaluation criteria to assess the value
of authors' work. Thus, like the "screen credit" established by the WGA in the
United States, the scope and the remuneration rate of authors who enjoy the SRR
should be determined and negotiated by authors themselves and be referenced with
industrial standards. Ultimately, this collective management system is a
convenient and effective way to collect and administer subsequent remuneration.

   To develop the collective management association in China, legislation should
encourage employees of producers and freelance authors to set up their own
unions and empower rights to these unions representing the authors to administer
SRR. Currently, one copyright collective management organization exists in China
in the movie industry, the China Film Copyright Association ("CFCA"). The CFCA,
founded mainly by producers, represents the interest of producers to collect and
administer the license fees from the third parties who use the films. n79 There
are several industrial associations, such as China Director Association and
China Dramatist Film Association, which were voluntarily organized by elites
from related fields. However, each of these associations lacks authority or
power to negotiate with producers or the CFCA with respect to compensation
representing the authors. The reasons are two-fold. First, there is no SRR that
is similar to U.S. law on residual claims in China. Second, these related
associations lack any collective management power because the law does not
ordain them. Therefore, to make SRR  [*60]  enforceable in practice, the
legislators should grant related associations a right to collect and administer
subsequent remuneration for their members, and encourage authors to establish
private orders to protect their rights.

   IV. Criticism of Subsequent Remuneration for the Author on Audiovisual Work

 The SRR is a novel concept in China. Currently, industrial guidelines governing
SRR are nonexistent. This Section will address the problem of a lack of
industrial standard, along with other criticisms.

   A. The Effectiveness of the SRR

 The potential criticism is that, under the rule of contractual freedom, it is
unfair if a producer and an author enter into a contract where the author is
only entitled to de minimis sum of subsequent compensation (for example, the
equivalent of $ 1) and there are no industry standards that can help to guide
the courts in adjusting the subsequent remuneration to a reasonable amount. n80
Without such a standard, SRR still cannot be enforced effectively in practice to
protect the author's right.

   The unfairness resulting from contractual freedom is overstated. Admittedly,
due to the natural monopolistic position and strong bargaining power of the
producers, they may offer authors unfavorable contract terms. However, in most
of the aforementioned circumstances, such authors have no artistic control or
talent, and thus no bargaining leverage. On the contrary, if the authors are
A-list directors, screenwriters, or musicians possessing strong artistic control
over their work, they do not need to worry about such unfavorable contract terms
because they have the freedom to pick producers who can best satisfy their
compensation demand. For most authors who are not primary authors in a
production, but can offer tangible values to a production, they are offered fair
market rated compensation, governed by the market law of supply and demand. n81
In the long run, the producers who can provide more competitive compensations to
authors gain an edge in attracting talents in the labor market. Therefore, even
if contractual freedom does not achieve absolute fairness, it can still keep the
subsequent remuneration within a relatively fair range. Unfair contracts  [*61]
will always exist, but they certainly will never be a ubiquitous phenomenon.
Once authors are granted SRR officially and legally, they can further
consolidate and strengthen their bargaining power by relying on a collective
bargaining entity to protect their right.

   Moreover, according to the doctrine of unconscionability under contract law,
n82 if remuneration is far from fair, the court may adjust the remuneration into
a reasonable scope at its discretion. The most common way courts exercise this
power is by considering the value of similar works in a similar market. Since
the value of works in the movie industry is intangible, it becomes more
difficult to rely on this metric. Thus, the industrial standard is an objective
and reasonable standard for reference. Although reference to SRR in current
copyright law is non-existent, explicitly granting SRR to authors by law will
certainly accelerate the formation of an industrial standard and will eventually
push this standard to maturity.

   B. High Transaction Cost for Open-end Authors?

 Another criticism is that granting every author an SRR is impractical because,
even with collective bargaining, this may increase the transaction costs in
negotiating and contracting around audiovisual works. n83

   However, the transaction costs will not be higher because, in this proposal,
the number of authors entitled to SRR is limited. Aside from the five categories
of traditional authors, the other authors potentially entitled to SRR must meet
two prerequisites: the work is copyrightable; and the author has a consensus
with the producer. The producer can set a list of guidelines to screen authors
who have indeed made critical contributions to the work, and are thus entitled
to SRRs. However, with the producer's natural monopolistic position, she may not
evaluate contributions fairly. Thus, it is necessary to establish an objective
evaluation system and industrial standard in the movie industry through
collective management associations.

   V. Conclusion

 At present, the movie industry in China is experiencing exciting development.
Facing the ever-increasing economic interests, authors are trying to break the
producers' monopolistic position granted by the current Copyright Law by
demanding a higher remuneration, which reflects the value of their work in the
market. A flexible proposal is recommended  [*62]  based on the contractual
freedom principle to discontinue using the lump-sum compensation arrangement,
which is mandated in the current Copyright Law. This proposal shows the
necessity to grant SRRs to the author, and the amount of any subsequent
remuneration should depend on the revenue received from the derived markets when
authors' works are reused beyond the first intended market. For collecting SRR
to be enforceable, this article suggest relying on collective management
entities for remuneration collection and administration. The clauses in this
proposal intend to grant flexibility for parties to negotiate copyright and
remuneration plans according to the market demand and their willingness.
Adaptation to the proposal will provide legal certainty for authors, while
balancing the economic interest between producers and authors.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Computer & Internet LawCopyright ProtectionCivil Infringement ActionsOwner
RightsMoral RightsCopyright LawForeign & International ProtectionsProtected
RightsCopyright LawSubject MatterAudiovisual Works & Motion PicturesAudiovisual
Works

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  Zhuzuoquanfa (xiugaicaoan)[SEE CHINESE CHARACTER IN ORIGINAL] [Copyright
Law Draft] (drafted by Copyright Administration of China, Mar. 31, 2012),
National Copyright Administration of the People's Republic of China,
http://www.ncac.gov.cn/chinacopyright/contents/483/17745.html; Zhuzuoquanfa
(xiugaicaoandiergao) [SEE CHINESE CHARACTER IN ORIGINAL] [Copyright Law Second
Draft] (drafted by Copyright Administration of China, July 10, 2012), The
Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China,
http://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2012-07/10/content_2180033.htm; Zhuzuoquanfa
(xiudingcaoansongshengao[SEE CHINESE CHARACTER IN ORIGINAL] [Copyright Law
Examination Draft] (drafted by Law Office of St. Council, June 6, 2014), The
Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China,
http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2014-06/10/content_2697701.htm.





n2.  The literal translation is "the right of second remuneration." For correct
understanding, I translate such right into "the subsequent remuneration right."





n3.  See supra note 1.





n4.  China Film Association, leaded by Li Shaohong, Held the Annual Meeting:
Focused on Interest of Directors, Tencent Entertainment (Oct. 24, 2013, 3:04
AM), http://ent.qq.com/a/20131024/001246.htm.





n5.  China National Copyright Administration, Brief Description of Second Draft,
The Cent. People's Gov't of the People's Republic of China (July 10, 2012),
http://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2012-07/10/content_2180033.htm.





n6.  Talk with Vice-president of Huayi: Part of Copyright Law Drafted Version Is
Not Feasible, Sina Entm't (Aug. 10, 2012, 5:12 PM),
http://ent.sina.com.cn/c/2012-08-10/17123708731.shtml.





n7.  References to Chinese Copyright Law and other Chinese law only refer to the
People's Republic of China Copyright law and other related laws. Also, China
refers to the jurisdiction of mainland of China (excluding Hong Kong, Macao and
Taiwan).





n8.  Zhuzuoquanfa [SEE CHINESE CHARACTER IN ORIGINAL] [Chinese Copyright Law]
(promulgated by the Standing Comm. Nat'l People's Cong., Feb. 26, 2010,
effective Apr. 1 2010), art. 15 (China),
http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/text.jsp?file_id=186569.





n9.  Id.





n10. " Author," as discussed in this article, does not include the "actor,"
though they are also granted the subsequent remuneration right in the Drafts.
The right of the actor in Chinese Copyright Law falls under the neighboring
right, which is not a complete copyright. Since the right of the actor is
different from the right of the author, this article does not discuss the
subsequent remuneration for the actor.





n11.  According to Article 11 of Chinese Copyright Law, if there is no other
evidence, the "author" refers to the individuals, corporations, or other
entities whose signatures are on the work . Chinese Copyright Law, art. 11.
There is no clear definition of the producer in Chinese Copyright Law or other
related regulations. Currently, the Chinese government implements censorship
mechanisms on the movie and TV industries. In practice, the "producer" refers to
the movie companies, studios, or other eligible movie production entities whose
signatures are on the Distribution License issued by the authorities.





n12.  For the purpose of this article, copyright protection of movies is
discussed as one example of audio-visual works. Under Chinese Copyright Law, the
definition of audiovisual work is much broader, and refers to cinematographic
works, works created by a process analogous to shooting cinematographic works,
and works consisting of a series of related images on suitable devices, together
with or without accompanying sounds. The audiovisual works include films, video
games, TV production, multimedia work, and other works that satisfy the criteria
of audiovisual work.





n13.  China Film Industry Report 2013-2014 (In Brief), Entgroup,
http://english.entgroup.cn/report_detail.aspx?id=28 (last visited Oct. 17,
2014).





n14.  Julie E. Cohen, Copyright in a Global Information Economy 131 (3d ed.
2010).





n15.  The Criticism and Suggestion on the Second Draft of the Copyright Law
Amendment, China Film Copyright Ass'n (Aug. 10, 2012),
http://www.cfca-c.org/news_view.php?newsty=102&news=116.





n16.  Wang Mi, The Combat on the Right of Second Remuneration in Movie Industry
- -Fighting for Balancing Interest and Expectation on Legislation Improvement,
Qian Xian (Aug. 31, 2012), http://www.bjqx.org.cn/qxweb/n54355c761.aspx.





n17.  Id.





n18.  Id.





n19.  Id.





n20.  Sina Entm't, supra note 6.





n21.  Id.





n22.  Wang, supra note 16.





n23.  Brief Description of Second Draft, supra note 5.





n24.  Adriane Porcin, Of Guild and Men: Copyright Workarounds in the
Cinematographic Industry, 35 Hastings Comm. & Ent. L.J., 1, 12 (2012); see also
F. Jay Dougherty, Not a Spike Lee Joint? Issues in the Authorship of Motion
Pictures Under U.S. Copyright Law, 49 UCLA L. Rev. 225, 228 (2002).





n25.  Porcin, supra note 24.





n26.  Catherine L. Fisk, The Role of Private Intellectual Property Rights in
Markets for Labor and Ideas: Screen Credit and the Writers Guild of America,
1938-2000, 32 Berkeley J. Emp. & Lab. L. 215, 219 (2011).





n27.  17 U.S.C. § 201(b) (2006).





n28.  Audiovisual works in the U.S only have limited moral rights protection.
See S. Rep. No. 100-352, at 9-10, as reprinted in 1988 U.S.C.C.A.N. 3706,
3714-15.





n29.  About the DGA, Dirs. Guild of Am.,
http://www.dga.org/The-Guild/History.aspx (last visited Oct. 30, 2014).





n30.  Guide of Guild, Writers Guild of Am. (West),
http://www.wga.org/content/default.aspx?id=509 (last visited Jan. 26, 2015);
What Is the Guild, Writers Guild of Am. (East),
https://www.wgaeast.org/about-the-guild/what-is-the-guild/ (last visited Mar.
26, 2015).





n31.  Fisk, supra note 26, at 223.





n32.  Id. at 222.





n33.  Credits, Writers Guild of Am. (West),
http://www.wga.org/content/default.aspx?id=1029 (last visited Oct. 30, 2014).





n34.  Id.





n35.  About the DGA, Dirs. Guild of Am., supra note 29.





n36.  Id.





n37.  Id.





n38.  Id.





n39.  Fisk, supra note 26, at 245.





n40.  Porcin, supra note 25, at 6; see also Code de la propriete intellectuelle
[C. prop. intel.] [Intellectual Prop. Code] art. L113-7 (Fr.).





n41.  Intellectual Prop Code art. L132-24 (Fr.).





n42.  Id. art. L132-25 (Fr.).





n43.  Porcin, supra note 25, at 10.





n44.  Fisk, supra note 26, 258-266.





n45.  Current Chinese Copyright Law was promulgated by the standing committee of
National People Congress on September 7, 1990, effective Jun 1, 1991. See
Natalie P Stoianoff, The Influence of the WTO over China's Intellectual Property
Regime, 34 Sydney L. Rev. 65, 73-85 (2012). The Law was amended twice, once in
2001 and again in 2010, both of which were made under the WTO's pressure. Id.
The first amendment in 2001 revised and supplemented some provisions that were
not consistent with TRIPS to satisfy the minimum standard for WTO members; due
to the outcome of arbitration between China and U.S by the Dispute Settlement
Body of the WTO, the second amendment in 2010 was prompted by pressure to adjust
two provisions of Copyright Law. Id.





n46.  See supra text accompanying note 1.





n47.  Copyright Law Draft, art. 16 (China); Copyright Law Second Draft, art. 17
(China).





n48.  Copyright Law Examination Draft, art. 19 (China).





n49.  Chinese Copyright Law, art. 10 (China). Article 10 stipulates: (1) the
right of publication, that is, the right to decide whether to make a work
available to the public; (3) the right of alternation, that is, the right to
alter or authorize others to alter one's work; and (4) the right of integrity,
that is, the right to protect one's work against distortion and mutilation. Id.





n50.  Wu huizhong & Hu Zhengsheng, "The Right of Second Remuneration" Will
Obstruct the Development of Chinese Movie Industry, Chinese Intell. Prop. J.
(Aug 7, 2012), http://www.cipnews.com.cn/showArticle.asp?Articleid=24239.





n51.  Brief Description of Second Draft, supra note 5.





n52.  Copyright Law Examination Draft, art. 19 (China).





n53.  Copyright Law Draft art. 16 (China).





n54.  Copyright Law Second Draft, art. 17 (China).





n55.  Copyright Law Examination Draft, art. 19 (China).





n56.  Luo Yanjie, Interpretation of "The Right of Second Remuneration," Find Law
(June 6, 2014), http://china.findlaw.cn/lawyers/article/d334856.html.





n57.  John M. Kernochan, Ownership and Control of Intellectual Property Rights
in Motion Pictures and Audiovisual Works: Contractual and Practical Aspects -
Response of the United States to the Alai Questionnaire, Alai Congress, Paris,
Sept. 20, 1995, 20 Colum.-VLA J.L. & Arts 379, 404 (1996).





n58.  Id. at 405-433.





n59.  Luo, supra note 56.





n60.  Id.





n61.  Residuals Survival Guide, Writers Guild of Am. (West),
http://www.wga.org/subpage_writersresources.aspx?id=133 (last visited Oct. 30,
2014).





n62.  See, e.g., Tao Xinliang, Second Remuneration Should Be Agreed via Contract
Rather Than Be Regulated by Law, China Intell. Prop.,
http://www.chinaipmagazine.com/journal-show.asp?1524.html (last visited Mar. 18,
2015); Dai Zhe, Research of the Second Remuneration Right on Audiovisual Work -
at Time of Copyright Law Amendment, 12 Elec. Intell. Prop. 44, 50 (2013).





n63.  See, e.g., Wang Xingdong, The Age of One Lump Sum of Compensation Is
Expected to End, Jian cha Journal (Aug. 24, 2012),
http://newspaper.jcrb.com/html/2012-08/24/content_107626.htm; see also Response
to Criticism of Second Remuneration: "Clear Regulation, Convenient Implement,"
Xinhua News (Apr. 7, 2013),
http://news.xinhuanet.com/newmedia/2013-04/07/c_124545625.html.





n64.  Copyright Law Draft, art. 16 (China).





n65.  Chinese Copyright Law Second Draft, art. 17 (China).





n66.  Copyright Law Examination Draft, art. 19 (China).





n67.  Kernochan, supra note 57, at 387.





n68.  Chinese Copyright Law, art. 11 (China).





n69.  Tao, supra note 62.





n70.  Shi Bisheng, Economic Analysis for the Right of Second Remuneration, China
Intell. Prop. (Aug. 26, 2013),
http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6e987b230101e3j0.html.





n71.  The Battle Between the Director and the Producer on the Right of Second
Remuneration, Tencent Entm't, http://ent.qq.com/zt2012/views/42.htm (last
visited Jan. 2, 2015).





n72.  Id.





n73.  Shi, supra note 70.





n74.  Id.





n75.  The Interview of the Life of Pi, YouTube,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wCCcRSmeHwc (last visited Apr. 30, 2015).





n76.  Orli Belman, ICT Effects Lauded in Avatar, USC News (Dec. 21, 2009),
http://news.usc.edu/32632/ICT-Effects-Lauded-in-em-Avatar-em/.





n77.  Here, "author" refers to authors of existing work, screenwriters,
directors, lyricists, and composers.





n78.  Fisk, supra note 26, at 215-37.





n79.  Introduction, China Film Copyright Ass'n (collective),
http://www.cfca-c.org/xhgs.php (last visited Apr. 3, 2015).





n80.  Shi, supra note 70.





n81.  See Edwin Mansfield & Gary Yohe, Microeconomics 347-48 (11th ed. 2004)
("We have seen that a perfectly competitive economy maximizes the total net gain
of consumers and producers. We then showed ... how deadweight losses -
reductions in economic efficiency - result if the government [obstructs the
forces of supply and demand by imposing] a price ceiling[,] ... a price floor[,]
... a tariff, a quota, or an excise tax."); Robert S. Pindyck & Daniel L.
Rubinfeld, Microeconomics 590-91 (5th ed. 2001) ("The market mechanism is the
tendency for supply and demand to equilibrate (i.e., for price to move to the
market-clearing level), so that there is neither excess demand nor excess
supply.").





n82.  Hetong Fa [SEE CHINESE CHARACTER IN ORIGINAL] [Chinese Contract Law]
(promulgated by the Standing Comm. Nat'l People's Cong., Mar. 15, 1999,
effective Oct 1, 1999), art. 54 (China).





n83.  See generally R.H. Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, 3 J. of L. and Econ.
1, 44 (Oct. 1960).


                              661 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                             May 29, 2010 Saturday
                                 First Edition

Resources tipped to bounce back

BYLINE: Philip Baker and Brendon Lau

SECTION: SMART MONEY; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 847 words


Investors were already nervous heading into May amid concerns about Greece's
debt problems and euro zone contagion. But within days, the resources sector was
turned on its head.

Key parts of the mining industry are under a cloud as debate rages about Labor's
proposed resource super profits tax (RSPT) just when investors need clarity. It
seems the days of the resources sector pulling the rest of the sharemarket along
in its wake are gone.

Or are they? Although mining stocks have led the sharemarket down from its high
of 5001.9 on April 15, speculation is growing that the tax will not survive in
its present form, leading brave investors to chance their arm this past week as
stocks that were savaged started to look more attractive.

Investors have used this week's bounce to snap up bargain miners and now the
resources sector is down 5 per cent since the proposed the tax, while the
broader S&P/ASX200 Index has fallen 7.3 per cent.

The share sell-off is not just local - global markets have also taken a dive
over the past few weeks, driven by fears that Europe's debt problems will not be
limited to the region. There are concerns that China's attempts to contain its
housing bubble will spill into the broader economy. Rising tensions between
North and South Korea haven't helped skittish investors.

Since the S&P/ASX200 Index closed at 5000 on April 15, stocks have fallen 10.9
per cent. Investors are contemplating the emergence of a second leg to the
global credit crisis. Despite the gloom, some brokers see bargains in stocks.

Royal Bank of Scotland analyst Lyndon Fagan was quick to price the impact of an
RSPT into valuation models and still thinks BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, Fortescue
Metals Group and Equinox Minerals are the best buys. But he notes that questions
over China's growth outlook, Australia's fiscal regime and Europe's debt
problems will keep many investors out of the sector in the short term.

For these reasons, RBS thinks the next federal election will be the
circuit-breaker, and mining stocks will tread water until it is announced.

The fund manager for Wilson HTM Priority Growth Fund, Sandy Grant, also thinks
the resources sector has been oversold and will bounce hard once some of the
fear has drained away.

"The mining sector has had a lot thrown at it. It's had fears of commodity
prices turning down, foreign currencies fluctuating quite rapidly and the super
profit resources rent tax as well. Just on that basis, it's hard to imagine it
will get a lot worse," Grant says.

"But it's very hard to quantify what the impact has been on the sector and if
something changes, like war on the Korean peninsula, then all bets are off."

Nonetheless, he suspects mining stocks could jump 15 to 20 per cent once
investor confidence returns, and sees attractive opportunities in the smaller
iron ore plays such as Mount Gibson Iron and Atlas Iron. Mount Gibson has
slumped 12 per cent and Atlas 17.5 per cent while the S&P/ASX 200 Materials
Index has fallen only 4.8 per cent.

The price falls have put these stocks in deep value territory: Mt Gibson trades
on a one-year forecast price-earnings multiple of 4.5 times when its five-year
average is 31.5, and Atlas Iron on a P/E of about six when the average of its
peer group is closer to 14.

Grant Craighead, from independent research firm Stock Resource, sees the most
attractive value in copper and gold. He recommends buying miners with offshore
assets as they are not affected by the resource super profits tax. But their
upside potential is limited as most have held their ground well in the recent
sell-off.

"Most of the problems in the last few weeks have all been financial market
turmoil, but when we are looking at the physical demand side of things, it's
been holding up really well," he says. "Look at copper, it has pulled back from
$US3.50 a pound to $US3 and if you are talking through the cycle, producers will
love $US3 a pound as an average."

He forecasts a serious shortage of copper next year due to lack of new supply
and says Equinox Minerals offers the best copper leverage. The miner's key
project is in Zambia and he rates the stock a "buy" below $3.95 a share.

As for gold, Craighead doesn't see much downside as sovereign risks are likely
to plague the market over the medium term at least. He likes emerging West
African producers such as Perseus Mining and Gryphon Minerals below $2 and 71Â¢,
respectively.

A better value copper and gold play is OZ Minerals, says Citigroup. Citi's Craig
Sainsbury has a target price for the cashed-up Australian miner of $1.45.
Whitehaven Coal is another stock the broker recommends.

It is now the lone independent Australian coal producer and could be a target
following Banpu's purchase of a "strategic stake" in Centennial Coal. Production
is solid and Citi has a price target of $6.50.

On the run
Worst performing resources stocks since the tax was announced (%)
Macarthur Coal  -25.8
Linc Energy  -24.9
Kagara   -21.8
Roc Oil   -21.6
Carnarvon Petroleum -19.5
Platinum Australia  -18.7
Atlas Iron   -17.5
Western Areas  -17.2
Sundance Resources  -15.6
AWE   -15.0


LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2010 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              662 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                            August 17, 1995 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

Food producers hoping to really clean up in Asia;
Food industry

BYLINE: CHRIS TOLHURST

SECTION: SUPPLEMENT; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 980 words


WITH Asia's food market alone forecast to grow by $US160 billion in the next
five years, fresh food producers have embarked on a sea change in the way
Australian foods are presented and sold overseas.

Increasingly, food producers and related industries are realising that
Australia's ability to be a low-cost food producer cannot by itself maintain,
let alone increase, the $4 billion the nation earns annually from food exports.

Most sectors of the industry are joining forces to carve out an export niche for
Australia as a source of clean, high-quality food through Clean Food Australia.

Clean Food Australis is an educational and quality control program launched two
years ago by the National Farmers Federation, the Australian Horticultural
Growers Association, Agriculture Victoria and other trade groups.

Mr John McKay, general manager of Clean Food Marketing Australia, an associated
firm owned by the NFF, the Federal Government and Grocery Manufacturers of
Australia, said the clean food initiative aimed to increase annual food export
earnings to $7 billion by 2000.

He said through stepped-up overseas marketing activity and improved production
processes, Australian exporters intended to shift food away from the general
commodity trade area into the specialised marketing area, thereby adding value
to food exports.

One recent example of the drive to add value to food exports was the launch of
an "Australia Fresh" branding for Australian oranges and other horticultural
products, which the Australian Horticultural Corporation is supporting through
point-of-sale material in Asian supermarkets, plus advertising and public
relations.

The Department of Industry, Science and Technology has also launched a Food
Quality Program, providing $6 million in grants over three years for industry
quality control programs.

The program's administrator, Ms Robyn Fleming, said grants were aimed at
improving farm management systems, especially in relation to providing more
rigorous screening for bacterial infections and chemical residues.

She said the DIST program, coupled with other State Government programs and the
Clean Food initiative, aimed to clearly differentiate Australian produce in
overseas markets.

A key plank of this strategy was to highlight the fact that Australian food was
grown in a cleaner environment where there was no food irradiation.

"You have to cement that broader image of clean food with rigorous management
structures," Ms Fleming said.

"But (Australia's cleaner production environment) is a marketing advantage and
it's a way of differentiating the Australian orange from the American orange or
from European produce."

Most players involved in the clean food initiative admit the drive for
international best practice in food production and exporting is no simple task.

To build an off-shore image of Australia as a quality, clean food supplier,
promotional hype has to reflect reality, and disparate industry elements -
including primary producers, processors, wholesalers and retailers - need to
carefully co-ordinate individual quality programs so that quality is assured
from the paddock to the plate.

The negative impact felt when one link in the production chain falls down was
demonstrated last year when drought-affected farmers in inland NSW and
Queensland began feeding cattle the leaves and stalks of cotton plants.

The cotton plant feed, used by some graziers in the face of dwindling stocks of
conventional feed, contained the chemical helix which, in turn, produced the
contaminant CFZ in meat farmed from affected animals.

For exporters, the so-called "CFZ incident" was a public relations nightmare and
placed at risk major export orders in the US and other markets, even though
contaminated meats never left Australia.

Mr McKay said producers had to be constantly on the look-out for unwanted
chemical residues and most primary industries were now giving proper attention
to residue screening.

He said the outcry over the CFZ contamination - which was identified by
Australian food inspectors - was is in many ways a reflection of "our technical
capabilities and not due to any mismanagement in terms of residues".

"Had that particular residue appeared in products sold in many of our overseas
markets, it would never have been picked up," he said.

Mr McKay said recent industry studies had forecast that the annual market for
food in Asia would increase by $US160 billion between 1995 and 2000, of which
Western-style foods would account for $16 billion.

"It's better to take a share of a growth business than a static or declining
one; therefore Australia has a unique opportunity to take a share of Asia's
growth market," he said.

Australia was already one of the top four exporters of food to Asia, and well
placed to tap the region's expanding retail supermarket sector with carefully
marketed fresh and semi-processed foods.

Clean Food Marketing Australia last year launched a major sales drive in Taiwan
to give Australian produce a point of difference on supermarket shelves, and the
company is increasingly providing marketing services to individual Australian
producers wishing to launch in Asia.

Mr McKay said marketing programs focused on catering to the food requirements of
pockets of high yield consumers in each Asian country.

"Most people here underestimate the sophistication of Asian consumers," he said.

"If you take a country such as Indonesia, with a population of 190 million,
there are millions of people who have a disposable income as high as Australia's
average disposable income.

"We are using selective marketing in supermarkets and really targeting the
higher spenders within each of the countries we deal with."

Ms Fleming added it was essential that the various sectors of the industry
focused on what the off-shore customer wanted, working jointly to ensure that
production processes underpinned those customer requirements.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illus: PROMOTION: An Australian Clean Food promotion in Taipei.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1995 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              663 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 16, 2013 Monday

Washington: USDA Grants Support Organic Agriculture Research

LENGTH: 666  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Agriculture, The Government of USA has issued the following
news release:

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) National Institute of Food and
Agriculture (NIFA) today awarded five grants to support research, education and
Extension programs that will improve the competitiveness of organic livestock
and crop producers.

"The organic industry is a rapidly growing segment of American agriculture and
it is important we continue to invest in sound science to support organic
producers," said Secretary Tom Vilsack. "The discoveries these grants enable can
help farmers who are looking to adopt the best organic practices that will make
their operations more competitive and sustainable."

The grants disbursed include more than $3 million through the Organic
Transitions Program (ORG). ORG is an essential part of USDA's commitment to the
organic farm sector. USDA's flagship program to fund organic production, the
Organic Agriculture Research and Extension Initiative (OREI), currently remains
unauthorized to continue until a new Farm Bill is passed by Congress.

Fiscal Year 2013 ORG awards include:

University of Florida, Gainesville, Fla., $675,719. This project focuses on
developing sustainable wholefarm systems for organic pecan production in the
Southeast.
 Michigan State University, East Lansing, Mich., $464,482. This project will
develop alternatives to antibiotics for fire blight control in organic crops.
 University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn., $718,225. This project will create
a series of online, interactive educational modules with a focus on the
fundamentals of organic agriculture and how to transition to organic farming.
 University of Texas Pan American. Edinburg, Texas, $746,973. This project
focuses on launching an innovative new academic program that engages students in
rigorous, well-designed research projects designed to address real-world
problems faced by organic farmers in south Texas.
 Washington State University, Pullman, Wash., $749,661. This project examines
whether, over time, the adoption of organic farming improves natural pest
control.

This year, NIFA also awarded $847,637 in continuation awards to previous ORG
awardees. North Carolina State University's project seeking to understand the
impact of organic systems in the Southeastern United States on greenhouse gas
emissions and educate stakeholders and students about maximizing the mitigation
potential of these systems received Fiscal Year 2013 continuation funding. Also
receiving an award that will allow them to build on prior research
accomplishments is Texas AgriLife Research for their program to quantify the
effects of cover crops, organic soil amendments, and cultivar choice on rice
yield, milling quality, soil quality, soil carbon sequestration, and greenhouse
gas emissions.

In fiscal year 2013, ORG priorities included determining "ecosystem services",
i.e., environmental benefits, provided by organic farming systems in the area of
soil conservation and climate change mitigation, including reduction of
greenhouse gases. In addition, ORG helps develop educational tools for
Cooperative Extension personnel and other agricultural professionals who advise
producers on organic practices. ORG also supports the organic industry to
develop appropriate practices and materials to correspond with the National
Organic Program's National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances. More
information on the program may be found online at
www.nifa.usda.gov/fo/organictransitionsprogram.cfm.

Since the late 1990s, U.S. organic production has grown significantly. U.S.
producers are increasingly turning to certified organic farming systems as a
potential way to decrease reliance on nonrenewable resources, capture high-value
markets and premium prices, and boost farm income. Today, more than two-thirds
of U.S. consumers buy organic products at least occasionally, and 28 percent buy
organic products weekly.

For more information please visit: http://www.usda.gov

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              664 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Trust (Abuja)

                            October 4, 2011 Tuesday

Taking Advantage of Commercial Agriculture in Kano

BYLINE: Auwalu Umar

LENGTH: 1492  words

DATELINE: Kano


Kano farmers are now taking advantage of the opportunities so availed by the
commercial agriculture currently being experimented in the state by the
Commercial Agriculture Development Project (CADP), a World Bank-assisted project
aimed at assisting peasant farmers to access improved technology,
infrastructure, finance, and output markets.

Kano is one of the five participating states in the project developed by the
federal ministry of agriculture and water resources in collaboration with the
World Bank and other stakeholders. The other states, where the project is being
piloted, include Kaduna, Cross River, Enugu and Lagos and it will support three
value chains per state. The project is to be implemented over a period of five
years starting from April 16, 2009 and is expected to close on December 31,
2014.

The rationale for the World Bank's involvement in the project is basically to
bring global experience and knowledge on value chain development and
stakeholders' commercialization as well as attract potentially interested
partners to commercial agriculture in Nigeria.

Kano, for example, is expected to produce rice, dairy and maize in commercial
quantity while Kaduna will encourage the cultivation of fruit trees, dairy and
maize. Cross River is expected to cultivate palm oil, cocoa and rice just as
Enugu will have fruit trees, poultry and maize while Lagos is to produce
poultry, aquaculture and rice. The value chains chosen for the states were based
on the respective comparative advantage and their contribution to agricultural
growth as well as their high demand and market capacities to absorb the
additional production.

The basic strategy of the World Bank-assisted project is essentially to improve
the business environment for agriculture to become more successful by gradually
shifting from subsistence to commercial agriculture in addition to helping
participating small and medium scale commercial farmers to access improved
technology, infrastructure, finance and output markets.

The project will equally boost the incomes of target beneficiaries through a
value chain approach with strong emphasis on stakeholder participation. A
typical chain will include producers, assemblers, processors distributors,
retailers and finally consumers.

The project, in a nutshell, will have direct impact on 50,000 small and medium
commercial farmers while many households will benefit indirectly through access
to farm roads, energy and market through spillover effects.

Matching grants will be provided to finance adoption of existing and new
technologies by participating commercial farmers and support to staple crop
production system and the formula for the matching grants is 50%-20%
contribution from IDA on a sliding scale basis at the association level. Fifty
percent matching grant, which is open to all qualified members of community
interest group (CIG) and commercial agriculture development association (CADA),
will be provided in the case of staples.

For instance, the total number of direct project beneficiaries in Kano is
estimated at 10,000 over a period of five years and many households will,
however, benefit indirectly through access to farm roads, energy and market
opportunities.

For Kano, the project will support the activities of three value chains that
include rice, maize and dairy. As for the rice, a special attention will be paid
to seed multiplication, processing, de-stoning technology, parboiling
technology, packaging and re-branding while in the case of maize, emphasis will
be made on propagation and use of improved seedlings, high yielding crop
pest/disease resistant varieties and improved agronomic practice. And for the
dairy, attention will paid to technologies for egg artificial insemination as
well as milk hygiene and cold chain.

Kano government through federal government received a credit from the
International Development Association (IDA) for the implementation of the
project in the state. It paid its counterpart fund to the tune of 155 million in
2009. And a total of 2,097 commodity interest groups (CIGs) were established
besides the sensitization and collaborating activities with stakeholders.

Participating farmers in the project from the selected localities across Kano
State expressed satisfaction with the level of support given them by CADP that
translated into a bumper harvest this farming season. A cross section of farmers
interviewed said their economic status had improved tremendously since the start
of the agricultural project, saying their plan was to expand cultivation to
produce more in view of the increasing demand of farm produce and other
agricultural products.

Alto Labaran, a maize farmer and member of the Inda Naka Maize Producers
Association in Dambatta local government area, said his income had significantly
increased since the time he and his other colleagues had embraced the project.
"My income had improved; unlike in the past when, a time, I found it difficult
to feed my immediate family members, now I comfortably feed more than 20
persons; I really thank God and those behind the project," he said.

Labaran, whose maize farm is located at Tadeta village, said his locality was
not known for maize farming before but today his people cultivate maize even in
commercial quantity, saying last year he cultivated 2.4 hectares of maize but
because of the support from CADP this year he cultivated 3.6 hectares. "Before
we only got the maize we eat from Katsina but today we even cultivate it in
commercial quantity because of the technical assistance from CADP", he also
said.

Also speaking, Chairman Inda Naka Maize Producers Association, Malam Lado
Dambatta, said CADP had established market information kioks where farmers
access useful information that will help improve their farming activities in
addition to markets found for them.

Speaking to our correspondent after a training workshop organized in Kano
recently for farmers by CADP, Dambatta also said CADP has been instrumental to
boost in maize production in Kano because of the technical advice offered to
farmers by experts sourced by CADP. The chairman, who said his association has
22 members, said part of the training was how to plant maize seeds, how to apply
fertilizer and how to use local manure, saying CADP had pledged to secure a
market for all his members.

Farmers at Bakarari and Tangaji villages in Makoda local government area under
the programme expressed gratitude for the access road provided for farmers to
transport their farm products with ease. The 2.8km surfaced dress road,
according to the farmers, will help them transport their farm produce to urban
markets without any difficulty.

One of the resident engineers handling various roads under the programme,
Ibrahim Wakili, said the access roads are being constructed not far from the
cultivating farms, saying the roads are either late rite or surface dressed.
Wakili, who supervises Diggol-Dausayi road in Dambatta local government area,
also said all the roads under construction will be ready as work is now in
progress to meet the clients' deadline.

The project, according to CADP's recent progress report, had provided grant
support to 67 Community Interest Groups (CIGs) in the state to undertake various
types of agricultural production and processing activities and the total IDA
grants to the beneficiaries are more than N50 million.

The report also said the project had established six market information kioks at
Tudun Wada, Garko, Kura and Dambatta. They were also established at Sundu and
Dawanau markets, it said. It said the establishment of the kioks will facilitate
easy access to relevant marketing data and to disseminate same in a timely
manner among commercial farmers, just as it will increase their awareness about
opportunities available for marketing their produce at domestic and
international market level.

Since the project began in the state since 2009, a number of trainings,
workshops and study tours for CIGs and CADA had been carried out to enhance
their capacity to understand and adopt the new improved technology packages
being demonstrated under the CADP. The report said developing the capacity of
commercial farmers in this way will subsequently increase their total output,
income and generate employment opportunities.

A total of five roads covering 34km are currently under construction to among
others reduce transportation cost of farm output as well as decrease travel time
from farm to market and the road project will gulp N465.2 million, according to
the report.

The project, it also said, had maintained a provision of logistic and technical
support required to sustain activities pertaining to management, coordination
and supervision of project execution in the state. And the project's monitoring
and evaluation sub-component had aggregated and analyzed project data during the
period under review in order to track progress, process quality and
sustainability, it said.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              665 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Gazette (Tasmania, Australia)

                          September 14, 2016 Wednesday
                                Gazette Edition

Flood funds on way

BYLINE: ALEX LUTTRELL

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 384  words


THE acting Central Highlands Mayor has welcomed the arrival of flood recovery
grant applications to the region but has criticised the time it took for them to
be made available.

As part of the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, the Federal
and State Governments are now offering grants of up to $10,000 to Central
Highlands farmers affected by the June floods - three months ago.

Floods battered parts of the Derwent Valley and Central Highlands on June 6,
with the small highlands town of Ouse hit particularly hard.

Flooding on the Ouse River resulted significant damage to farming
infrastructure. The Ouse footbridge was also destroyed but thanks to State
Government funding repairs are now being undertaken in the next four weeks.

The Derwent also broke its banks at New Norfolk, flooding the caravan park and
nearby Esplanade.

Minister for Justice Michael Keenan and Acting Premier Jeremy Rockliff last week
announced grants were available to help Central Highlands producers with
clean-up and restoration activities.

Central Highlands acting Mayor Lana Benson said she understood there was a
process to go through to secure assistance, but was unhappy with the time it
took because the region initially didn't qualify for help.

"We're delighted we have got there now for the farmers, it's just a shame it
took so long," Cr Benson said.

"It would be nice if the process was easier for those already stressed but we
can't spend our time looking backwards. We need to focus on what's good in
this." Mr Rockliff said the funding would make a difference.

"Farmers can apply for funding that will assist in the removal of debris,
disposing of dead livestock, salvaging crops, grain and feed and repairing plant
and equipment," he said.

Also under the NDRRA producers can now apply for a transport subsidy until
November 30.

The subsidy helps reduce the costs of transporting fodder, stock and materials,
with 50 per cent of the total freight cost to a maximum value of $15,000
available per farm.

Meanwhile, disaster relief organisation BlazeAid will continue repairs to
damaged properties at Ouse. In the next month members of the California
Conservation Corps will also assist with flood recovery in the Derwent Valley.To
apply for a grant, farmers can head to the Department of Human Services website.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: The Gazette


                   Copyright 2016 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              666 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2017 Dun & Bradstreet Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                         D&B Financial Analysis Reports

                                 March 7, 2017

                           SOCIETY OF LONDON THEATRE

                                 32 ROSE STREET
                                     LONDON
                                LONDON WC2E 9ET


TRADE ADDRESS: 32 Rose Street, LONDON WC2E 9ET

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: 02075576700
FAX: 020-7557-6799
URL: www.solt.co.uk

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
REGISTRATION NO.: 00527227

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: December 23, 1953
JURISDICTION/PLACE OF REGISTRATION
EMPLOYEES: 66

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
DIRECTORS:

     ·    Mr Robert Frederick Strang Noble, Deputy Managing Director
     ·    Miss Kim Poster, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Nicholas Salmon, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Nicholas David Allott, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Mark Terence James Goucher, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Kenneth Howard Wax, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Mark Gabriel Rubinstein, Theatre Producer
     ·    Ms Catherine Rowena Mallyon, Executive Director
     ·    Miss Caroline Denise Newling, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Adam Pennington Spiegel, Producer
     ·    Mr Dafydd Rogers, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mrs Catherine Ruth Pakenham, Executive Producer Theatre
     ·    Mr James Russell Bierman, Producer
     ·    Mr Jonathan Richard Bath, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Nicholas Henry Frankfort, Theatre Producer
     ·    Miss Eleanor Rose Lloyd, Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Nicholas Potter, Managing Director Theatres
     ·    Ms Lounica Maureen Patricia Burns, Chief Executive & Theatre Producer
     ·    Mr Andre Jan Ptaszynski, Theatre Producer


Go To ICC Directors
SECRETARY:

     ·    Julian PiersBird


* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
PRINCIPLE ACTIVITIES: Activities of business and employers membership
organisations
INDUSTRY TYPE:
COMPANY TYPE:  Private Limited company without share capital::Private Limited
company without share capital::
COMPANY SIZE:  Normal   Company acting as agents

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC:
94110

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: December 31, 2015
FISCAL YEAR END: December 31

LAST FILED ACCOUNTS:  December 31, 2015
ACCOUNTS TYPE:  Full Accounts
ACCOUNTS LODGED DATE:  June 29, 2016
ANNUAL RETURN:  July 30, 2016
CREDIT LIMIT:  405,000

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS
Date of Accounts                           31/12/201 31/12/201 31/12/201
                                                   5         4         3
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Tangible Assets                            1,680,723 1,728,809 1,786,640
Intangible Assets                                  -         -         -
Total Fixed Assets                         1,680,723 1,728,809 1,786,640
Stocks                                             -         -         -
Debtors                                    2,531,392 2,863,052 2,569,030
Cash                                       2,262,245 2,659,215 2,416,842
Miscellaneous Current Assets               13,338,03 11,589,92 11,517,65
                                                   5         1         9
Other Current Assets                       15,600,28 14,249,13 13,934,50
                                                   0         6         1
Total Current Assets                       18,131,67 17,112,18 16,503,53
                                                   2         8         1
Fixed Assets                               1,680,723 1,728,809 1,786,640
Intermediate Assets                                -         -         -
Due From Group, Non Current                        -         -         -
Due From Group, Current                            -         -         -
TOTAL ASSETS                               19,812,39 18,840,99 18,290,17
                                                   5         7         1



LIABILITIES
Date of Accounts                           31/12/201 31/12/201 31/12/201
                                                   5         4         3
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Creditors                                    935,045   748,814   695,577
Bank Overdraft                                     -         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Liabilities          17,966,01 17,426,82 17,066,24
                                                   5         3         8
Bank Loans - Current Portion                       -         -         -
Other Short Term Finance                           -         -         -
Due To Group, Current                              -         -         -
Due To Directors, Current                          -         -         -
Other Current Liabilities                  17,966,01 17,426,82 17,066,24
                                                   5         3         8
Short Term Loans                                   -         -         -
Long Term Loans                                    -         -         -
Long Term Bank Loan                                -         -         -
Other Long Term Finance                            -         -         -
Due To Group, Non Current                          -         -         -
Due To Directors, Non Current                      -         -         -
Other Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
Total Current Liabilities                  18,901,06 18,175,63 17,761,82
                                                   0         7         5
Total Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
TOTAL LIABILITIES                          18,901,06 18,175,63 17,761,82
                                                   0         7         5
Called Up Share Capital and Sundry                 -         -         -
Reserves
Profit & Loss Account Reserve                911,335   665,360   528,346
Revaluation Reserve                                -         -         -
Shareholder Funds                            911,335   665,360   528,346
Called Up Share Capital                            -         -         -
Sundry Reserves (Including Grants)                 -         -         -
Contingent Liabilities                             -         -         -
NET ASSETS                                   911,335   665,360   528,346


* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
Date of Accounts   31/12/201 31/12/201 31/12/201
                           5         4         3
                         GBP       GBP       GBP
Total Sales        6,311,398 6,006,654 6,215,762
Cost of Sales              0         0         0
Gross Profit       6,311,398 6,006,654 6,215,762
Operating Profit     326,068   202,172   241,353
Export                     -         -         -
Nontrading Income     19,775     8,557     6,733
Interest Payable           -         -         -
Pretax Profit        345,843   210,729   248,086
Taxation              74,868    49,715    56,671
Profit After Tax     270,975   161,014   191,415
Dividends Payable          0         0         0
Retained Profits     270,975   161,014   191,415
Value Added        2,494,745 2,223,387 2,220,272
Capital Employed     911,335   665,360   528,346
Net Worth            911,335   665,360   528,346
Working Capital      -769388  -1063449  -1258294
Emp. Renumeration  2,098,866 1,954,081 1,910,993
Dir. Renumeration      2,000     2,000     2,000
Audit Fees            14,900    14,475    14,050
Non-audit Fees             -         -         -
Depreciation          69,811    67,134    67,926
Number of                 66        64        64
Employees

* * * * * * * * * * CASHFLOW STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *
Date of Accounts                               31/12/201 31/12/201 31/12/201
                                                       5         4         3
                                                     GBP       GBP       GBP
Net Cashflow From Operating Activities         1,205,980   299,790 1,134,420
Net Cashflow From Return On Investment And             -     8,557     7,733
Servicing Of Finance
Net Cashflow Before Financing                    103,030   242,373 1,126,514
Net Cashflow From Financing                            -         -         -
Increase In Cash                                 103,030   242,373 1,126,514

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *


GROWTH RATES
Date of Accounts        2      3      5
                    Years  Years  Years
                      GBP    GBP    GBP
Sales                5.07   1.54   0.41
Pretax              64.12   39.4 -684.1
                                      5
Total Assets         5.16   8.32   9.16
Current Assets       5.96   9.87  11.16
Current              3.99   6.41   6.17
Liabilities
Capital Employed    36.97  72.49 161.93
Employee Wages       7.41   9.83   9.34
Number of            3.13   3.13   1.54
Employees



INDUSTRY AVERAGES
Compared to 1,334 companies in the same industry
sector
(year ending 2015)
SIC Code:
91110 Activities of business and employers
organisations



INDUSTRY QUARTILES
                                                      Lower   Median    Upper
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                  -3.03     3.45    17.39
Pretax Profit / Total Assets (%)                       -2.1     1.81     7.66
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                             -1.89     1.78      7.6
Sales / Total Assets (%)                              66.59   125.16   205.49
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales) x       52.81    15.92        0
365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                      1     1.79     3.72
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)            26,360.4 40,372.4 60,819.7
                                                          7        9        9
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees (GBP)  19,684.2 31,020.4 43,972.2
                                                          1        1        2
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                  44,064.9 89,532.4  141,175
                                                          6
Wages / Turnover (%)                                  49.87    38.53    25.08



CREDIT RATING
Year  0  94
=
Year -1  94
=
Year -2  91
=
Year -3  10
=         0

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *
Date of Accounts                                1/12/201 31/12/201 31/12/201
                                                       5         4         3
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)               37.95     31.67     46.96
Pretax Profit / Assets (%)                          1.75      1.12      1.36
Pretax Profit / Shareholders Funds (%)             37.95     31.67     46.96
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                           5.48      3.51      3.99
Sales / Total Assets (%)                           31.86     31.88     33.98
Sales / Fixed Assets (%)                            3.76      3.47      3.48
Export / Sales (%)                                     -         -         -
Working Capital / Sales (%)                       -12.19     -17.7    -20.24
Sales / Stocks                                         -         -         -
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales )     146.4    173.98    150.86
x 365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                0.96      0.94      0.93
Quick Assets / Current Liabilities                  0.96      0.94      0.93
Total Debt / Net Worth (%)                             -         -         -
Shareholders Funds / Total Assets                   0.05      0.04      0.03
Long Term Debt / Net Worth (%)                         -         -         -
Interest / Pre Interest Profit (%)                     -         -         -
Current Liabilities / Stocks                           -         -         -
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees       31,801 30,532.52 29,859.27
(GBP)
Employee Remuneration / Sales (%)                  33.26     32.53     30.74
Pretax Profit / Number Of Employees (GBP)       5,240.05  3,292.64  3,876.34
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)               95,627.2 93,853.97 97,121.28
                                                       4
Capital Employed / Number Of Employees          13,808.1 10,396.25  8,255.41
                                                       1
Fixed Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)        25,465.5 27,012.64 27,916.25
Total Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)        300,187. 294,390.6 285,783.9
                                                       8
Pretax Profit / Value Added (%)                    13.86      9.48     11.17
Value Added / Sales (%)                            39.53     37.02     35.72
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)         37,799.1 34,740.42 34,691.75
                                                       7
Value Added / Employee Remuneration                 1.19      1.14      1.16
Sales / Audit Fees                                423.58    414.97     442.4
Total Assets / Audit Fees                       1,329.69  1,301.62  1,301.79
Creditors / Debtors                                 0.37      0.26      0.27
Total Debt / Working Capital                           -         -         -
Total Debt / Total Assets                              -         -         -

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
CURRENT SHARES OUTSTANDING: GBP 911,335

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: Nyman Libson Paul

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2017


                              667 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Norwalk Reflector, Ohio

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 19, 2014 Wednesday

Report: USDA rural development initiatives created 75,000 Jobs in 2013

BYLINE: Norwalk Reflector, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1192 words


March 19--Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack has issued a report highlighting the
impact of more than $33 billion in USDA investments to support rural businesses,
infrastructure and housing in 2013.

"This report tells the story of how USDA support has made a tremendous
difference in the lives of rural Americans," said Vilsack. "Our investments help
create jobs and opportunity for rural residents, provide affordable housing,
support modern infrastructure, and build essential community facilities. I am
proud of the role that USDA has played to grow rural economies and help make
rural America a place of opportunity, innovation and economic growth."

USDA Rural Development's $193 billion portfolio is making lasting investments in
rural communities. The report highlights several initiatives that are helping to
address persistent rural poverty, expand health care for Mississippi Delta
residents, and develop stronger partnerships between government, private-sector
and community-based organizations.

Since the start of the Obama Administration, USDA business programs have
provided more than 18,000 guaranteed loans, direct loans and grants to help more
than 74,000 businesses create or save more than 375,000 jobs. USDA is
increasingly becoming the lender of choice for many Native American tribes
throughout the country.

USDA programs support research into new energy sources and help protect the
environment. During the two last quarters of fiscal year 2013, USDA made
payments to operators of 56 anaerobic digesters that produced almost 173 million
kilowatt hours of electricity -- enough to power more than 17,000 homes
annually.

For example, Clover Hill Dairy in Campbellsport, Wis., received a $6,200 payment
through the Advanced Biofuel Payment Program to operate its anaerobic digester,
which was commissioned 2007. The digester produces 2.7 million kilowatt hours
(kWh) of energy per year. The dairy's herd provides the manure to produce
biogas, which fuels the generators that produce electricity. The excess
electricity is purchased by a local utility and delivered to customers.

USDA broadband infrastructure loans awarded in FY 2013 will result in new or
upgraded broadband service for about 120,000 rural households, businesses and
community institutions once the projects are completed. The Department also
continued to make great strides to bring distance learning and telemedicine
infrastructure to rural areas. In 2013, one-third of USDA's distance learning
grants went to rural areas where the minority population is 30 percent or
higher. Another third went to areas were poverty rates have been consistently
high over long periods. All of the awards went to rural areas where residents
lacked access to medical services.

Rural Development is a key player in the recovery of the nation's housing
market, particularly in rural areas. For many realtors, USDA Rural Development
loans account for most of their business. In 2013, nearly 163,000 rural families
became homeowners through loans from private lenders that were guaranteed by
USDA, and more than 7,000 families bought homes through direct loans from USDA.

USDA's homeownership program is complemented by assistance that helps rural
residents find affordable rental housing. Tenants pay no more than 30 percent of
their income on rent for decent, safe housing. Last year, USDA provided rental
assistance to nearly 280,000 rural residents. Including the residents who get
rental assistance, more than half a million rural Americans live in rental
housing financed or directly supported by USDA.

USDA's Rural Housing Service invested in more than 1,000 essential community
infrastructure projects with $1.4 billion in direct loans, guaranteed loans and
grants in Fiscal Year 2013.

In other areas, the report indicates that USDA's Rural Utilities Service helped
meet the power needs of 8.7 million rural customers last year by providing
nearly $5 billion in loans to electric utilities. These loans helped build and
expand transmission and distribution systems. During fiscal year 2013, USDA
helped bring new and improved electric infrastructure to more than 80,000 Native
Americans and Alaska Natives and invested a record amount -- $275 million -- on
infrastructure projects benefitting them.

One of the many examples of how USDA investments are helping rural businesses
and communities is the bio-based startup company Laurel Biocomposites, LLC, in
Laurel, Neb. USDA partnered with Security Bank in Laurel to provide a $5 million
loan guarantee that helped Laurel Biocomposites buy equipment and provide
working capital for its first year of operation. Today, the company is operating
one production line and is expected to begin full-scale production later this
year. When full-scale production begins, the company plans to double its work
force from seven currently to 13 to 15 workers on the plant floor.

The Wisconsin Food Hub Cooperative in Madison, Wis., is using a $150,000 USDA
Value Added Producer Grant to help start a regional fresh produce food hub and
packinghouse to improve producers' access to local wholesale markets. The hub
will create private-sector jobs and aggregate local produce sold under the
"Wisconsin Farmed" brand.

Eleven families in Reedley, Calif., became homeowners in 2013 after moving into
houses they jointly built through USDA's Mutual Self-Help Housing program. The
group worked with oversight from Self-Help Enterprises, a pioneer in the "Sweat
Equity" concept of homebuilding.

For additional information on Rural Development projects, visit Rural
Development's new interactive web map featuring program funding and success
stories for the past four fiscal years. The data can be found HERE.

To view the entire report, click on the link at the end of this story.

Here are Ohio's numbers:

Program FY 2009 -- 2013-- --   TOTALS   NUMBER OF  PROJECTS

Business and Industry Guarantee -- $235,771,307  86

Intermediary Relending Program  -- $2,709,000   6

Renewable Energy Loans and Grants  -- $51,573,032   335

Rural Business Enterprise Grants  -- $5,846,702    51

Rural Economic Development Loans and Grants  -- $300,000   1

Value-Added Producer Grants  -- $954,288    10

Single Family Housing Direct Loans  -- $189,214,526    1,740

Single Family Housing Guaranteed Loans  -- $2,287,713,125    21,919

Home Repair Loans and Grants  -- $7,266,854   1,501

Self-Help Housing Technical Assistance Grants  -- $1,361,030   3

Multi-Family Housing Direct Loans  -- $29,103,632    51

Multi-Family Housing Guaranteed Loans  -- $16,379,295    17

Rental Assistance  -- $105,509,916    1,330

Community Facility Direct Loans  -- $72,830,125    73

Community Facility Guaranteed Loans  -- $16,900,500   8

Community Facility Grants  -- $3,751,445   80

Water and Waste Direct Loans  -- $141,328,000    65

Water and Waste Guaranteed Loans  -- $11,000,000   2

Water and Waste Grants  -- $97,347,246   66

Telecommunications Loans and Grants (DLT)  -- $45,394,228   31

Electric Loans  -- $333,869,000   20

TOTAL  -- $3,656,123,251   27,395

___ (c)2014 the Norwalk Reflector (Norwalk, Ohio) Visit the Norwalk Reflector
(Norwalk, Ohio) at www.norwalkreflector.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20140319-1NW-Report-USDA-rural-development-initiatives-created-75,000-Jobs-in-20
13-0319-20140319

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1NW


                     Copyright 2014 Norwalk Reflector, Ohio


                              668 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                        Calgary Herald (Alberta, Canada)

                   January 20, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

ISLEY WOULD SELL CANOLA PLANT 'IN A FLASH'

BYLINE: DUNCAN THORNE, EDMONTON JOURNAL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 361 words


The province will sell its heavily subsidized canola-crushing plant in a flash
-- if Ottawa agrees to stop paying the railways grain-hauling subsidies.

So says Agriculture Minister Ernie Isley, who has faced continuing pressure from
the canola industry to sell or close government-owned Northern LiteCanola Inc.
at Sexsmith in northern Alberta.

"If we get a simple little thing like a change in the method of payment (of
grain subsidies) the Alberta government will be able to sell Northern Lite
Canola quicker than you can say, 'Sell it,'" Isley told the Alberta Canola
Producers Commission Tuesday.

Isley has been campaigning to have Ottawa stop paying the railways $ 724 million
a year to ship export grain to port. He wants the federal government to give
farmers long-term interest-bearing bonds, based on how much land they own.

He said Tuesday he's hopeful of progress towards changing the system, despite
opposition from Saskatchewan.

Canola crushers such as Northern Lite stand to gain because they will no longer
need to compete against the market-distorting effects of the export subsidy, he
said.

Northern Lite began as a government-backed co-operative in the 1970s, the
province eventually bailing it out of receivership in 1987.

Isley estimated the province's cost so far at "about $ 70 million," on a plant
with a break-up value that he's put at $ 4 million.

The record indicates the government tab is higher.

Outright spending and write-offs of loans and loan guarantees totals about $ 61
million, not counting a $ 20-million loan guarantee that has been described as
an operating line of credit.

As well the provincial Agricultural Development Corp. has added $ 14.6 million
in preferred shares. That puts the total above $ 75 million -- up to $ 95
million, including the line of credit.

The plant employs about 75 people, making the support about $ 1 million a job.
The province says the main value has been in boosting the value of the canola
crops in the Peace region.

Isley said Northern Lite had its first two profitable months in the crop year
ending last July 31, and has operated in the black ever since.



LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 1993 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              669 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Variety

                                  May 4, 2012

On verge of rush in pic production;
From the Rio Grande to Tierra del Fuego, filmmakers are finding better
resources, friendlier governments and safer venues as they pursue their projects

BYLINE: Anna Marie de la Fuente

SECTION: FEATURES; Film; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 1265  words


Argentina

Skilled crews, good infrastructure battle inflation

By Charles Newbery

BUENOS AIRES

Buenos Aires is busy with shoots, yet few are foreign.

Enrique Avogadro wants to change this, but admits it won't be easy. "There is a
lot of competition," says the city director of creative industries.

Australia, Brazil, New Zealand and South Africa offer more in incentives like
grants and tax rebates, he adds.

To contend, Buenos Aires has set up a tax-free hub for the film and TV industry,
eased paperwork, expanded location sites and rolled out discounts on hotels and
transport. The next step could be fiscal incentives to round out a tempting
offer, Avogadro says.

Argentina has a large talent pool, multi-laureled directors and plenty of
studios and equipment rentals to support a busy local industry shooting 100
features and even more TV series a year.

"Our crews have worked a lot with foreigners, they understand different work
models and tend to be creative and resourceful in resolving situations," says
Muriel Cabeza, an executive producer at 100 Bares Productions who has worked on
Chris Nahon's "Blood: The Last Vampire," shot in Argentina and China.

As important, Argentine locations include European-like cities, deserts,
glaciers, jungles, high mountains and slums.

Even so, few foreigners have picked Argentina over the past two years despite
scouting, says Juan Pablo Buscarini, a producer at Pampa Films. That's largely
because even though Argentina is cheaper than many markets, double-digit
inflation since 2007 - now at 25% annually - is erasing that advantage.

But sometimes the loss of a shoot is simply because a director wants to go
elsewhere, such as the time Marc Forster chose Chile for "Quantum of Solace"
after visiting Argentina.

Buscarini isn't sitting around.

Pampa Films is working with Argentine helmer Alejandro Agresti on "No somos
animales" ("Dictablanda"), a comedy that attracted John Cusack to star, co-write
and help produce. It's bilingual comedy of manners about two American tourists
in Buenos Aires.

"If they don't come we have to go get them,"  he says.

Brazil

Rio region is more friendly to films

By Marcelo Cajueiro

RIO DE JANEIRO

In stark contrast to its generous incentives for local production, Brazil offers
little to foreign producers angling to shoot pics here. Most regional film
commissions limit themselves to logistic support.

Sole exceptions are the Rio Film Commission (RFC), backed by the city and state
of Rio de Janeiro, and RioFilme, a municipal film financing company. Together,
they have funded four international productions.

RFC recently announced grants for pics and TV productions from abroad and other
Brazilian states. It will distribute 1 million reais ($581,000) for two to four
productions, paying the Rio state-based service company or co-producer.
International producers tapping the funds must find a local partner.

The pics or series must also shoot partially in Rio, with 25% of crew and
artistic elements being local.

First-round 2010 RFC grant recipients were doc "The Race," teaming the U.K.'s
Very Much So and Terra Vermelha Filmes and EPP, plus Gustavo Lipsztein's
romantic comedy "A Night in Rio," from EH Filmes and U.S. shingle Nuts & Lloyd.

RioFilme granted $500,000 to production services outfits Zohar Intl. and Total,
responsible for Rio scenes in "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part 1." It
also invested $750,000 in the TV series/feature "Rouge Bresil," a co-production
of France, Brazil, Canada and Portugal.

Looking forward, more foreign productions - Julien Temple's Children of the
Revolution," for example - will shoot in Brazil.

"The BRIC mentality is part of that, says RFC prexy Steve Solot, referring to
the acromym for Brazil, Russia, India and China, four countries with surging
economies - and box office. The Brazil World Cup and Rio Olympics are also part
of it, Solot notes. "Every country on the planet wants to do at least a cultural
and travelogue piece about Brazil."Sergio Sa Leitao, president of RioFilme, says
the Rio town government plans to expand grants to international productions.

Colombia

Weather is a bigger challenge than crime

By Anna Marie de la Fuente

Bogota

Despite a decade of relative calm, Colombia is still trying to shake off the
perception that it remains a hotbed of drug cartels, guerrillas and crime - a
view that the recent U.S. Secret Service prostitution scandal here did nothing
to dispel.

"The only challenge now is (getting) filmmakers to make the decision to shoot
here," says Rodrigo Guerrero of Dynamo Capital, which runs a private equity fund
and co-produced the $2 million "The Hidden Face" with Fox Intl. Productions. A
local production boom spurred by hefty tax incentives and TV support has led to
a growing talent pool.

It helps that Colombia's president Juan Manuel Santos is a cinephile. While
addressing the inauguration of Cartagena's 52nd film fest in February - the
second time in his two years in office - Santos spoke with confidence that a
pending film bill would be approved this year by congress.

The bill, mainly designed to lure foreign productions, sets up a $12 million
film fund for pics or TV movies shot in Colombia. This would allow for 40% cash
rebates for a foreign pic's local production expenses and a 20% cash rebate of
its transport, catering and hotel expenses in the country. The key condition is
that they hire the production services of a Colombian shingle.

To date, Colombia's film commissioner Silvia Echeverri and consultant Jason
Resnick have organized up to five familiarity tours since 2010. "Security was
never an issue for me in Bogota; I felt completely safe, " says FIP production
veep Anna Kokourina, who was on location for "The Hidden Face." "The production
process for us ran pretty smoothly, and the main complications came from
weather, which can happen anywhere."

Mexico

Crews, incentives add value to location close to Hollywood

Mexican film crews are well known for their skills, experience and capacity for
big-budget productions. Now with new tax incentives and film commissions
spurring both local and foreign shoots, these seasoned pros give the country an
edge over other locations.

Mexico's proximity to the U.S. is an added value, especially for Hollywood, but
noteworthy pics are also surfacing from the rising number of local productions -
around 70 in 2011.

"The uptick in production has also resulted in film equipment rental companies
upgrading their gear," says Mexico City film commissioner Fernando Uriegas.

Recent shoots include Neill Blomkamp's "Elysium" and Adrian Grunberg's "Get the
Gringo" (formerly "How I Spent My Summer Vacation"), starring Mel Gibson, who
co-produced and co-penned the cross-border action pic with Grunberg and his
Redrum producing partner, Stacy Perskie. Gibson, who chose Veracruz for both his
2006 Mayan drama "Apocalypto" and "Gringo," refused bodyguards despite the bad
rap Mexico has been getting.

"Elysium," also co-produced by Redrum, and "Gringo" were among the first foreign
productions to tap Mexico's new ProAV Fund, which allows local and int'l
filmmakers to recover up to 17.5% of their expenses in Mexico. "They must spend
at least 70 million pesos (around $5 million) in Mexico to qualify," says
Mexican Film Commission coordinator Carla Raygoza.

Also driving the production boom is the Eficine 226 tax incentive program, which
allows Mexican companies to write off any investment of up to $1.5 million for a
local production. Mexican shingles can tap the 226 incentive for international
co-productions provided that 70% of the 226 coin goes to their Mexico spend.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 Reed Business Information, US, a division of Reed Elsevier Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              670 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                             June 5, 2013 Wednesday

Morocco - Agricultural Value Chain Development Project in the Mountain Zones of
Al-Haouz Province

LENGTH: 189  words


Total cost: US$9.1 million
Approved IFAD loan: US$6.4 million
Approved IFAD grant: US$143,000
Duration: 2012 - 2017
Directly benefiting: 6,600 households
Status: Ongoing
This project will directly benefit approximately 33,000 people    including
smallholder farmers and livestock producers, women, young people and landless
farmers    whose livelihoods are affected by the upward and downward linkages of
the olive, apple and lamb-meat value chain.


The project  s overall goal is to alleviate rural poverty through sustainable
growth in the incomes of poor rural women, men and young people involved in the
three agricultural production sub-sectors referenced above.
More specifically, the project will:
raise the productivity and quality of the three targeted products
enhance the value added of the targeted products through processing and
packaging
improve producers   access to more lucrative markets.
In addition, the project will increase women  s participation in the planning
and implementation of project activities by:
providing technical and organizational capacity-building
facilitating access to credit.

country :Italy
Ltd.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2013 Tenders Info
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              671 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

                            January 7, 2017 Saturday

Canadian softwood imports caused harm: U.S.

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 444 words


MONTREAL * The U.S. International Trade Commission says it has found there was a
reasonable indication that softwood lumber products from Canada materially
injured American producers, setting the stage for the imposition of preliminary
duties that softwood producers fear could impact Canadian jobs.

The trade commission announced Friday that it made an initial determination of
harm from Canadian lumber that is "allegedly subsidized and sold in the United
States at less than fair value."

It said the U.S. Commerce Department will continue anti-dumping and
countervailing duty investigations launched Dec. 16 into the imported products.

"In the final phase, which is a much longer and much more in-depth
investigation, the commission will make a determination whether the U.S.
industry is injured by reason of the imports," said spokeswoman Peg O'Laughlin.

The preliminary finding could force U.S. importers of Canadian lumber to pay
cash deposits to cover preliminary countervailing duties in early March,
followed in mid-May with deposits for any anti-dumping duties, unless the
deadlines are extended.

Canadian softwood producers say the duties would result in job losses and plant
closures north of the border.

International Trade Minister Chrystia Freeland said Canada is prepared for any
situation and the government will vigorously defend the interests of Canadian
workers and producers.

"Our softwood lumber producers and workers have never been found in the wrong;
international bodies have always sided with our industry in the past," she said
in a statement.

The decision to investigate is in response to petitions filed in November from
the U.S. Lumber Coalition, which alleges that provincial governments, which own
most of Canada's vast timberlands, provide trees to Canadian producers at rates
far below market value, along with other subsidies.

Softwood producers in Canada dispute the U.S. Lumber Coalition's allegations.
Montreal-based Resolute Forest Products said producers in Quebec and Ontario pay
market prices and should have access to free trade with the U.S.

The B.C. Lumber Trade Council has said the claims levelled by the U.S. lumber
lobby are based on unsubstantiated arguments that were previously rejected by
independent NAFTA panels.

Paul Quinn of RBC Capital Markets said the Americans will likely initially
impose a high duty to get Canada to negotiate a deal over a long period that's
favourable to the U.S.

"The reality is everybody's making money so just the initial determination of
harm is a difficult one in an environment where everybody was making money," he
said from Vancouver. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 The Telegraph Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              672 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Daily Gleaner (New Brunswick)

                          February 27, 2008 Wednesday

Farmers worry loan changes have come too late

BYLINE: RICHARD DUPLAIN duplain.richard@dailygleaner.com

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 647  words


The federal government is cutting some red tape to help farmers access loans but
for some in the agriculture industry, it's too little, too late.

Earlier this week the federal government announced proposed amendments to the
Advance Payments Program. Formerly that program allowed farmers to access cash
advances of up to $25,000.

The amendments eliminate a requirement for farmers to use a business risk
management program as security for a cash advance. It also allows farmers to use
inventory as security.

The amendments further allow farmers to use the term "severe economic hardship"
as a condition to apply for emergency advances of up to $400,000.

This week's farm-aid proposal also targets help for the country's struggling hog
industry.

The federal government announced $50 million for a sow-cull program so the
industry sector can restructure. The program will see a 10 per cent reduction in
the national breeding herd.

"It takes too long to deliver these federal programs," said Larry Ratcliffe,
secretary manager of the New Brunswick Cattle Producers association. "We are in
a financial crisis that needs to be addressed immediately."

Ratcliffe said the dollar's high value, competition from U.S. beef products
coming into Canada, low market prices for Canadian beef, high energy and feed
costs, and a large supply of Canadian beef is the worst possible combination of
events to strike the industry.

Ratcliffe said the federal government's proposal to cut through the red tape is
"a step in the right direction, but it's not the end of our problems."

Twenty years ago, there were 120 hog farmers in New Brunswick producing 250, 000
hogs each year, said Stephen Moffett, a director with both Pork NB and the
Canadian Pork Council.

"Today there are 20 large-scale farmers producing 150,000 hogs," he said. "The
number of hog producers is shrinking dramatically."

Moffett said the high value of the Canadian dollar, over production of hogs in
North America and the high price of corn grain feeds has had a cumulative effect
on the hog industry in Canada and New Brunswick. Hogs that should be selling for
$200 are fetching $10 and it costs a farmer $150 to raise a hog to maturity, he
said.

"We are in an untenable situation," Moffett said. "We need federal help so we
can weather this economic storm."

Moffett said government assistance offered this week are the tools farmers need.

He said the sow-cull program will reduce New Brunswick's 120,000 hog herd by
1,200 animals.

"This will help reduce the current oversupply of animals and put farmers in a
better position when market conditions improve," Moffett said.

Larry Jewett and his family raised cattle in Keswick Ridge for more than three
decades.

Now he's building boats in Hainesville and operating the marina at Mactaquac
Park.

That means hog producers will receive a per head payment for each animal
slaughtered and disposed of.

Jewett lost $500,000 since 2003 when bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), or
mad cow disease, was first identified in an Alberta cow.

The cattle industry in New Brunswick took a $10-million hit in the years after
the U.S. closed its borders to Canadian beef and beef products. Those border
restrictions were relaxed last year.

"We sold our farm in 2007," Jewett said.

"We hung on too long."

Jewett tried diversifying, reduced his heard of 400 head and accessed government
grants. "We tried to tread water on grants," he said. "We tried growing hay for
other farmers but those other farmers were also growing hay so that wasn't
profitable."

Jewett then went into cattle transportation and export. High fuel costs and
additional cases of BSE all but sounded the death knell for that venture.

He developed a container for shipping cattle but continued border restrictions
have kept that shipping business to a minimum.

"We moved our equipment to Florida and we are doing a little bit of shipping
there," he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2008 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                               Publications Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              673 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 20, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: USDA to Help 821 Rural Small Businesses Boost Renewable Energy Use,
Save on Energy Costs

LENGTH: 784  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: United States Department of Agriculture has issued the following
news release:



 Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced funding for 821 projects
across the nation that will help rural small businesses and agricultural
producers reduce energy usage and costs in their operations. The funding is
available through the Rural Energy for America Program (REAP) and will be used
to make energy efficiency improvements and install renewable energy systems.





 "Since 2009, the Rural Energy for America Program has helped roughly 15,000
small businesses and farms save enough energy to power about 730,000 homes and
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by more than five million metric tons annually,"
Vilsack said. "These investments in clean energy are good for the environment,
are good for each business's bottom line and they support the broader rural
economy by encouraging the production of renewable energy sources."



 USDA is providing $43.2 million in loan guarantees and $11.6 million in grants
through REAP for projects in every state, as well as in the Virgin Islands, the
Western Pacific and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Funding of each award
announced today is contingent upon the recipient meeting the terms of the loan
or grant agreement.



 Delaney's Landscape Center, a family-owned business providing plants and
landscaping services in Polson, Mont., has been selected to receive a $10,298
REAP grant to install a geothermal renewable energy system to heat its
greenhouse. The system is expected to save the business nearly $2,000 per year
and generate more than 15,000 kWh of energy. The project also supports USDA's
StrikeForce for Rural Growth and Opportunity by investing in a high-poverty
area.



 The Sundry Store, Inc., another family-owned business, providing home
improvement tools and household items, is receiving a $15,565 REAP grant to
replace its fluorescent- and incandescent-based lighting system with a
light-emitting diode (LED) system. The new system is expected to save the
Etowah, Tenn., business $13,676 annually and reduce energy usage by 136,766 kWh
annually. That is enough energy to power 13 homes.



 From 2009 to date, REAP has helped finance more than 11,000 renewable energy
and energy efficiency projects that have reduced energy costs for roughly 15,000
rural businesses. During this period, USDA has provided more than $373 million
in grants and almost $481 million in loan guarantees to agricultural producers
and rural small business owners. When operational, these projects will generate
or save almost 9 million megawatt hours - enough to power more than 730,000
homes and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by more 5 million metric tons in
carbon dioxide each year. That is the equivalent of removing more than 1.1
million cars from our roads.



 The Rural Energy for America Program also helps businesses create jobs, helps
farmers and rural businesses reduce their carbon footprint, and helps the
country move closer to energy independence.



 Congress created the REAP program in the 2002 Farm Bill. Because of the
program's success, Congress reauthorized it in the 2014 Farm Bill with
guaranteed funding of at least $50 million annually for the duration of the
five-year Farm Bill.



 REAP is generating positive results. Silverleaf Family Farms, LLC, of Corrales,
N.M., used a $4,522 REAP grant in 2014 to install a 6.1 kW photovoltaic array
system. The system generates about 10,600 kWh per a year, replacing 33 percent
of the farm's energy usage. The savings have allowed the owners to reinvest in
their hydroponic vegetables business. Silverleaf subsequently received a $44,068
USDA Value Added Producer Grant to expand vegetable sales into additional
farmers' markets and grocery stores.



 Helping thousands of rural small businesses, farmers and ranchers shift away
from fossil-based energy by installing renewable energy systems and energy
efficiency solutions has been one of the most important components of USDA's
climate mitigation investments. Thanks to USDA investments in renewable energy
projects of all sizes, rural Americans are saving more than 10.4 billion
kWh--&#226;&#128;[#xfffd]enough energy to power more than 959,000 American homes
annually.



 USDA has invested $38 billion in electric loans and more than $1 billion for
smart grid technologies since 2009, helping build more than 185,000 miles of
transmission and distribution lines serving approximately 5 million rural
customers annually. Today, more than 2,200 USDA wind and solar renewable
electricity generation projects power more than 130,000 homes.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              674 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Wyoming Tribune-Eagle (Cheyenne)

                            November 1, 2016 Tuesday

11-1 NEWS LOCAL BRIEFS

BYLINE: Staff

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Briefs; Pg. 11-1 NEWS LOCAL BRIEFS

LENGTH: 735 words


bkm

CHEYENNE

HollyFrontier Corp. to buy Suncor Energy's Petro-Canada Lubricants

HollyFrontier Corp. announced Monday it has entered an agreement to buy Suncor
Energy's Petro-Canada Lubricants business for $1.125 billion.

HollyFrontier operates through its subsidiaries several refineries, including
one in Cheyenne.

The Petro-Canada Lubricants plant is located in Mississauga, Ontario, and is the
largest producer of base oils in Canada, with 15,600 barrels per day of
lubricant production capacity. It is the only North American producer of high
margin Group III base oils.

With the addition of the new business, HollyFrontier will become the
fourth-largest lubricants producer in North America, with a capacity of 28,000
barrels per day, or about 10 percent of North American production.

HollyFrontier, headquartered in Dallas, Texas, is an independent petroleum
refiner. The company produces high-value light products, such as gasoline,
diesel fuel, jet fuel and other specialty products.

Warning sirens to sound Friday

as part of monthly system test

The Laramie County Emergency Management Agency is once again scheduled to test
the Outdoor Warning Siren system at 10 a.m. Friday in Pine Bluffs and noon
Friday in Cheyenne, Albin and Burns.

The warning sirens will sound a steady signal for one to three minutes on the
first Friday of every month, according to a news release.

The siren signal means "take cover immediately." The sirens are designed to be
heard by people who are outdoors, and they may be heard through open doors and
windows. People inside of buildings might not hear the sirens.

During an actual emergency, once residents have taken shelter, they are advised
to turn radios or televisions to a local broadcast station to get additional
emergency information.

Visit Cheyenne to accept grant applications to help with events

Visit Cheyenne, the official tourism organization for Laramie County, is
accepting marketing and sponsorship grant applications for 2017.

The programs provide marketing and other assistance to events that grow the
Laramie County hospitality industry. In the past, this popular program has
helped promote the New Year's Eve Ball Drop, Cheyenne Depot Days, Cheyenne Comic
Con and many other Laramie County events.

Applications must be submitted to Visit Cheyenne by Nov. 30. Its board of
directors will evaluate the applications at its Dec. 14 board meeting.

For more information, and grant rules and applications, call Jill Pope at
307-778-3133 or email jill@cheyenne.org

Average gas price in state drops half-cent a gallon in past week

The average price of retail gasoline in Wyoming dropped 0.5 cents a gallon in
the last week, averaging $2.18 a gallon Sunday, according to gasoline price
website GasBuddy's daily survey of 494 gas outlets in Wyoming.

This compares with the national average that dropped 2 cents a gallon in the
last week to $2.20 a gallon.

Including the change in gas prices in Wyoming during the last week, prices
Sunday were 15.3 cents a gallon lower than the same day a year ago. The average
price is 0.4 cents a gallon lower than a month ago. The national average has
decreased 1.9 cents a gallon during the last month and stands 2.8 cents a gallon
higher than this day one year ago.

In Fort Collins, Colorado, the average price is $2.15 a gallon, down 1 cent a
gallon from last week's $2.16 a gallon.

According to GasBuddy historical data, gas prices on Oct. 31 in Wyoming have
ranged widely over the last five years: $2.33 a gallon in 2015, $3.25 a gallon
in 2014, $3.36 a gallon in 2013, $3.61 a gallon in 2012 and $3.48 a gallon in
2011.

Wyoming Farm Bureau Federation will have conference Nov. 10-12

"Agriculture - Keeping Wyoming Strong" is the theme of the 97th annual meeting
of the Wyoming Farm Bureau Federation from Nov 10-12 at the Hilton Garden Inn
and University of Wyoming Conference Center in Laramie.

Policy discussions will be the main purpose of the meeting. Members also will
hear updates on issues. U.S. Rep. Cynthia Lummis, R-Wyoming, will attend the
Nov. 11 banquet to visit with attendees.

Featured speakers from the federation will include Katelyn McCullock, economist,
and Ryan Yates, director of congressional relations.

Jessie Dafoe, executive director of the Wyoming Ag in the Classroom program,
will speak at 10 a.m. Nov. 11.

The agenda is available at wyfb.org.

To register, contact Julie Johnson-Doyle at juliejohnson@wyfb.org or
307-721-7723.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2016 Cheyenne Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              675 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            August 27, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

How much is a CEO worth?

BYLINE: Scott Haggett, Calgary Herald

SECTION: CALGARZ BUSINESS; Scott Haggett; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 688  words


We now have an answer to the old question of "What's a promise worth?" Or, to
narrow it down somewhat, we know what the value of a promise fulfilled is to an
oilpatch CEO.

The answer is $300,000.

That's the amount that Nexen chief executive Charlie Fischer has been awarded by
the board of the company for carrying through on a pledge to sell assets to cut
debt.

For other senior executives at the Calgary-based oil producer, the promise has
been a bit less rewarding, but still well up there. Marvin Romanow, the chief
financial officer, gets $175,000, senior vice-president Roger Thomas was awarded
$200,000, and for John McWilliams, the general counsel and corporate secretary,
the reward came to $100,000.

Now before getting bent out of shape about lucrative payments to the executive
suite, recall that Nexen shareholders should be a pretty happy lot these days.
The stock of the oil producer has had an exceptional run in 2005 as it's more
than doubled -- rising from $24.35 at the end of 2004 to Friday's closing price
of $49 on the TSX.

That performance has put the company in the -- for it -- unusual position of
posting one of the strongest share price gains among Canada's senior producers,
lagging only Canadian Natural Resources Ltd.'s 108 per cent increase over the
calendar year.

The rise is more stunning when compared with 2004, a year in which Nexen was
among the worst investments anyone could make in an energy stock. It rose just
3.8 per cent over the course of the year, while the average return for the
companies listed on the TSX oil and gas index was 28.7 per cent.

So there's been a big turnaround in the company's fortunes as investors have
stopped looking at the production disappointments that have often characterized
the company's past. Instead, the focus has been placed on the oil-leveraged
company's potential profits as the price of a barrel punches through record
after record and the promise of production growth from the company's new North
Sea core area, its Long Lake oilsands project and new finds in the Gulf of
Mexico and elsewhere.

A smaller part of investors' renewed confidence in the company comes from the
recent sales of some mature oil properties in Western Canada and the partial
spinoff of its chemicals unit. Those moves were made to follow through on
promises that Nexen would cut its debt made when it paid $2.1 billion US for
EnCana Corp.'s North Sea assets.

But while those moves may not be key to investors' faith in the company, they
have become a big part of Fischer's compensation. The North Sea purchase last
year resulted in a special award of $450,000 to Fischer, on top of a regular
bonus of $860,000 made for meeting various performance targets. That came in
addition to a salary of $847,917 and a grant of 150,000 stock options.

According to the company, the one-time payments are made to reward hard work
and, more importantly, successful hard work.

"Where there's a concerted effort towards a project and the results of that
project are positive we try and link bonuses to that," says Grant Dreger,
investor relations manager at Nexen. "It's so you have a linkage between the
activity, the results, the effort and the reward."

Yet, while it tells us what value is placed on a chief executive following
through on a promise, the larger question, just what Nexen's board of directors
think a chief executive's job should be, remains unanswered.

Fischer's considered by many to be a more-than-able chief executive, indeed, one
of Canada's best. And his strategic sensibilities have been highlighted by the
company's move into the U.K. North Sea and the oilsands.

However, Nexen's board might be better advised wrapping any compensation for
achieving special targets into year-end bonuses and stock option grants than to
offer rewards for what at many other companies are regular business items.

And if board members are rewarding the success of hard work completed, more
power to them. But given the salary of a modern chief executive, a job that
comes with unimaginably long hours and no end of public second-guessing, what
does that money get you?

shaggett@theherald.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Calgary Herald Archive; Nexen CEO Charlie Fischer was awarded $300,000
for carrying through on a pledge to sell assets to cut debt -- a reward for what
at many other companies is considered a regular business item.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              676 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 18, 2013 Tuesday

Minnesota: Northern Lights Lamb receives MDA Value Added Grant

LENGTH: 312  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Department of Agriculture, The State of Minnesota has issued the following press
release:

He may be young and still in high school, but a Redwood Falls area entrepreneur
will expand his sales of lamb with the help of a Value Added Grant from the
Minnesota Department of Agriculture (MDA). Scott Dingels is one of 50 recipients
of the Value Added Grant Program which aims to increase sales of Minnesota
agricultural products by helping farmers, producers, and processors add value to
their operations and by assisting entrepreneurs investigating new opportunities
or new enterprises.

Dingles says his grant is being used to purchase a refrigerated trailer to
ensure safe storage and delivery of his lamb products to farmers markets and
other customers. Dingles lamb sales started as a FFA business project and with
the Value Added Grant he can expand his sales.

"These grants are helping businesses add value to their operations through
expansions or upgrades," says Minnesota Assistant Agriculture Commissioner
Charlie Poster. "This will lead to an increase in rural economic activities,
generate jobs, and create new businesses."

Examples of the grant projects include creamery production and cheese processing
equipment for dairy farms, high tunnels for extending the growing season on
fruit and vegetable farms, and the purchase of coolers and grinders for meat
processing facilities. Other grantees will use the funds to pay for feasibility
studies and business plans, and to implement methods to increase on-farm food
safety.

The Value Added Grants are made available through the Agricultural Growth,
Research and Innovation Program (AGRI), established by the legislature to
advance Minnesota's agricultural and renewable energy industries. Another round
of Value Added Grants will begin later this summer.

For further information please visit: http://www.mda.state.mn.us/

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              677 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                          November 18, 2015 Wednesday

Washington: Warner, Kaine Announce Nearly $3 Million in USDA Funding to Support
Virginia Agriculture

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Washington: Office of the Senator Mark R. Warner has issued the following
news release:



 Today, U.S. Senators Mark Warner and Tim Kaine announced that the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) has awarded $2,996,643 in grant funding to
small businesses throughout Virginia. Today&rsquo;s funding will support
operations and marketing at local farms, ranches, wineries and other
product-based small businesses that contribute to the agricultural industry in
Virginia.





 &ldquo;Agriculture is an economic driver and job creator throughout the
Commonwealth. These grants will help Virginia&rsquo;s small businesses succeed,
support local economies, and strengthen Virginia&rsquo;s largest
industry,&rdquo; Sen. Warner said.



 &ldquo;Today&rsquo;s funding will bolster local food networks and support small
business activity throughout the Commonwealth,&rdquo; Sen. Kaine said. &ldquo;By
giving these businesses the resources they need to expand operations, hire
additional labor and promote their various products, we can help spur local
economic activity in Virginia&rsquo;s largest industry: agriculture.&rdquo;



 The following Virginia businesses will receive funding under USDA&rsquo;s Value
Added Producer Grant Program (VAPG):



     Ag Events, Inc. in Waynesboro, Virginia will receive: $250,000 in funding
to buy supplies and labor to produce beer from far-grown hops and market their
hops to other craft breweries in Virginia;



     Cornell B. Goldman in Cullen, Virginia will receive: $125,000 in funding to
market products to a wider customer base and help transport and sell produce;



     Old House Vineyards in Culpeper, Virginia will receive: $250,000 in funding
to support increased marketing activities that will help grow the business;



     Riverstone Farm, LLC. in Floyd, Virginia will receive $250,000 to support
operations and expand marketing of locally-grown foods;



     Lickinghole Creek Craft Brewery in Goochland, Virginia will receive
$250,000 in funding for labor, marketing and packaging expenses;



     The Good Earth Peanut Company, LLC. in Skippers, Virginia will receive
$49,999 in funding to support operations and marketing for peanut products;



     Engel Family Farms in Hanover, Virginia will receive $73,400 to support a
feasibility study;



     Meadows Pride Farm, LLC. in Monterey, Virginia will receive $49,500 to
support operations and expand marketing activities;



     Old Church Creamery in King William, Virginia will receive $175,000 to
support operations and expand marketing activities;



     Monroe Bay Vineyard in King George, Virginia will receive $49,500 to
support operations and expand marketing activities;



     North Cove Mushrooms, LLC. in Reva, Virginia will receive $250,000 to
support operations and expand marketing of locally-grown foods;



     Woods Mill Malting, LLC. in Lovingston, Virginia will receive $49,999 to
support operations and expand marketing activities;



     Buckingham Berkshires in Gladstone, Virginia will receive $49,500 to
support operations and expand marketing activities;



     FDC Enterprises, Inc. in Nottoway County, Virginia will receive $75,000 to
support a feasibility study;



     Next Generation Woods, Inc. in Hiwassee, Virginia will receive $50,245 to
support a feasibility study;



     Blue Bee Cider, LLC. in Richmond, Virginia will receive $250,000 to support
operations and expand marketing activities;



     Buffalo Creek Beef, LLC. in Lexington, Virginia will receive $200,000 to
support operations and expand marketing activities;



     Turkey Knob Growers, Inc. in Timberville, Virginia will receive $49,500 to
support operations and expand marketing of locally-grown foods;



     Davis Valley Winery and Vineyard, Inc. in Rural Retreat, Virginia will
receive $250,000 to support operations and expand marketing activities and;



     Kelly Turkeys USA, LLC. in Fort Valley, Virginia will receive $250,000 to
support operations and expand marketing activities.



 The VAPG program helps agricultural producers enter into value-added activities
related to the processing and/or marketing of bio-based, value-added products.
The VAPG program aims to generate new products, create and expand marketing
opportunities and increase producer income for local product-based businesses.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              678 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2017 ICC Information Group Ltd.
                         ICC Financial Analysis Reports
            ICC Information Limited is not an investment adviser and
          makes no warranties regarding merchantability or suitability
                     of material for a particular purpose.

                                January 13, 2017

                          FEATHERSTONE CO-HOUSING LTD

                               FEATHERSTONE LODGE
                                  1 ELIOT BANK
                                  FOREST HILL
                                LONDON SE23 3XE


TRADE ADDRESS: Featherstone Lodge 1 Eliot Bank Forest Hill, LONDON SE23 3XE

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
URL: www.featherstonecohousing.co.uk

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
REGISTRATION NO.: 08259411

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: October 18, 2012
JURISDICTION/PLACE OF REGISTRATION

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
DIRECTORS:

     ·    Mr Stephen Mansfield, Builder
     ·    Ms Dana Mansfield, Production Artworker
     ·    Mrs Julia Elizabeth Farr, None
     ·    Ms Tanja Van Oudtshoorn, University Lecturer
     ·    Ms Karen Livesey, Film Producer
     ·    Mr John Christopher Farr, None
     ·    John Brady, None
     ·    Ms Olga Rodriguez Falcon, None
     ·    Ms Nina Elizabeth Grant, Teacher
     ·    Mr Paul Crozier, Chief Executive
     ·    Ms Louise De Villiers, Film Producer
     ·    Ms Rosa Rogers, Film Producer
     ·    Ms Cathy Gale, Film Producer
     ·    Ms Sonia Rai, Communications Specialist
     ·    Mr Rhys Owen Pritchard, Manager


Go To ICC Directors

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
PRINCIPLE ACTIVITIES: Other accommodation
INDUSTRY TYPE:
COMPANY TYPE:  Private Limited company without share capital::Private Limited
company without share capital::
COMPANY SIZE:  Reinstated

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC:
55900

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: October 31, 2015
FISCAL YEAR END: October 31

LAST FILED ACCOUNTS:  October 31, 2015
ACCOUNTS TYPE:  Dormant
ACCOUNTS LODGED DATE:  June 29, 2016
ANNUAL RETURN:  October 18, 2016
CREDIT LIMIT:  12,500

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS
Date of Accounts                           31/10/201 31/10/201 31/10/201
                                                   5         4         3
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Tangible Assets                                    -         -         -
Intangible Assets                                  -         -         -
Total Fixed Assets                                 -         -         -
Stocks                                             -         -         -
Debtors                                            -         -         -
Cash                                               -         -       525
Miscellaneous Current Assets                       -         -         0
Other Current Assets                               -         -       525
Total Current Assets                               -         -       525
Fixed Assets                                       -         -         -
Intermediate Assets                                -         -         -
Due From Group, Non Current                        -         -         -
Due From Group, Current                            -         -         -
TOTAL ASSETS                                       0         0       525



LIABILITIES
Date of Accounts                           31/10/201 31/10/201 31/10/201
                                                   5         4         3
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Creditors                                          -         -         -
Bank Overdraft                                     -         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Liabilities                  -         -         -
Bank Loans - Current Portion                       -         -         -
Other Short Term Finance                           -         -         -
Due To Group, Current                              -         -         -
Due To Directors, Current                          -         -         -
Other Current Liabilities                          -         -         -
Short Term Loans                                   -         -         -
Long Term Loans                                    -         -         -
Long Term Bank Loan                                -         -         -
Other Long Term Finance                            -         -         -
Due To Group, Non Current                          -         -         -
Due To Directors, Non Current                      -         -         -
Other Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
Total Current Liabilities                          -         -         -
Total Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
TOTAL LIABILITIES                                  -         -         -
Called Up Share Capital and Sundry                 -         -         -
Reserves
Profit & Loss Account Reserve                      0         0       525
Revaluation Reserve                                -         -         -
Shareholder Funds                                  -         -       525
Called Up Share Capital                            -         -         -
Sundry Reserves (Including Grants)                 -         -         -
Contingent Liabilities                             -         -         -
NET ASSETS                                         -         -         -


* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
Date of Accounts   31/10/201 31/10/201 31/10/201
                           5         4         3
                         GBP       GBP       GBP
Total Sales                -         -         -
Cost of Sales              -         -         -
Gross Profit               -         -         -
Operating Profit           -         -         -
Export                     -         -         -
Nontrading Income          -         -         -
Interest Payable           -         -         -
Pretax Profit              -         -         -
Taxation                   -         -         -
Profit After Tax           -         -         -
Dividends Payable          -         -         -
Retained Profits           -         -         -
Value Added                -         -         -
Capital Employed           0         0       525
Net Worth                  0         0       525
Working Capital            -         -       525
Emp. Renumeration          -         -         -
Dir. Renumeration          -         -         -
Audit Fees                 -         -         -
Non-audit Fees             -         -         -
Depreciation               -         -         -
Number of                  -         -         -
Employees

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *


GROWTH RATES
Date of Accounts        2      3      5
                    Years  Years  Years
                      GBP    GBP    GBP
Sales                   -      -      -
Pretax                  -      -      -
Total Assets            0   -100      -
Current Assets          -      -      -
Current                 -      -      -
Liabilities
Capital Employed        0   -100      -
Employee Wages          -      -      -
Number of               -      -      -
Employees



INDUSTRY AVERAGES
Compared to 4,550 companies in the same industry
sector
(year ending 2015)
SIC Code:
55239 Other tourist or short stay accommodation



INDUSTRY QUARTILES
                                                      Lower   Median    Upper
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                   -.48     1.15       20
Pretax Profit / Total Assets (%)                       -.62      .61    12.29
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                                -1     1.89    21.69
Sales / Total Assets (%)                              20.88    62.58    170.8
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales) x           0        0        0
365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                    .17        1     2.57
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)            18,976.0 25,046.1 37,335.2
                                                          1                 1
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees (GBP)  10,548.0 15,937.1   21,000
                                                          8
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                  25,607.9 36,656.2 66,833.3
                                                          6        5        3
Wages / Turnover (%)                                  52.25     38.5    21.26



CREDIT RATING
Year  0  4
=        9
Year -1  6
=        9
Year -2  7
=        4
Year -3  5
=        8

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *
Date of Accounts                                1/10/201 31/10/201 31/10/201
                                                       5         4         3
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                   -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Assets (%)                             -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Shareholders Funds (%)                 -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                              -         -         -
Sales / Total Assets (%)                               -         -         -
Sales / Fixed Assets (%)                               -         -         -
Export / Sales (%)                                     -         -         -
Working Capital / Sales (%)                            -         -         -
Sales / Stocks                                         -         -         -
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales )         -         -         -
x 365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                   -         -         -
Quick Assets / Current Liabilities                     -         -         -
Total Debt / Net Worth (%)                             -         -         -
Shareholders Funds / Total Assets                      -         -         1
Long Term Debt / Net Worth (%)                         -         -         -
Interest / Pre Interest Profit (%)                     -         -         -
Current Liabilities / Stocks                           -         -         -
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees            -         -         -
(GBP)
Employee Remuneration / Sales (%)                      -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Number Of Employees (GBP)              -         -         -
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                      -         -         -
Capital Employed / Number Of Employees                 0         0         -
Fixed Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)               -         -         -
Total Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)               0         0         -
Pretax Profit / Value Added (%)                        -         -         -
Value Added / Sales (%)                                -         -         -
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)                -         -         -
Value Added / Employee Remuneration                    -         -         -
Sales / Audit Fees                                     -         -         -
Total Assets / Audit Fees                              0         0         -
Creditors / Debtors                                    -         -         -
Total Debt / Working Capital                           -         -         -
Total Debt / Total Assets                              -         -         -

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2017


                              679 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           The Taos News (New Mexico)

                            April 30, 2009 Thursday

WORKSHOPS ON FUNDING FOR RURAL PROJECTS

BYLINE: STAFF REPORT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-4

LENGTH: 258 words


The U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development's business program will
hold free workshops around the state, including one in Taos on May 14, to
provide information on obtaining loans and grants for "renewable energy systems,
energy efficiency improvements and value-added" agriculture projects.

The Rural Energy for America Program offers funds to farmers and rural small
businesses to purchase and install renewable energy systems and make
energy-efficiency improvements.

Such energy systems include biofuels, wind, solar, geothermal and hydrogen-based
projects using commercially proven technology.

The Value Added Producer Grant Program gives grants for projects that increase
value to agriculture commodities. In past years, value-added grants have been
awarded for projects dealing with biofuels, composting, high-value wool, branded
beef, wine and pork processing.

Workshops will be held in the following locations:

Wednesday (May 6): Clovis Community College, Clovis;

Thursday (May 7): Eastern N.M. University/Roswell;

Friday (May 8): Las Cruces Small Business Development Center, Las Cruces;

Wednesday, May 13: Belén Public Library, Belén;

Thursday, May 14: Taos Coronado Hall, Taos Convention Center, El Alcalde Room,
120 Civic Plaza Drive, 1:30-3:30 p.m.

For information on these workshops, contact Jesse Monfort Bopp at (505) 761-4952
or jesse.bopp@nm.usda.gov or Thelma DiBartolomeo at (505) 761-4953.

For more information on these and all USDA Rural Development business and
cooperative programs, visit www.rurdev.usda.gov/rbs.

--Staff Report

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: See pdf's for exact rendition, caption, graphics and photographer info.


PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 The Taos News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              680 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                             hollywoodreporter.com

                            September 2, 2013 Monday

New Russian Industry Platform to Bring Together Northern European Filmmakers

BYLINE: Nick Holdsworth

SECTION: NEWS; TAG

LENGTH: 369  words


LONDON - Russia's newest film industry platform, the Northern Seas Forum, is set
to launch later this month at the St. Petersburg International Film Festival
with attendees from various companies and organizations and Oliver Stone.


The forum, scheduled to take place Sept. 15-17, brings together industry
professionals from countries across Northern Europe, including Russia, the
Netherlands, Germany, France, the U.K., Ireland, Scandinavia and the Baltic
countries.


Designed as a "hub of cultural dialog and networking for producers,
distributors, representatives of state and private funds, investors and
sponsors," the event will bring together more than 150 companies and
organizations, including Yellow Affair, Twenty Twenty Vision, Medienboard
Berlin-Brandenburg, Riga City Council, Apple Films, Nordmedia Fonds, German
Films, Rohfilm, Volya Films, Matila Productions, Estonian Film Institute,
National Film Centre of Latvia, Jos Stelling Films, Fortissimo Film Sales, The
Finnish Film Foundation, the Icelandic Film Centre and many others.


Based at St. Peterburg's Original Sokos Hotel Olympia Garden, the forum includes
a co-production market, master classes, cases studies and industry
presentations.


Directors, including Jos Stelling and Veiko Ounpuu, will present their new
projects. Stone is also due to attend the forum, organizers said Monday.


In other events at the forum, the winners of a new private Russian initiative to
provide seed funding for projects, the Point of View (POV) Fund, will present
their projects. POV provides interest free grants of up to $33,000 to assist
feature co-productions of "high artistic value" with a Russian partner.


The fund's expert group, which includes leading Russian and European industry
figures, Sergey Selyanov (CTB Film Company), Artem Vasiliev (MetraFilms)
Konstantinos Kontovrakis (Herectic, Cinemart), Riina Sildos (Amrion, Baltic
Event) and Jean-Christophe Simon (Films Boutiques), chose the following films
for its first grants:


&middot; The Woman from Ingria (producer Pavel Odynin)


&middot; Svetlana(producers Anastasia Perova, Olga Kolegaeva, Konstantin
Nafikov, Karsten Stoter)


&middot; Manifestation (director Anna Sarukhanova; producer Julia Mishkinene.)



LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: ONLINE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                    Copyright 2013 VNU Business Media, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              681 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 Yorkshire Post

                                August 12, 2002

New Dales abattoir raises hopes

SOURCE: Yorkshire Post

BYLINE: Brian Dooks

LENGTH: 381 words


NEW hope has been given to farmers struggling to recover from the foot and mouth
disease crisis by the opening of a new (GBP)1m abattoir in Wensleydale, which
should allow livestock producers to bring their Dales Meat brand to a wider
market.

A redundant sawmill at East Borwins, two miles west of Bainbridge, has been
converted into a European standard abattoir capable of processing organic and
non-organic animals by Martin McIntyre, who saw the need for farmers to gain
added value from locally bred Yorkshire meat.

Until the project was completed with the help of a (GBP)260,000 processing and
marketing grant from DEFRA farmers had to stand the cost of transporting their
animals to abattoirs 50 miles away - subjecting them to additional stress and
losing the ability to market the meat as a Dales product.

The new plant will play a vital part in the development of a fledgling producer
club, Wensleydale Fine Foods, which is based around the Hawes Auction Market and
its customers. Mr McIntyre believes it will give producers and consumers
confidence that the meat has been produced to the highest standards in the
Dales.

Mr McIntyre, who began planning the abattoir before foot and mouth struck
Wensleydale in March 2001, said: Traceability of the meat is a key aspect. Our
computer system is capable of telling us where any animal came from, when it
arrived and where the meat was sold on to.

His original small scale slaughterhouse was attached to the house and could not
be expanded. The choice was to build a completely new plant or go and work for
someone else. Local farmers were calling out for someone who could process their
stock in this area.

We are the only abattoir for 50 miles so we began looking at what farmers
wanted. His McIntyre Meat company has been helped by DEFRA's rural development
service, which has (GBP)44m available over five years to offer grants of 30 per
cent towards the cost of new buildings, refurbishment of old ones and the
purchase of equipment.

DEFRA's senior rural development adviser, David Stirling, said: This is the
largest individual grant we have made in Yorkshire and that reflects the
important role which this abattoir will play in helping farmers in North
Yorkshire get their produce to the consumer.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2002

                       Copyright 2002 Johnston Press Plc


                              682 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Carlsbad Current-Argus (New Mexico)

                              May 8, 2008 Thursday

Ag census deadline extended to end of May

BYLINE: Submitted to the Current-Argus

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 488 words


The Census of Agriculture has extended its deadline to the end of May 2008 for
New Mexico. The Census of Agriculture, taken every five years, is an attempt to
get a complete count of U.S. farms and ranches and the people who operate
them.The Census looks at land use and ownership, operator characteristics,
production practices, income and expenditures and many other areas. For
America's farmers and ranchers, the Census of Agriculture is their voice, their
future and their responsibility.The Census of Agriculture is the responsibility
of every farmer and rancher, regardless of the size or type of operation.For
Census purposes, a farm is any place from which $1,000 or more of agricultural
products were produced and sold, or normally would have been sold, during the
Census year.Many small producers in New Mexico and Eddy County do not complete
the census. Our state and county are extremely under counted in the national
data bank. The Census provides the only source of uniform, comprehensive
agricultural data for every county in the nation.Through the Census, producers
can show the nation the value and importance of agriculture and they can help
influence decisions that will shape the future of American agriculture for years
to come.By responding to the Census, producers are helping themselves, their
communities and all of U.S. agriculture.Also by being under reported, New Mexico
and Eddy County do not receive all of the funding for agriculture programs they
should.New Mexico State University, New Mexico's Land Grant University, receives
funding based on the number of farms and farmers in New Mexico. The Eddy County
Extension office is one of those programs.The Farm Service agency and the
Natural Resource Conservation Service are also funded based on the number of
agriculture producers. If you produce at least $1000 in agriculture products,
which you either consume yourself or sell you should complete the census of
agriculture. Even if you just have a few pecan trees that you sell the pecans
from.The census form can be found on line at
http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/index.asp , or you may call the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture NASS office at 575-646-3007.The information is
confidential. Respondents are guaranteed by law (Title 7, U.S. Code) that their
individual information will be kept confidential. NASS uses the information only
for statistical purposes and publishes data only in tabulated totals. The report
cannot be used for purposes of taxation, investigation, or regulation. The
privacy of individual Census records is also protected from disclosure through
the Freedom of Information Act.Eddy County Extension Service, New Mexico State
University is an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer and educator. All
programs are available to everyone regardless of race, color, religion, sex,
age, handicap, or national origin. New Mexico State University, University
Cooperating.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 Carlsbad Current-Argus
                              All Rights Reserved


                              683 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Mudgee Guardian

                                 June 22, 2014

The future is at the Mudgee farmers' market

SECTION: COMMUNITY

LENGTH: 1142  words


It's the third Saturday of the month, and the Mudgee Farmers' Market is bustling
with locals looking for a bacon and egg roll, a coffee and a chat, stallholders
offering the best of locally grown and made produce and food, and visitors keen
to take home a tasty souvenir.

Visitors know that the Mudgee Farmers Markets' is the place to go for fresh
fruit, vegetables and meat for their weekend lunch, their favourite relish or
jam, or freshly made bread.

But a recent report from the Rural Industries Research and Development
Corporation (RIRDC) confirms that the benefits of farmers' markets to shoppers,
farmers, value-added businesses and local communities goes far beyond bread,
jams and fresh vegetables.

The RIRDC report found markets like the Mudgee Farmers' Markets play an
important part in local economies, allow stallholders to test and improve new
products and find new markets, and help to 'incubate' fledgling businesses.

By giving consumers access to fresh, local, seasonal food directly from the
producer, markets also encourage healthy lifestyles by helping consumers to
learn more about how food was produced and how to use it.

The report found 19 per cent of Australians purchase vegetables at least once a
month from a farmers' market, and with the trend towards locally-produced,
environmentally friendly and healthy products, this number is predicted to rise.

Mudgee Fine Foods treasurer John Grant, who was among those who participated in
the RIRDC survey, agreed with the report's finding that markets were an
important launching pad for new businesses.

'I couldn't have got my business running without the market and it's still the
main outlet for my bread' said Mr Grant, who started Mudgee Sourdough in 2008.
'I'm at a point where I can sell everything I make.'

Mr Grant said the Mudgee Farmers' Market operates to strict guidelines, where
stallholders must come from within 100km of Mudgee and products sold have been
grown, reared, caught, brewed, pickled, baked, smoked or processed by the
stallholders themselves.

'I think our customers appreciate that they can speak directly with producers
and that's what makes our farmers' market different from many others.

'It's all got to be fresh and local produce'.

Mr Grant said because the Mudgee Farmers Markets have a high proportion of
visitors from other areas, there is a higher proportion of valued-added products
such as jams and chutneys, which appeal to travellers looking for something to
take home.

But the flexibility of the markets also allows home producers to have stalls, or
to sell excess produce through the community table, he said.

'That's the great community aspect of the market.'

Mr Grant said the Mudgee Farmers' Markets regularly attracts around 35 stalls,
depending on the season, but can have up to 50 on the busiest weekends.

A key to the growth of the market has been Mudgee Fine Foods' decision to employ
Liz Mayberry as a professional market manager, instead of relying on volunteers.

'Liz has been very important to the market and to ensuring the success that it
is,' he said.

Market newcomer Jodie Polkinghorne has in the past used the community stall to
sell produce from her garden, but has recently branched out into her own stall.

Ms Polkinghorne said as a newcomer to the town, the market had helped her to
make friends.

'I've always grown vegetables,' she said. 'It's a hobby, but this is a good way
to make some money.'

At the other end of the scale, George Attard of Belleview Hobby Farm attends
markets in Penrith, the Blue Mountains and Sydney.

Mr Attard, who has been a regular at Mudgee for two years, said the appeal of
market produce was simple: 'It's fresh'.

'Local people know where it's grown so they keep on coming,' he said.

Richard Lawson of Fig Tree Food and Music has been coming to the market as a
stallholder and musician since 1998.

He now sells his produce at markets from Canberra to Newcastle, but says the
Mudgee Farmers' Markets are among the best in NSW.

'Mudgee Fine Foods is great at galvanising the food community and publicising
and networking,' he said.

He said the markets were an important way of testing and refining products.

'You know exactly what people like and what they don't,' he said. 'Visitors will
turn up and buy three of something, and then you also get return customers.

'A lot of the tourists are impulse buyers. They're on holidays and if they find
they right food they will spend up.'

Mr Lawson said selling through markets had also allowed him to connect with
wholesalers.

'Networking is important ' it's the whole point of the markets,' he said. 'And
it's fun.'

Networking is also important to Dennis Grimshaw, a familiar face at the
Castlereagh Seedsavers stall ' the starting point for many stallholders.

He is always willing to provide advice to market visitors who are inspired to
grow their own fruit and vegetables.

'The market has been one of the important ingredients for Seed Savers,' he said.
'People see a vegetable on display at the markets and they come and say 'have
you got a seed for that''?

For new stallholders, Charlie and Elke Simpson, the Mudgee Farmers markets are a
way to learn the basics of running a small business.

Charlie and Elke have been selling their home made lemonade at the markets for
the past two months, using lemons, limes and grapefruit from Lawson Farm.

'Last time we made $116 each,' said Charlie. 'This time is not as good, but we
are still having fun.'

Charlie and Elke said coming to the market had helped them learn about deducting
expenses before they calculate their profit.

'We'll keep doing it while the fruit lasts,' they said.

Australian Farmers' Markets Association (AFMA) chair Jane Adams said the RIRDC
report paints a very positive picture of farmers markets and will be a catalyst
for the sustainable growth of the sector in the future.

'Farmers' markets are a vital and increasingly significant link in Australia's
food chain and provide a valuable distribution channel connecting farmers and
specialty food producers directly with customers.

'This significant national study will be pivotal in supporting the continued
evolution of Australia's farmers' markets, especially in alerting government to
the viability of the farmers' market sector and the role it plays in supporting
food producers and regional communities.'

- 70 per cent of stallholders who participated in the RIRDC survey said farmers
markets were critical, important or very important to making sales outside the
market;

- 73 per cent of respondents participate in more than one market;

- 49 per cent of respondents use markets to grow their businesses;

- 81 per cent said feedback from markets had influenced their produce range;

- 85 per cent said the ability to interact with customers was critical or very
important;

- The value of farmers markets to the Australia economy has been estimated at
$80 million.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              684 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Mudgee Guardian

                                 June 22, 2014

The future is at the Mudgee farmers' market

SECTION: COMMUNITY

LENGTH: 1142  words


It's the third Saturday of the month, and the Mudgee Farmers' Market is bustling
with locals looking for a bacon and egg roll, a coffee and a chat, stallholders
offering the best of locally grown and made produce and food, and visitors keen
to take home a tasty souvenir.

Visitors know that the Mudgee Farmers Markets' is the place to go for fresh
fruit, vegetables and meat for their weekend lunch, their favourite relish or
jam, or freshly made bread.

But a recent report from the Rural Industries Research and Development
Corporation (RIRDC) confirms that the benefits of farmers' markets to shoppers,
farmers, value-added businesses and local communities goes far beyond bread,
jams and fresh vegetables.

The RIRDC report found markets like the Mudgee Farmers' Markets play an
important part in local economies, allow stallholders to test and improve new
products and find new markets, and help to 'incubate' fledgling businesses.

By giving consumers access to fresh, local, seasonal food directly from the
producer, markets also encourage healthy lifestyles by helping consumers to
learn more about how food was produced and how to use it.

The report found 19 per cent of Australians purchase vegetables at least once a
month from a farmers' market, and with the trend towards locally-produced,
environmentally friendly and healthy products, this number is predicted to rise.

Mudgee Fine Foods treasurer John Grant, who was among those who participated in
the RIRDC survey, agreed with the report's finding that markets were an
important launching pad for new businesses.

'I couldn't have got my business running without the market and it's still the
main outlet for my bread' said Mr Grant, who started Mudgee Sourdough in 2008.
'I'm at a point where I can sell everything I make.'

Mr Grant said the Mudgee Farmers' Market operates to strict guidelines, where
stallholders must come from within 100km of Mudgee and products sold have been
grown, reared, caught, brewed, pickled, baked, smoked or processed by the
stallholders themselves.

'I think our customers appreciate that they can speak directly with producers
and that's what makes our farmers' market different from many others.

'It's all got to be fresh and local produce'.

Mr Grant said because the Mudgee Farmers Markets have a high proportion of
visitors from other areas, there is a higher proportion of valued-added products
such as jams and chutneys, which appeal to travellers looking for something to
take home.

But the flexibility of the markets also allows home producers to have stalls, or
to sell excess produce through the community table, he said.

'That's the great community aspect of the market.'

Mr Grant said the Mudgee Farmers' Markets regularly attracts around 35 stalls,
depending on the season, but can have up to 50 on the busiest weekends.

A key to the growth of the market has been Mudgee Fine Foods' decision to employ
Liz Mayberry as a professional market manager, instead of relying on volunteers.

'Liz has been very important to the market and to ensuring the success that it
is,' he said.

Market newcomer Jodie Polkinghorne has in the past used the community stall to
sell produce from her garden, but has recently branched out into her own stall.

Ms Polkinghorne said as a newcomer to the town, the market had helped her to
make friends.

'I've always grown vegetables,' she said. 'It's a hobby, but this is a good way
to make some money.'

At the other end of the scale, George Attard of Belleview Hobby Farm attends
markets in Penrith, the Blue Mountains and Sydney.

Mr Attard, who has been a regular at Mudgee for two years, said the appeal of
market produce was simple: 'It's fresh'.

'Local people know where it's grown so they keep on coming,' he said.

Richard Lawson of Fig Tree Food and Music has been coming to the market as a
stallholder and musician since 1998.

He now sells his produce at markets from Canberra to Newcastle, but says the
Mudgee Farmers' Markets are among the best in NSW.

'Mudgee Fine Foods is great at galvanising the food community and publicising
and networking,' he said.

He said the markets were an important way of testing and refining products.

'You know exactly what people like and what they don't,' he said. 'Visitors will
turn up and buy three of something, and then you also get return customers.

'A lot of the tourists are impulse buyers. They're on holidays and if they find
they right food they will spend up.'

Mr Lawson said selling through markets had also allowed him to connect with
wholesalers.

'Networking is important ' it's the whole point of the markets,' he said. 'And
it's fun.'

Networking is also important to Dennis Grimshaw, a familiar face at the
Castlereagh Seedsavers stall ' the starting point for many stallholders.

He is always willing to provide advice to market visitors who are inspired to
grow their own fruit and vegetables.

'The market has been one of the important ingredients for Seed Savers,' he said.
'People see a vegetable on display at the markets and they come and say 'have
you got a seed for that''?

For new stallholders, Charlie and Elke Simpson, the Mudgee Farmers markets are a
way to learn the basics of running a small business.

Charlie and Elke have been selling their home made lemonade at the markets for
the past two months, using lemons, limes and grapefruit from Lawson Farm.

'Last time we made $116 each,' said Charlie. 'This time is not as good, but we
are still having fun.'

Charlie and Elke said coming to the market had helped them learn about deducting
expenses before they calculate their profit.

'We'll keep doing it while the fruit lasts,' they said.

Australian Farmers' Markets Association (AFMA) chair Jane Adams said the RIRDC
report paints a very positive picture of farmers markets and will be a catalyst
for the sustainable growth of the sector in the future.

'Farmers' markets are a vital and increasingly significant link in Australia's
food chain and provide a valuable distribution channel connecting farmers and
specialty food producers directly with customers.

'This significant national study will be pivotal in supporting the continued
evolution of Australia's farmers' markets, especially in alerting government to
the viability of the farmers' market sector and the role it plays in supporting
food producers and regional communities.'

- 70 per cent of stallholders who participated in the RIRDC survey said farmers
markets were critical, important or very important to making sales outside the
market;

- 73 per cent of respondents participate in more than one market;

- 49 per cent of respondents use markets to grow their businesses;

- 81 per cent said feedback from markets had influenced their produce range;

- 85 per cent said the ability to interact with customers was critical or very
important;

- The value of farmers markets to the Australia economy has been estimated at
$80 million.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              685 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Mudgee Guardian

                                 June 22, 2014

The future is at the Mudgee farmers' market

SECTION: COMMUNITY

LENGTH: 1142  words


It's the third Saturday of the month, and the Mudgee Farmers' Market is bustling
with locals looking for a bacon and egg roll, a coffee and a chat, stallholders
offering the best of locally grown and made produce and food, and visitors keen
to take home a tasty souvenir.

Visitors know that the Mudgee Farmers Markets' is the place to go for fresh
fruit, vegetables and meat for their weekend lunch, their favourite relish or
jam, or freshly made bread.

But a recent report from the Rural Industries Research and Development
Corporation (RIRDC) confirms that the benefits of farmers' markets to shoppers,
farmers, value-added businesses and local communities goes far beyond bread,
jams and fresh vegetables.

The RIRDC report found markets like the Mudgee Farmers' Markets play an
important part in local economies, allow stallholders to test and improve new
products and find new markets, and help to 'incubate' fledgling businesses.

By giving consumers access to fresh, local, seasonal food directly from the
producer, markets also encourage healthy lifestyles by helping consumers to
learn more about how food was produced and how to use it.

The report found 19 per cent of Australians purchase vegetables at least once a
month from a farmers' market, and with the trend towards locally-produced,
environmentally friendly and healthy products, this number is predicted to rise.

Mudgee Fine Foods treasurer John Grant, who was among those who participated in
the RIRDC survey, agreed with the report's finding that markets were an
important launching pad for new businesses.

'I couldn't have got my business running without the market and it's still the
main outlet for my bread' said Mr Grant, who started Mudgee Sourdough in 2008.
'I'm at a point where I can sell everything I make.'

Mr Grant said the Mudgee Farmers' Market operates to strict guidelines, where
stallholders must come from within 100km of Mudgee and products sold have been
grown, reared, caught, brewed, pickled, baked, smoked or processed by the
stallholders themselves.

'I think our customers appreciate that they can speak directly with producers
and that's what makes our farmers' market different from many others.

'It's all got to be fresh and local produce'.

Mr Grant said because the Mudgee Farmers Markets have a high proportion of
visitors from other areas, there is a higher proportion of valued-added products
such as jams and chutneys, which appeal to travellers looking for something to
take home.

But the flexibility of the markets also allows home producers to have stalls, or
to sell excess produce through the community table, he said.

'That's the great community aspect of the market.'

Mr Grant said the Mudgee Farmers' Markets regularly attracts around 35 stalls,
depending on the season, but can have up to 50 on the busiest weekends.

A key to the growth of the market has been Mudgee Fine Foods' decision to employ
Liz Mayberry as a professional market manager, instead of relying on volunteers.

'Liz has been very important to the market and to ensuring the success that it
is,' he said.

Market newcomer Jodie Polkinghorne has in the past used the community stall to
sell produce from her garden, but has recently branched out into her own stall.

Ms Polkinghorne said as a newcomer to the town, the market had helped her to
make friends.

'I've always grown vegetables,' she said. 'It's a hobby, but this is a good way
to make some money.'

At the other end of the scale, George Attard of Belleview Hobby Farm attends
markets in Penrith, the Blue Mountains and Sydney.

Mr Attard, who has been a regular at Mudgee for two years, said the appeal of
market produce was simple: 'It's fresh'.

'Local people know where it's grown so they keep on coming,' he said.

Richard Lawson of Fig Tree Food and Music has been coming to the market as a
stallholder and musician since 1998.

He now sells his produce at markets from Canberra to Newcastle, but says the
Mudgee Farmers' Markets are among the best in NSW.

'Mudgee Fine Foods is great at galvanising the food community and publicising
and networking,' he said.

He said the markets were an important way of testing and refining products.

'You know exactly what people like and what they don't,' he said. 'Visitors will
turn up and buy three of something, and then you also get return customers.

'A lot of the tourists are impulse buyers. They're on holidays and if they find
they right food they will spend up.'

Mr Lawson said selling through markets had also allowed him to connect with
wholesalers.

'Networking is important ' it's the whole point of the markets,' he said. 'And
it's fun.'

Networking is also important to Dennis Grimshaw, a familiar face at the
Castlereagh Seedsavers stall ' the starting point for many stallholders.

He is always willing to provide advice to market visitors who are inspired to
grow their own fruit and vegetables.

'The market has been one of the important ingredients for Seed Savers,' he said.
'People see a vegetable on display at the markets and they come and say 'have
you got a seed for that''?

For new stallholders, Charlie and Elke Simpson, the Mudgee Farmers markets are a
way to learn the basics of running a small business.

Charlie and Elke have been selling their home made lemonade at the markets for
the past two months, using lemons, limes and grapefruit from Lawson Farm.

'Last time we made $116 each,' said Charlie. 'This time is not as good, but we
are still having fun.'

Charlie and Elke said coming to the market had helped them learn about deducting
expenses before they calculate their profit.

'We'll keep doing it while the fruit lasts,' they said.

Australian Farmers' Markets Association (AFMA) chair Jane Adams said the RIRDC
report paints a very positive picture of farmers markets and will be a catalyst
for the sustainable growth of the sector in the future.

'Farmers' markets are a vital and increasingly significant link in Australia's
food chain and provide a valuable distribution channel connecting farmers and
specialty food producers directly with customers.

'This significant national study will be pivotal in supporting the continued
evolution of Australia's farmers' markets, especially in alerting government to
the viability of the farmers' market sector and the role it plays in supporting
food producers and regional communities.'

- 70 per cent of stallholders who participated in the RIRDC survey said farmers
markets were critical, important or very important to making sales outside the
market;

- 73 per cent of respondents participate in more than one market;

- 49 per cent of respondents use markets to grow their businesses;

- 81 per cent said feedback from markets had influenced their produce range;

- 85 per cent said the ability to interact with customers was critical or very
important;

- The value of farmers markets to the Australia economy has been estimated at
$80 million.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              686 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 29, 1993 Saturday

Dishing the 'straight poop' on the 'Dan Quayle thing'   IN PERSON"Actor Grant
Shaud, who plays the neurotic television   producer on the hit sitcom Murphy
Brown, is shy and reserved   in real life. He ducked controversy when the show
became a   political hot potato last year, but he does have strong views

BYLINE: LIAM LACEY; GAM

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: Toronto ONT


BY LIAM LACEY
Television Critic
  Toronto
 THE young man who answers the hotel-room door is dressed in jeans and a
casual shirt; he's forgettably handsome with a wiry build and a shy
manner. His name is Grant Shaud, which probably means nothing to most
people.

But imagine him with wire-frame black glasses, an edge of nasal whine
in the voice and dress him in a natty blazer and slacks. Instantly, he
would be recognizable to millions as Miles Silverberg, star of Murphy
Brown, one of television's most popular and certainly most controversial
situation comedies of the past five years. He's the Maalox-addicted young
producer, the nemesis of feisty anchorwoman, Murphy Brown, played by
Candice Bergen.

At the end of a tumultuous season, the 31-year-old actor is in Toronto
this week for a guest appearance on The Dini Petty Show where the talk
turns to getting Murphy Brown out of the headlines and back on track as a
comedy. Inevitably, this invites comparison to the media hoopla over the
Cheers finale. "What an amazing amount of hype," Shaud says, shaking his
head in bewilderment. "It was almost as bad as the Dan Quayle thing. . .
.

The "Dan Quayle thing" refers to former vice-president Quayle's attack
on Murphy Brown last May, in which he suggested that, by having a child
out of wedlock, Murphy Brown was contributing to the sort of social
anarchy that caused the L.A. riots. The show's producers decided to have
Murphy respond to Quayle's "family-values" platform on the air in a
special one-hour season opener last September. (That episode will be
rebroadcast on June 7.)
   At the Emmy Awards, a line of performers - including Murphy Brown
creator Diane English - lashed out at Quayle. Subsequently, Bergen
appeared on the cover of Time magazine for an issue on Hollywood's
influence on politics.

At the time, Shaud ducked the controversy. He avoided the Emmy Awards,
and he is, by habit, reserved. In fact, until last year, when he helped
promote his part in Eddie Murphy's flop comedy The Distinguished
Gentleman, Shaud did no interviews.

A year later, Shaud's response to the Quayle episode is an awkward
grimace. It was not one of his favourite moments on the show: "Look, I'm a
registered Democrat, but my time in Hollywood has turned me more and more
conservative. Is it possible to say that maybe Dan Quayle had a point?
There is a Hollywood elite, which is in denial about their agenda, their
desire to tell everyone what's best for them without offering much
perspective or subtlety. Not everyone who is a Republican is Jessie Helms.
Again, it's a matter of giving audiences credit for an instinctive ability
to discern whether they're being given the straight poop, rather than
saying 'This is how you should feel.' "
   Five years ago, Shaud, then a struggling Broadway actor (he was an
understudy in Harvey Fierstein's Torch Song Trilogy and has acted with
John Turturro and Ellen Barkin), was interviewed, and then passed over for
a part on Murphy Brown. With just five days to go before taping the show's
pilot episode, the husband-and-wife producers, Joel Shukovsky and Diane
English, made a desperate call to artistic directors in New York for the
part of Miles (a character based on Shukovsky's personality).

Shaud's name came up - someone had seen him do a play reading in a New
York restaurant - and he was invited to make an audition tape. The
producers liked him, and though network executives tried to reject him
again, English insisted he was the right actor for the part.

Her insistence, says Shaud, was his first clue to what it takes to
create a success in television, why a few sitcoms work and so many fail:
"There has to be someone at the top with a vision, who remains true to
that vision, and is not guided by what they think the public wants, or
networks tell them. You think of Taxi and Cheers with James Burrows, the
Mary Tyler Moore Show, with James Brooks. And then, Diane (English).
There's always a key person, who makes it original.

"I believe that networks frequently underrate the audience's
instinctually positive reaction to originality. It's a very fear-based
industry. You'll have people constantly checking their own reactions: 'Do
you think that was funny?' 'I thought it was funny.' 'Maybe it wasn't
funny. What do you think?' "
   As for Murphy Brown, Shaud says, frankly, that the show needs a
shakeup:
   "There was certainly a big difference between the first year and the
fifth," he says. "Diane English left after last year, and the writers
suddenly had Murphy's baby to deal with. And the first episode they had to
write was the response to Dan Quayle, which because of public interest and
advertisers' pressure and everything, ended up as an hour-long show, which
it shouldn't really have been. Altogether, the past season has been a bit
of a lull as far as the writing's concerned. Next year, they're going to
focus it back in the workplace a bit more, because essentially it is a
workplace comedy."

Domestic tenderness has been an awkward fit in a comedy of hard-edged
characters who frequently play their parts loudly and broadly.

"That was something that they pounded home to us in the first two
seasons," Shaud agrees. "Send that line in the mail.' Make it clear. So
much depends on the energy and the pacing. Murphy Brown is about a lot of
high-pressure people. It's not like Cheers, which is more of an Everyman
situation, and is set in a bar, where the pace is far more casual."

For the first couple of seasons, says Shaud, he was still thinking as a
theatre actor, worrying about which variation of a scene would be most
effective. But he noticed that other actors, especially Faith Ford (who
plays former beauty queen Corky Sherwood), would relax between scenes and
"when the camera's on, suddenly she's Judy Holliday."

For Shaud, sitcoms are at their best when they accept the absurdity of
comic conventions, not when they attempt to hit "meaningful moments" or to
highlight social issues. "We had an episode where Miles had an affair with
his boss' wife, after he picked her up in a bar. Nobody bothered
explaining why Miles would be picking up a woman in a bar. We just
accepted it. And suddenly, that became a new dimension to Miles'
character."

Such liberties, says Shaud, keep his character creatively interesting,
though he recognizes the strict limits of the form. There is a golden rule
of network sitcoms - the characters must be, on some level, likable: "Even
if we're playing characters that are, objectively speaking, obnoxious, the
audience should be sympathetic," says Shaud. "We are, in fact, one of the
most cohesive sets on television - a group of pretty nice people who
genuinely like each other. Week after week, I think, our underlying
personalities come through the characters, and that's why audiences allow
us so much latitude."

"We could play it differently. Did you see the film Glengarry, Glen
Ross? Imagine that cast doing Murphy Brown."

And he adds, a little wistfully: "Not that I wouldn't want to do that
kind of acting some day myself."

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1993 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              687 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Sentinel (Carlisle, Pennsylvania)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           December 1, 2016 Thursday

Cumberland County agri-businesses receive grants

BYLINE: The Sentinel, Carlisle, Pa.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 439 words


Dec. 01--The United States department of Agriculture recently awarded five
Cumberland County agri-businesses value-added grants to boost economic planning
work.

The Cumberland Area Economic Development Corporation announced the grants this
week. CAEDC directed partners to the grant program and/or wrote a letter of
support for Eleven Oaks, The Winery at Long Shot Farm, Toigo Orchards and
Warrington Farm Meats.

"We have a great working relationship with CAEDC and CAEDC helped to publicize
the Value Added Producer Grant (VAPG) program to Cumberland County agricultural
businesses, with several of those businesses being approved for a VAPG grant,"
USDA Area Specialist Rob Lane said. "CAEDC has been a great partner with USDA in
helping assist rural Pennsylvania businesses."

CAEDC officials said in a news release that these five projects tie directly
back to the group's focus on growing and expanding agri-business in Cumberland
County laid out in its Strategic Economic Development Plan.

Here are the projects:

Eleven Oaks Farms LLC (Newville) -- $250,000

To provide professional media, marketing and social media; direct sales and
customer service/fulfillment for the custom beef processing.

The Winery at Long Shot Farm LLC (Carlisle) -- $47,550

To finish and bottle wine, which is produced primarily from grapes and
blackberries grown at the Long Shot Farm.

Toigo Orchards (Shippensburg) -- $250,000

Get breaking news sent instantly to your inbox

5C84B893BD6D939E951F538A3E73E89B html subscribe The Sentinel Newspaper  EST
email@newsletter.cumberlink.com

Sign Up!

I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site consitutes
agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.

To pay labor and marketing costs to increase the volume of produce sold by Toigo
Orchards at existing farmers markets, expand into new markets, and increase
distribution of locally grown produce to wholesalers, retailers, and
distributors in Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia and Washington D.C.

Warrington Farm Meats (Carlisle & Dillsburg) -- Amount TBD

To pay for packaging, new labels, marketing and advertising.

Sunny Brae Hops (Carlisle) -- $31,198

To purchase processing supplies, packaging materials, and marketing items to
produce and sell local pelletized hops to craft breweries and homebrewers.

CAEDC is Cumberland County's authorized agency charged with leveraging and
promoting Cumberland Valley's economic development and tourism assets to drive
growth, create jobs and improve the quality of life.

___ (c)2016 The Sentinel (Carlisle, Pa.) Visit The Sentinel (Carlisle, Pa.) at
www.cumberlink.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20161201-JV-Cumberland-County-agri-businesses-receive-grants
-1201-20161201

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JV


                          Copyright 2016 The Sentinel


                              688 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     News Bites - Australian Stock Exchange

                            December 4, 2007 Tuesday

Abra plans HNG joint venture

LENGTH: 201 words


Abra Mining Ltd will enter a joint venture with Hunan Nonferrous Metals Holdings
Group Co Ltd over Mining Lease 52/776, which covers the 100 percent owned Abra
lead-silver-zinc-copper-gold deposit in Western Australia.

Abra will make a placement of 10 million shares to HNG at 34c per share. Subject
to all necessary approvals Abra will grant an option to HNG to purchase 10
million shares at 39c each, exercisable on execution of the joint venture
agreement.

HNG is the largest integrated nonferrous metal producer in China, with upstream
exploration, mining and processing, and downstream smelting, refinery and
research and development operations. It is the largest producer of finished lead
and zinc products in China and the third largest producer of finished lead and
zinc products in the world.

STOCK DASHBOARD: DECEMBER 4, 2007

ABRA MINING

Price at 2:23 pm: 43c

Price change from previous trading day: +14.67%

Relative Strength (6 months percentile rank): 96.2

Market capitalisation: $38.65 million

Turnover volume: 775,091

Volume Index (1 is average): 4.8

Turnover value: $348,796

Turnover period: 465 days

Value of $1,000 invested 1 year ago: $1,955

Source: www.BuySellTips.com

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Joint Ventures

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2007 News Bites Pty Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                         Australian Company News Bites


                              689 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Diamond Valley Leader (Australia)

                          September 30, 2009 Wednesday
                                 1 - DV Edition

Rate relief struggle Food producers press for `fair go'

BYLINE: Farming| Shaun Turton

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 317  words


LOW rainfall and small economic returns are placing Diamond Valley's future
identity as a gourmet food producer at risk, local growers say.

Farmers said more rain was the only silver bullet, but local and state
governments could provide more support by increasing rate subsidies and
expanding ``exceptional circumstances'' grants.

Victorian Farmers Federation Whittlesea branch president Judy Clements said
Nillumbik's present rate subsidy of 10 per cent needed to be increased.

``We have really struggled in getting local councils to consider farm rates
seriously enough,'' Ms Clements said.

She said the region's proximity to the city meant farmers faced

``incredibly high'' rates determined on land values rather than the commercial
value of their business.

Nillumbik councillor Ken King, who owns a Kangaroo Ground vineyard, said the
farm rate was not giving many local producers a fair go.

``I think it's very important residents are given an incentive to produce
food,''Cr King said.

``Smaller-block agriculture does have a future. We're becoming more appealing to
the people of Melbourne as a resource to get organic produce, especially with
the resurgence of farmers markets.''

Nillumbik Council spokeswoman Joanne Hammond said the subsidy rate was extended
to 115 local farmers, and the council was not considering increasing it.

The Shire of Yarra Ranges gives farmers a 30 per cent rate subsidy.

Nutfield cattle farmer Julie Sutherland said more discounts would help but
steady, prolonged rain was the only quick fix.

Malcolm Smith from Rural Finance, which administers government support programs,
said although the area was declared ``exceptional circumstances'' for drought,
most local farmers were not eligible because of extra income they earned off the
farm.

Cr King said the Green Wedge Management Plan, due out later this year, would
look at incentives for farmers.

Stories from the farmers, Page 11.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: DVV


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              690 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  The Daily Republic (Mitchell, South Dakota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 12, 2011 Saturday

$25 million rail project proposed near Kimball

BYLINE: Austin Kaus, The Daily Republic, Mitchell, S.D.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 671 words


March 12--KIMBALL -- The fate of a $25 million railroad project to be located
between Kimball and White Lake that could create jobs, reduce transport time and
increase profits for farmers appears to be in the hands of Congress.

Chuck Jepson, of Harrold, said Friday he and some business partners have an
option to buy a piece of land along the Dakota Southern Railway between Kimball
and White Lake.

If a $16 million grant designated to rebuild the state-owned rail line from
Mitchell to Chamberlain makes it through Congress, Jepson said he and other
investors will begin work on a $25 million shuttle grain facility on property
near the junction of state Highway 45 and Interstate 90. He estimates the
project could create at least seven permanent jobs in the area and save money
for producers who now truck their grain longer distances.

Whether or not the grant, announced last year, will come through is unknown.

Earlier this week, U.S. Sen. Tim Johnson, D-S.D., said the passage of
legislation known as HR 1 -- which failed this week in the Senate -- would have
eliminated the grant.

"Cutting the railroad money is typical of the meat-axe approach to cutting
government spending in the House bill," he said in a news release ahead of the
Senate vote.

HR 1 is a broad spending bill that proposed to cut federal expenditures by $60
billion during the rest of the current fiscal year. When it passed the House on
Feb. 19, Rep. Kristi Noem, R-S.D., voted for it. Sen. John Thune, R-S.D., also
voted for it Wednesday in the Senate, while Johnson voted against it. The
failure of the bill and a competing Democratic spending measure sent Congress
into further negotiations on a spending bill for the rest of the fiscal year.

The fate of the grant controls the fate of the project, Jepson said.

"Our whole deal is predicated on this grant going through," Jepson said. "If the
railroad doesn't come through, everybody packs up and goes home."

Kimball Mayor Wayne Tupper said the completed project would increase the profits
of local farmers who would have to travel less to transport their wares and
bring overall economic stimulation to the area.

"It's hard to put a value on how much it's going to up the price of grain
locally but, to the farmers in this area, it's just phenomenal," Tupper said.
"It's just endless as to what this means to our community."

Jepson said the project would involve a 9,000-pound circular track that would
allow between 110 and 120 rail cars to be loaded with approximately 450,000
bushels of grain in 15 hours. The grain would then be transported to markets in
the Pacific Northwest that have recently been opened to producers in central
South Dakota.

"Essentially, we call it an elevator on steroids," Jepson said.

Jepson estimates area farmers would gain an additional 15 cents per bushel by
using the shuttle loader.

Jepson said a fertilizer plant could eventually be added along the line. He's
also open to adding other rail-oriented businesses to the area.

"We are very aggressive at looking at other business creation," said Jepson, who
is involved with an elevator in Harrold as well as a proposed shuttle-loader
project in Miller. "If somebody had an idea that would fit on the railroad,
we're going to have other property available."

Tupper said other companies have expressed interest in doing similar projects in
the area, although he said he could not comment on locations being considered.

While excited about what the potential projects could mean for the area, Tupper
said he's waiting to see what happens with HR 1.

"You can't do anything until we know what the fate of that is," Tupper said. "If
that doesn't go through, all of this is for naught."

To see more of The Daily Republic, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.mitchellrepublic.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Daily Republic,
Mitchell, S.D. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110312-JQ-25-million-rail-project-proposed-near-Kimball-0312-20110312

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JQ


                       Copyright 2011 The Daily Republic


                              691 of 998 DOCUMENTS



               South Burnett Times and Rural Weekly (Queensland)

                                November 8, 2013

Plans afoot to boost sales to China

SECTION: Pg. 7

LENGTH: 329  words



HIGHLIGHT: Export opportunities


FOOD producers are being called on to help Toowoomba and Surat Basin Enterprise
facilitate export opportunities in China.

TSBE is working on a project aimed at identifying new premium markets in middle
class China for food (particularly protein foods and related food by-products)
and linking these opportunities to producers in our region.

The TSBE was awarded a grant earlier in the year under the Australian
Government's inaugural Asian Century Business Engagement Plan to facilitate the
project.

It will be delivered over the next two years and will involve extensive market
research in China to identify specific growing market opportunities for protein
foods, along with an analysis of protein food currently being produced in the
Darling Downs and Surat Basin region.

TSBE is now gathering information regarding our region's food production
capability and inviting food producers to complete a short survey.

TSBE agriculture projects manager Jo Sheppard said the future of the
agricultural sector was critical to our region and Asian opportunities were
going to play a significant part in growth opportunities for the sector over the
next 10 to 20 years.

"We are keen to establish a strong, relevant business network between our region
and Asia to ensure businesses are well placed to take advantage of opportunities
as they present themselves," Ms Sheppard said.

"In general terms, we are looking to understand what food is being produced in
the region, including volume and value, which are the key businesses and which
of these businesses are interested in finding a new market.

"It is so important that we are on the front foot and forge the necessary
relationships to get our head around identifying the prospects now.

"If you are a food producer, I invite you to participate in this project.

"The survey will only take about five minutes to complete but the results are
likely to have significant benefits to businesses in the region."

Visit www.surveymonkey. com/s/DCCRGLP.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TRW


                    Copyright 2013 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              692 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 11, 2016 Monday

Virginia: Adding value pays off for Virginia cattle producers

LENGTH: 702  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Richmond: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University has issued the
following news release:



 With more than 1.4 million head of cattle across the commonwealth, Virginia's
beef cattle industry is big business.



 But while the cattle market has been favorable over the past few years,
producers understand the need to continually improve their operations to stay
competitive.





 The Virginia Quality Assured certified feeder cattle program provides producers
with the means to add value to their cattle, enabling them to receive premium
prices for their calves.



 Virginia Cooperative Extension partnered with the Virginia Cattlemen's
Association to develop and administer the program, which encourages the use of
research-based health and best management practices for feeder cattle.
Participants are eligible to market feeder cattle through the Virginia Quality
Assured initiative.



 Feeder cattle are tagged with purple tags to to verify that they have met the
Virginia Quality Assured program standards.



 The program, which started in 1997, has marketed more than 125,000 head of
feeder cattle, resulting in $6.4 million in value-added income for Virginia's
beef cattle producers.



 "Having the ability to add value to Virginia's beef cattle operations is
critical to the sustainability of Virginia agriculture and rural communities,"
said Scott Greiner, Virginia Cooperative Extension beef cattle specialist.



 The initiative would not prosper without the coordinated efforts of all parties
involved.



 "Part of what makes this program so successful in our area is the collaboration
among Extension agents, the Virginia Cattlemen's Association, Virginia
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Abingdon Feeder Cattle
Association, Tri-State Livestock Market, and the producers," said Scott Jessee,
agriculture and natural resources Extension agent in Russell County. "We all
have a role to play."



 Throughout the year, Jessee and his fellow Extension agents and specialists
provide producers with valuable health, management, genetic, and marketing
information. This education is offered through a variety of methods, including
field days, on-farm visits, group meetings and workshops, demonstrations, and
distance learning. Extension agents also serve as third-party verifiers to
ensure that producers have followed the required vaccination and management
protocols. The eligible animals are evaluated and described by VDACS livestock
marketing representatives. The cattle are then grouped by similar traits and
offered for sale in truckload lots at scheduled intervals on the Virginia
Cattlemen's Association Tel-O-Auction. The livestock market provides the
facility and equipment to sort, weigh, and load out cattle.



 "Having the cattle groups in tractor trailer loads allows the producers to
reach a different level of buyer," said Jessee.



 Philip Bundy, a Russell County cattle producer and president of the Abingdon
Feeder Cattle Association, has been marketing cattle through the program since
it started in Southwest Virginia 11 years ago.



 "We've built a reputation of providing high-quality, weaned feeder calves,"
said Bundy, a Virginia Tech graduate. "Our cattle are highly sought after, and
we are now outselling western cattle."



 The program has taken off in the past couple of years. In 2014, producers in
Southwest Virginia more than doubled the number of cattle marketed through the
program in 2013.



 Virginia Cooperative Extension brings the resources of Virginia's land-grant
universities, Virginia Tech and Virginia State University, to the people of the
commonwealth. Through a system of on-campus specialists and locally based
educators, it delivers education in the areas of agriculture and natural
resources, family and consumer sciences, community viability, and 4-H youth
development. With a network of faculty at two universities, 107 county and city
offices, 11 agricultural research and Extension centers, and six 4-H educational
centers, Virginia Cooperative Extension provides solutions to the problems
facing Virginians today.

 Written by Lori Greiner



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.co

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              693 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             January 8, 2016 Friday

Virginia: Adding value pays off for Virginia cattle producers

LENGTH: 702  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Richmond: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University has issued the
following news release:



 With more than 1.4 million head of cattle across the commonwealth, Virginia's
beef cattle industry is big business.



 But while the cattle market has been favorable over the past few years,
producers understand the need to continually improve their operations to stay
competitive.





 The Virginia Quality Assured certified feeder cattle program provides producers
with the means to add value to their cattle, enabling them to receive premium
prices for their calves.



 Virginia Cooperative Extension partnered with the Virginia Cattlemen's
Association to develop and administer the program, which encourages the use of
research-based health and best management practices for feeder cattle.
Participants are eligible to market feeder cattle through the Virginia Quality
Assured initiative.



 Feeder cattle are tagged with purple tags to to verify that they have met the
Virginia Quality Assured program standards.



 The program, which started in 1997, has marketed more than 125,000 head of
feeder cattle, resulting in $6.4 million in value-added income for Virginia's
beef cattle producers.



 "Having the ability to add value to Virginia's beef cattle operations is
critical to the sustainability of Virginia agriculture and rural communities,"
said Scott Greiner, Virginia Cooperative Extension beef cattle specialist.



 The initiative would not prosper without the coordinated efforts of all parties
involved.



 "Part of what makes this program so successful in our area is the collaboration
among Extension agents, the Virginia Cattlemen's Association, Virginia
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Abingdon Feeder Cattle
Association, Tri-State Livestock Market, and the producers," said Scott Jessee,
agriculture and natural resources Extension agent in Russell County. "We all
have a role to play."



 Throughout the year, Jessee and his fellow Extension agents and specialists
provide producers with valuable health, management, genetic, and marketing
information. This education is offered through a variety of methods, including
field days, on-farm visits, group meetings and workshops, demonstrations, and
distance learning. Extension agents also serve as third-party verifiers to
ensure that producers have followed the required vaccination and management
protocols. The eligible animals are evaluated and described by VDACS livestock
marketing representatives. The cattle are then grouped by similar traits and
offered for sale in truckload lots at scheduled intervals on the Virginia
Cattlemen's Association Tel-O-Auction. The livestock market provides the
facility and equipment to sort, weigh, and load out cattle.



 "Having the cattle groups in tractor trailer loads allows the producers to
reach a different level of buyer," said Jessee.



 Philip Bundy, a Russell County cattle producer and president of the Abingdon
Feeder Cattle Association, has been marketing cattle through the program since
it started in Southwest Virginia 11 years ago.



 "We've built a reputation of providing high-quality, weaned feeder calves,"
said Bundy, a Virginia Tech graduate. "Our cattle are highly sought after, and
we are now outselling western cattle."



 The program has taken off in the past couple of years. In 2014, producers in
Southwest Virginia more than doubled the number of cattle marketed through the
program in 2013.



 Virginia Cooperative Extension brings the resources of Virginia's land-grant
universities, Virginia Tech and Virginia State University, to the people of the
commonwealth. Through a system of on-campus specialists and locally based
educators, it delivers education in the areas of agriculture and natural
resources, family and consumer sciences, community viability, and 4-H youth
development. With a network of faculty at two universities, 107 county and city
offices, 11 agricultural research and Extension centers, and six 4-H educational
centers, Virginia Cooperative Extension provides solutions to the problems
facing Virginians today.

 Written by Lori Greiner



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.co

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              694 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                       The Quoddy Tides (Eastport, Maine)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                 July 10, 2015

Tide Mill receives poultry production funds

BYLINE: The Quoddy Tides staff

LENGTH: 213  words


Women-owned or co-owned farms and agribusinesses that have recently received
assistance through USDA Rural Development programs include Tide Mill Organics in
Edmunds. Tide Mill, a small family farm, received $49,770 to provide working
capital so it can increase production and expand sales of its packaged organic
poultry from roughly 11,500 to 20,000 birds annually.

With a growing number of farms in Maine -- 8,173 farms, up from 7,196 in 2002 --
there is little surprise that Maine's entrepreneurial women are taking up
farming as a way of life. A total of 29% of Maine's farmers are women, and they
are finding opportunities through the USDA Rural Development programs.

USDA Rural Development Deputy Secretary Krysta Harden says, "We want to make
sure the programs work, are flexible, are creative enough and are there for
folks who need them. There is a new awakening for women [in farming]."

In recent years, USDA Rural Development has seen an increase in the number of
women applying for and receiving funding through two programs that assist Maine
farmers, agricultural businesses and producers: the USDA Rural Energy for
America Program (REAP), which promotes the installation of renewable energy and
energy-efficient systems; and the Value-Added Producer Grant Program (VAPG).

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Accomplishment

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QDY

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2015 The Quoddy Tides


                              695 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                  The State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL)

                             March 4, 2003 Tuesday

Cattle producers must follow new rules

SECTION: MARKETPLACE; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 615 words


Better write it down or log it into your computer.

Cattle producers are being told to immediately begin keeping records and
tracking their cattle, all part of the preparation needed for the newly passed
Country of Origin Labeling law. The rule, part of the new farm bill passed by
Congress last year, takes effect Sept. 30, 2004.  It requires fresh meat, fish
and produce to be labeled by country of origin in grocery stores.

"Our position was one of support when it was voluntary," said Terry Stokes, CEO
of the National Cattlemen's Beef Association. "Now it's mandatory. And the
question is, how do we implement a law without adding additional costs to
producers? We don't know what the value is to the consumer. Will they be willing
to pay?"

Stokes listed the country-of-origin labeling among the top concerns of cattle
producers when he was in Springfield recently for the Illinois Performance
Tested Bull Sale. The other concerns were the drought out West, environmental
issues and food safety.

A spokesman for Swift & Co., based in Greeley, Colo., which has more than 8,000
beef producers and 7,300 pork producers who raise meat for them, has said
producers must start keeping records of the origin of their livestock starting
with cattle born in February. The place of birth must be documented as well as
where the animal spends its life. The documents will be maintained by producers
and provided to packers.

The company also told hog and sheep suppliers to begin documenting those
animals' country of origin on any animals born in December or later.

The law means consumers will be able to determine at grocery stores where meat
came from. All livestock born, raised and slaughtered in the United States will
be labeled as such when the final product arrives at grocery stores.

Producers are hoping consumers will prefer American hogs over Canadian or
Mexican, and American beef over Argentine or Australian.

Ethanol update

Lincolnland Agri-Energy LLC is building a new $57 million ethanol plant in
Palestine in Crawford County. More than 450 local farmers have invested a
combined $13.4 million in the facility, the sixth in the state, and it will
produce 40 million gallons of ethanol.

Adkins Energy of Lena was the first farmer-owned plant to begin production of 40
million gallons annually last August. There are up to a half a dozen
farmer-investor groups assessing plans for similar plants across the state.

"At times like these, with war looming on the horizon in the Middle East, it
becomes very clear how much we need to develop and broaden our existing
infrastructure for fuels made in the U.S.," said Ken Green, Illinois Corn
Marketing Board chairman and a farmer from Durand.

The Lincolnland Agri-Energy ethanol plant is expected to create 38 full-time
jobs, while boosting the demand for Illinois corn by 15 million bushels a year.
The state Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity provided a $25,000
business-planning grant for the project last year. In addition, it benefited
from the federal Community Development Assistance Program also administered by
DCEO. And the Corn Marketing Board assisted early on with a $20,000 grant to
explore the facility's feasibility.

Ethanol, a renewable fuel made from corn, is principally used as a gasoline
additive to enhance octane and increase the oxygen level in the fuel so that it
burns more cleanly, improving the quality of vehicle emissions and engine
performance.

Congress again is considering renewable-fuel-standards legislation that would
increase the demand for ethanol to 5 billion gallons by 2012. Currently, more
than 2.6 billion gallons are being produced.

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LOCAL. COLUMN

                   Copyright 2003 The State Journal-Register


                              696 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                        October 30, 1985, Wednesday, ME2

U.S. agency to probe wood shingle imports from Canada

BYLINE: CP

SECTION: BUSINESS TODAY; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 206 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


   WASHINGTON (CP) - The U.S. International Trade Commission has agreed to
investigate demands by American producers that imports of Canadian wood shingles
and shakes be restricted by quotas or tariffs.

A coalition of U.S. manufacturers argue in a petition to the commission that
increased imports from Canada are harming domestic producers of shingles and
shakes used for roofing and siding.

Canada shipped $182.6 million (U.S.) worth of shingles and shakes to the United
States last year, up 22 per cent from the 1980 value, the coalition said. The
imports accounted for about 67 per cent of U.S. consumption last year, compared
with 57 per cent in 1980.

Industry complaints

The five-member commission is a quasi-judicial, government-appointed body that
deals with U.S. industry complaints about import competition and unfair foreign
trade practices.

The commission has until March 25 to decide whether import protection is
warranted and what form it should take.

U.S. producers sought imposition of a countervailing duty on Canadian imports of
shingles and shakes in 1982 but the case was dismissed after the U.S. commerce
department ruled that subsidies available to Canadian producers were
insignificant.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1985 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              697 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Weekly Times (Australia)

                           October 15, 2008 Wednesday
                               1 - FIRST Edition

VFF to play role of honest broker

BYLINE: PETER HEMPHILL

SECTION: CROPS; Pg. 94

LENGTH: 410 words


THE Victorian Farmers Federation grains group has joined forces with broker
Agfarm Pty Ltd to provide a grain brokerage service to the state's growers.

VFF grains group president Geoff Nalder said the federation had formed an
alliance with Agfarm until next March, after which it was hoped a more formal
partnership could be negotiated.

Mr Nalder said the arrangement meant Agfarm would act as an agent for producers
to sell their crop, especially with the loss of the wheat single desk.

Agfarm is linked to Clear, an on-line computer clearing house which matches
grain buyers with sellers.

Clear was developed by former AWB trading manager Bob McKay, former St Kilda
football coach Grant Thomas and computer programmers Martin Howell and Dominic
Pym.

Mr Nalder said the link to Clear would give growers direct access to
international traders and greater security of payment.

Agfarm operates offices in NSW and Western Australia, with one recently opened
in Wagga Wagga.

Mr Nalder said calls from Victorian farmers to Agfarm would be dealt with by the
Wagga Wagga staff, but a Victorian office could be opened soon.

Mr Nalder said Agfarm would provide market analysis and discuss marketing
options with growers based on their individual risk tolerance.

``Agfarm will do the contract negotiation and documentation, including any title
transfers, keeping it simple and time-efficient,'' he said.

Agfarm will be paid a commission of 1 per cent of the value of the product sold
and the VFF will take a share out of the commission to help run its head office.

Mr Nalder said the service would be open to all Victorian grain growers, but
eventually it would reward participants for being members of the VFF.

``This is a red letter day for grain producers in Victoria,'' he said.

``We have been frustrated by not being able to ascertain our (storage, handling
and freight) costs until we virtually get the headers into the crop.

``This brokerage service gives producers the ability to make one phone call to
get price discovery (for their grain).

``It opens up another avenue to market.''

The brokerage service evolved out of a survey of VFF members earlier this year
following a motion at the annual grains conference to look at setting up a
marketing co-operative.

The high cost of setting up a co-operative prior to harvest was an obstacle but
members were more interested in a brokerage service.

The VFF received a $35,000 Victorian Government grant to pursue the brokerage
service.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: WKT


                   Copyright 2008 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              698 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             July 11, 2013 Thursday

Ryan Coogler brings heart, talent to "Fruitvale"

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 1119 words


LOS ANGELES (AP) Ryan Coogler is back on the University of Southern California
campus for the first time since becoming one of the country"s most promising
young filmmakers, and he heads straight to the camera-rental center where he
worked as a student. He runs into a former classmate, who high-fives and
congratulates him, then asks for a photo. Coogler sheepishly obliges.

"This is inspiring, right here!" the younger man says as he snaps an iPhone shot
of himself and Coogler. "Thank you, bro!"

Coogler gives the student his email address, then looks for his old boss, the
equipment manager, who tells the 27-year-old filmmaker that he"s set a new
standard for success at USC"s film school, which counts Ron Howard and George
Lucas as alumni.

There"s no doubt he has. Coogler"s "Fruitvale Station" his first dramatic
feature and first project since graduating with a master"s degree in 2011 won
both jury and audience awards at the Sundance Film Festival, where the Weinstein
Co. outbid a dozen studios to distribute it. Originally called simply
"Fruitvale," the film opens Friday in New York and Los Angeles, and around the
nation later this month. Oscar buzz has already begun.

But nothing like that was on Coogler"s mind when he decided to make the film. A
native of Oakland, Calif., he was home for Christmas break during his first year
at film school when 22-year-old Oscar Grant was shot by transit police in the
city"s Fruitvale station on New Year"s Eve, 2009. Scores of witnesses filmed the
fatal shooting of the unarmed black man by white officer Johannes Mehserle on
their cellphones, and riots and protests exploded in Oakland and around the
country. (Mehserle was eventually convicted of involuntary manslaughter and
sentenced to two years behind bars.)

Coogler was also 22 then, looked like Grant and came from the same neighborhood.
It could have been him that night, he thought.

"I wanted to do something that could potentially have a proactive effect, that
could maybe trigger a thought process or a discussion that could possibly
prevent things like this from happening in the future," he said. "And I thought
a film could be effective in proving this person"s humanity."

Coogler has the athletic build of the football star he was, and a gregarious
personality that leads him to greet several students he passes on campus. But
there"s something deeper: A profound desire to tell stories that aren"t often
heard, stories of people like him, like Oscar Grant. It"s a passion that
inspired him to abandon dreams of medical school to pursue filmmaking.

It"s that drive, along with Coogler"s talent, that caught the eye of USC
professor Jed Dannenbaum, who contacted producer Nina Yang Bongiovi, telling her
there"s someone she had to meet.

"He"s truly brilliant," Bongiovi remembers the professor saying.

She met with Coogler, and he gave her some short films he"d made at school. She
watched them immediately and told collaborator Forest Whitaker, who"d been
seeking a young artist to mentor, that they just had to work with him.

"I felt he was going to be one of those important filmmakers of his generation,"
she said.

She set up a meeting between the Oscar winner and the college student, who
remembers wearing a shirt and tie to school that day.

"I was really nervous," Coogler said, recalling how he attended the meeting
between classes and had to bring his backpack along.

He told Whitaker his ideas for "Fruitvale," ""and he said he wanted to help me
make it," Coogler recalled, lighting up at the memory.

After signing on with Whitaker"s Significant Productions, the filmmaker
approached Grant"s family in the same humble, open-hearted way he dealt with his
classmates at USC.

"It was my first time making a film; I didn"t want to hide that," he said. "I
was young; I was the same age Oscar would have been had he still been alive, but
I thought those things were in my favor in many ways."

Coogler wasn"t looking to sensationalize anything. As a young, black Oakland
resident who saw himself and his friends in Grant, Coogler sincerely wanted to
reflect his neighborhood and the people he knew.

"I wasn"t trying to do this to further my career," he said. "I just wanted to
tell the story."

So with the family"s blessing and Whitaker"s support, he did, recounting the
last day in the 22-year-old"s life. The film shows his struggles with his
girlfriend and his prison past; his illuminating love for his young daughter and
desire to be a good dad; his devotion to his mom and grandmother; his penchant
for drug dealing and angry outbursts; and how much he meant to those closest to
him.

"Fruitvale" is not a documentary, but a dramatization based on court documents,
cellphone footage and extensive interviews with Grant"s family and friends.

"I feel like we put different values on different types of lives, just
inherently, and I think people like Oscar, their lives have very little value.
(We) see things like this happen all the time and don"t bat an eyelash," Coogler
said. "But these people are human beings, and their lives matter. And what
better way to get to the bottom of who he was than through the lens of (his)
relationships."

Michael B. Jordan, best known for his work on "The Wire" and "Friday Night
Lights," embodies his first leading role as the charming and conflicted Grant.
Grant"s mother is played by Octavia Spencer, who also hopped on board as a
producer, securing financing from investors including "The Help" author Kathryn
Stockett.

That the Trayvon Martin case is playing out while this film hits theaters
underscores the need for more stories like this, Coogler said.

"People who look like Oscar, who look like Trayvon, are dying every day on the
streets of our country not only being shot by a police officer or not only being
shot by somebody using vigilante tactics, but oftentimes being shot by someone
that looks just like them," he said. "These lives matter, and we shouldn"t just
stand by while this is happening."

Considering how much his life has changed since he left USC he"s made an
award-winning film, attended the Cannes Film Festival and is invited to ever
more Hollywood events makes Coogler even more cognizant of his blessings and
responsibilities as a storyteller.

He still lives in Oakland, maintains his day job at Juvenile Hall in San
Francisco and hopes to continue "to make things that are true to myself."

"I"m constantly reminded where my life could be were it not for a few things,
were it not for the parents that I had, or me being two inches here instead of
two inches there sometimes," he said. "I don"t think it"s something I ever plan
to forget."

___

AP Entertainment Writer Sandy Cohen is on Twitter: www.twitter.com/APSandy .

___

Online:

www.fruitvalefilm.com

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              699 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                           October 20, 2010 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Roderick Mann;
Hollywood showbiz writer who counted Cary Grant, Roger Moore and Liza Minnelli
among his friends

SECTION: FEATURES; OBITUARIES; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 773 words


For more than 40 years, Roddy Mann was that rarity in Fleet Street, a successful
showbusiness journalist and a genuine "friend of the stars". In an era before
excessive interest in the private lives of actors diminished them and the press
alike, Mann was able to maintain his readers' interest without breaking
confidences or inventing gossip. Accordingly celebrities gave him their trust:
he stepped out with Kim Novak; Cary Grant regarded him as a brother; and he gave
an address at Richard Burton's funeral.

He first made his name in London in the 1950s, when his "Mann About Town" column
became one of the chief attractions of a Sunday Express yet to begin its
decline. He became a widely syndicated entertainment writer for the newspaper
and then, in the late 1970s, moved to Hollywood, where he wrote in addition for
the Los Angeles Times.

Mann dismissed his skill as an interviewer as being nothing more than an ability
to listen. In truth, his subjects found him sympathetic because he did not
conform to their idea of a journalist. Although not greatly gregarious himself,
he knew how to be engaging without appearing pushy. He was aided, too, by a
well-mannered charm that was never bland, an intelligence that had not become
jaded, and by headturning masculine good looks.

He was also diligent. Mann saw five or six films a week, walking out on them if
they bored him, while at the peak of his fame his answering service would
receive up to 200 calls a day from producers and publicists seeking to place
articles. He interviewed Cybill Shepherd while she was standing on her head
doing her exercises, and from John Wayne learnt that he had turned down the lead
in Dirty Harry. Such was his standing that when Mann wrote a spoof story about a
fictional bon vivant, other newspapers followed it by claiming fresh sightings
of the playboy.

Mann particularly relished the opportunities offered by his work to travel. He
visited more than 100 countries, among them Afghanistan and Cambodia, but was
fondest of Italy. He managed to get to Capri some 45 times. Roaming the South of
France, he came to know Grace Kelly and David Niven, whom he cajoled into
writing what became a best-selling memoir, The Moon's a Balloon (1972). In 1976,
put ashore from John Mills's yacht rather farther from Cannes than expected, he,
Cary Grant and the producer Dan Melnick began to hitch-hike along the Croisette.
Half the town turned out to watch, though no-one picked them up.

Other friends included Robert Mitchum, Roger Moore, Liza Minnelli and Marcello
Mastroianni - and that was just one letter in his address book. Yet Mann was
able to mix business and pleasure in his life without detriment to either. He
refused lucrative offers to write biographies of Kelly and Grant (who left him
his suits in his will), and when out to dinner would scrupulously avoid making
eye contact with stars that he knew, out of respect for their privacy.

Frank Roderick Mann was born in Birmingham in 1922. His father, who worked in
the electrical cable business, was Scottish and soon after Roddy''s birth the
family returned to Glasgow, where he was educated at the city's High School. His
parents then sent him to Paris to improve his French, but with the coming of war
he joined the RAF and served as a fighter pilot.

On demobilisation, he made his start in journalism in Birmingham, but soon fell
under the mentoring sway of Ian Fleming, then foreign manager of the Kemsley
stable of newspapers, which included the Sunday Times. From Fleming, Mann learnt
that it was possible to use journalism to have fun, an approach that served him
well in the entertainment world.

"Clearly, public interest in the lives and activities of celebrities is
insatiable," he acknowledged. "And the truth is, actors and actresses are more
interesting, say, than nuclear plant managers and debt collectors, if only
because the world they inhabit has been imbued (by us) with an aura of glamour."

By the late 1980s, however, Mann was beginning to tire of his work. Although the
production values of films had improved, he found that the new generation of
stars lacked the sparkle of his contemporaries.

He had written several novels earlier in his career, including Foreign Body
(1973), which was adapted for the screen with Trevor Howard in 1986, and after
retiring in 1989 he wrote a thriller about Nazi loot concealed in Switzerland,
The Account (1994). Latterly, he had been suffering from Alzheimer's Disease.

He is survived by his wife Anastasia Kostoff, a former child actress.

Roderick Mann, journalist and author, was born on December 10, 1922. He died on
September 17, 2010, aged 87

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Mann, left, with Cary Grant and the Hollywood producer Dan Melnick, on
John Mills's yacht at Cannes in 1976

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2010 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              700 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 29, 2015 Thursday

Minnesota:Add value to your ag business

LENGTH: 373  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Minnesota Department of Agriculture has issued the following news release:

The Minnesota Department of Agriculture (MDA) has another round of funding
available for projects to help farmers, producers and processors add value to
their operations. A total of $1 million in funding has been made available
through the Agricultural Growth, Research and Innovation Program (AGRI),
established by the legislature to advance Minnesota's agricultural and renewable
energy industries.

The MDA will distribute the funds through its AGRI Value Added Grant Program
which aims to increase sales of Minnesota agricultural products by diversifying
markets and by increasing market access and food safety. Specifically, these
grants are intended to:

start, expand or update livestock product processing businesses;
    purchase equipment to start, upgrade, or modernize value added businesses;
    increase on-farm food safety, such as implementation of a food safety plan
    increase farmers' processing and aggregating capacity to sell to schools,
hospitals or others

Applications with a meat processing, farm-to-school (or other institution)
component, or are addressing Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) or similar type
of food safety plan will receive priority, but all value added proposals are
encouraged to apply.

Equipment purchases or physical improvements are eligible for 25 percent of the
total project cost up to a maximum grant award of $150,000. There is a minimum
grant of $1,000. Equipment purchases and facility improvements must accomplish
the goals of the grant and address improved efficiency, expansion,
modernization, or profitability.

This round of applications must be received no later than 4:00 p.m. on March 6,
2015. Grant applications are submitted through our online system. The
application is accessed through a link on the MDA Value Added website:
www.mda.state.mn.us/valueadded.aspx. If you cannot apply using this process, you
may submit an application by e-mail, mail, or by dropping it off at the MDA. An
application must be received by MDA staff by the deadline to be included in this
round of applications.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              701 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  The Dominion Post (Wellington, New Zealand)

                            January 25, 2010 Monday

Avatar snaps up $44.7m Govt grant

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 885 words


TOM PULLAR-STRECKER

More Seeing Avatar in 4-D, C7 -------------------- UNITED STATES film-makers
spent $307 million in New Zealand creating blockbuster 3-D film Avatar, but
$44.7m of the bill has been picked up by Kiwi taxpayers through a government
grant.

The total production cost of the film has not been disclosed, with estimates
ranging as high as US$500m (NZ$702.6m).

About 60 per cent of the film is comprised of visual effects, created by
Wellington's Weta Digital.

Weta faces more state-sponsored competition from overseas special- effects shops
in the wake of Avatar's box office success and optimism about the prospects for
3-D productions.

The size of the Large Budget Screen Production Grant (LBSPG) awarded to Avatar
production company 880 Productions was revealed by Film New Zealand, a
charitable trust which receives most of its funding from the Economic
Development Ministry and is responsible for promoting the incentives.

Under the scheme, film producers spending more than $15m on productions are
entitled to grants covering 15 per cent of qualifying costs.

In 2007, the grants were increased from 12.5 per cent of costs and extended to
producers that only carried out post-production, digital and visual effects
(PDV) work in New Zealand valued between $3m and $15m.

Film New Zealand acting chief executive Sue Thompson says $189.4m has been paid
out under the LBSPG scheme, including three PDV grants worth $5.1m, since the
grants were introduced in 2003 and their importance could not be underestimated.
"Having said that, trying to compete with increases in grants or rebates by
other countries is largely viewed as a downward spiral, and we have never sold
New Zealand as a cheap location."

The South Korean government announced last week that it would invest US$178m in
its computer- graphics industry by 2013, focusing on 3-D screen technology, in a
bid to win more orders from Hollywood.

Ms Thompson says the Californian state government introduced incentives to try
to retain film production work in July, with a tax credit of at least 20 per
cent of qualifying expenditure.

"Each day we see a new incentive being introduced in some territory."

Reports said the South Korean funding would go on providing equipment and
training to post- production companies, as well as on tax breaks for film
producers.

South Korea's Culture, Tourism and Sports Ministry said major competitors in
Canada, Singapore and New Zealand received "massive tax breaks" from their
respective governments, putting South Korean producers at a disadvantage.

Weta Digital spokeswoman Judy Alley says the company did not receive any tax
breaks.

"The only incentives offered to the industry were those provided to productions
that come here from overseas and receive the well- understood package of grants
that have been around since early 2000."

Ms Thompson says New Zealand's screen production industry boasted foreign
earnings of $542m last year, putting it third in the world behind Canada and
Britain. By comparison, the foreign earnings of the industry in Australia
totalled $20m.

"We have been doing extremely well, but when you look at Australia, it shows how
vulnerable we are and how nimble we must be to grow our market share. We do not
want the status quo. We want growth."

Ms Thompson says studios are running at 83 per cent capacity, which is
"basically full", and the industry is in dire need of more capacity.

The global competition for special-effects dollars is heating up as Avatar
spawns the first of what industry supporters hope will be a new group of
information-technology start-ups.

Brett O'Riley, chief executive of IT industry body the New Zealand Information
and Communication Technologies Group (NZICT), says a cluster of technology
businesses was created on the back of The Lord of the Rings trilogy, and Avatar
is starting to have similar spinoffs.

A group of developers who worked on Avatar are behind a new 10-person start-up,
The Funny Farm, which is developing short, humorous movies for mobile phones. It
has formed a partnership with Danish iPhone developer Kiloo, which is
considering setting up a development centre in New Zealand as its base in Asia
Pacific, Mr O'Riley says.

The Funny Farm commercial manager Peter Hall says the company will target a
global market of 300 million smart phones, for which there are currently few
entertainment videos.

Mr O'Riley says Avatar had surpassed The Lord of the Rings as the New Zealand IT
industry's biggest success. "The Lord of the Rings made us a global leader in
special effects, and Avatar and [Auckland software firm] Right Hemisphere have
made us a global leader in 3-D."

NZICT has lobbied for the LBSPG grants to be extended to makers of computer
games.

"The fact that Avatar the movie could get the tax break but Avatar the game
couldn't is a bit of an anomaly and we need to close that loop," Mr O'Riley
says.

Ms Thompson says games are quickly catching up on films in terms of their
economic value.

"We should encourage these industries to develop as the nature of the
entertainment industry quickly evolves."

---------------

CAPTION:

New worlds: Avatar star Sam Worthington and his special-effects human-alien
hybrid. The film's success has spawned the first of what industry supporters
hope will be a new group of information technology start-ups.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                              702 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2016 Directors Deals, All Rights Reserved

                                Directors Deals


                      ISSUER: Carpathian Resources Limited
                              BUYER:  Grant Priest


                         LAST UPDATE:  August 23, 2016
                            ANNOUNCED: March 9, 2006
                        TRANSACTION DATE: March 3, 2006

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * TRANSACTION SUMMARY * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



Security Description:                Ord NPV
Amount:                              50,000
Price:                               AUD 0.0700
GBP Value:                           1,493
EUR Value:                           2,187
USD Value:                           2,612
Transaction Significance Index:      67
Holding:                             50,000
Holding %:                           0.037
Holding Type:                        Indirect Beneficial
Note About the Trade:                Maiden trade. By Oglivie Superannuation
                                     fund, of which director is beneficiary

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * TARGET DETAILS * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


Name:                                Carpathian Resources Limited
Ticker:                              CPN
Sedol:                               6369103
ISIN:                                AU000000CPN0
Sector:                              533 - Oil & Gas Producers

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * BUYER DETAILS * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


Name:                                Grant Priest
Executive Status:                    Former
Holding:                             50,000
Holding Percentage:                  0.037

Biography:

[8/25/2005] Grant Priest has been a partner of Sothertons Chartered Accountants
since 1988. Grant has also been Chairman of Life Plan Recreation and Leisure
Association, a charity organisation, since August 1999.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2016


                              703 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2016 Directors Deals, All Rights Reserved

                                Directors Deals


                      ISSUER: Carpathian Resources Limited
                              BUYER:  Grant Priest


                         LAST UPDATE:  August 23, 2016
                           ANNOUNCED: March 23, 2006
                        TRANSACTION DATE: March 22, 2006

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * TRANSACTION SUMMARY * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



Security Description:                Ord NPV
Amount:                              50,000
Price:                               AUD 0.0995
GBP Value:                           2,043
EUR Value:                           2,949
USD Value:                           3,578
Transaction Significance Index:      67
Holding:                             100,000
Holding %:                           0.074
Holding Type:                        Direct Beneficial
Change in Holding:                   100

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * TARGET DETAILS * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


Name:                                Carpathian Resources Limited
Ticker:                              CPN
Sedol:                               6369103
ISIN:                                AU000000CPN0
Sector:                              533 - Oil & Gas Producers

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * BUYER DETAILS * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


Name:                                Grant Priest
Executive Status:                    Former
Holding:                             100,000
Holding Percentage:                  0.074

Biography:

[8/25/2005] Grant Priest has been a partner of Sothertons Chartered Accountants
since 1988. Grant has also been Chairman of Life Plan Recreation and Leisure
Association, a charity organisation, since August 1999.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2016


                              704 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                     The Chronicle (Toowoomba, Queensland)

                           November 19, 2013 Tuesday

Bid to boost region's exports

SECTION: Pg. 27

LENGTH: 325  words


FOOD producers are being called on to help Toowoomba and Surat Basin Enterprise
facilitate export opportunities in China.

The enterprise is working on a project aimed at identifying new premium markets
in middle class China for food (particularly protein foods and related food
by-products) and linking these opportunities to producers in our region.

The project is being conducted after Toowoomba and Surat Basin Enterprise was
awarded a grant earlier in the year, under the Federal Government's inaugural
Asian Century Business Engagement Plan.

It will be delivered over the next two years and will involve extensive market
research in China to identify specific growing market opportunities for protein
foods, along with an analysis of protein food currently being produced in the
Darling Downs and Surat Basin region.

The organisation is gathering information regarding our region's food production
capability and inviting food producers to complete a short survey.

Agriculture projects manager Jo Shepard said the future of the agricultural
sector was critical to the region and Asian opportunities were going to play a
significant part in growth opportunities for the sector over the next 10-20
years.

"We are keen to establish a strong, relevant business network between our region
and Asia to ensure businesses are well placed to take advantage of opportunities
as they present themselves," Ms Sheppard said.

"In general terms, we are looking to understand what food is being produced in
the region, including volume and value, which are the key businesses and which
of these businesses are interested in finding a new market.

"It is so important that we are on the front foot and forge the necessary
relationships to get our head around identifying the prospects now.

"If you are a food producer, I invite you to participate in this project."

The survey can be found at https://www.surveymonkey.com

/s/DCCRGLP

It will take only five minutes to complete.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TCH


                    Copyright 2013 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              705 of 998 DOCUMENTS



           Hart County's Newspaper News-Herald (Horse Cave, Kentucky)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                January 3, 2013

Sampling impacts purchases at farmers markets

BYLINE: Hart Countys News-Herald staff

LENGTH: 578  words


When vendors offered samples at their farmers market booths, they saw an
immediate effect on what customers purchased. The 2011 Regional Farm Market
Sampling Survey, a Web-based survey conducted by researchers in the University
of Kentucky College of Agriculture, determined that 55 percent of respondents
purchased the sampled product the same day, though they had not originally
planned to do so.

"Direct marketing opportunities, such as farmers markets, have proved to be a
popular way for small- to medium-sized producers to increase revenue," said Tim
Woods, UK agricultural economist who directed the study. "Sampling has the
potential to increase it further."

Woods and Miranda Hileman, also of UK's Department of Agricultural Economics,
have recently written and released Best-Practices for Sampling at Farmers
Markets: A Practical Guide for Farmers Market Vendors, a manual for farmers and
farmers market managers interested in learning the best practices of providing
samples to patrons. The manual was funded through a grant from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Federal State Market Improvement Program.

Kentucky farmers pushed for and received new state legislation in 2009 that
allows Kentucky food producers to offer food samples at registered Kentucky
farmers markets without requiring food handling permits, though vendors must be
certified through the Kentucky Department of Agriculture's sampling
certification program. So far, more than 1,100 producers have completed the
training. Many vendors, however, still do not provide samples. Hileman believes
it's because the process felt overwhelming.

"From previous vendor surveys we found that sampling was often noted as 'a
hassle,' and 'labor constraints' were an issue facing many vendors," Hileman
said. "Some also noted that they were 'uncertain about the benefits of
sampling.' We wanted to measure consumer perceptions about sampling in order to
share this information with farmers market vendors."

The Kentucky Department of Agriculture expects the more than 2,490 food
producers taking part in Kentucky farmers markets tp report approximately $12
million in revenue in 2012. The growth in the number of registered farmers
markets over the last eight years-from 91 in 2004 to l47 in 2012-is an
indication of consumers' increased interest in local food products and their
desire to build relationships with producers.

Woods' and Hileman's study consisted of 3,406 responses from farmers market
patrons across eight states, who had had a previous food sampling experience.
Responses indicated that vendor friendliness, sample presentation, market
atmosphere, sampling with friends or family and interaction with the vendor
significantly impacted how the patrons felt about the sampling event. They
concluded that the impact derived from sampling experiences extends to future
purchases and referrals, and many vendors might find that going through the
certification process is worth it, because it means increasing their customer
base, and in turn, their revenues.

Best Practices for Sampling at Farmers Markets: A Practical Guide for Farmers
Market Vendors is available online for free at http://www.ca.uky.
edu/cmspubsclass/files/extensionpubs/2012-19. pdf. Woods will also discuss their
findings at 1:30 p.m. EST Jan. 7 during the 2013 Kentucky Fruit and Vegetable
Conference and Trade Show at the Embassy Suites Hotel in Lexington. A complete
agenda for the conference is available at http://kyvga.org.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Value Added Agriculture

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HCN

                      Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
               Copyright 2013 Hart County's Newspaper News-Herald


                              706 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Queensland Country Life

                           September 8, 2016 Thursday
                           Internet & Print Editions

Lock in your property maps nowâ[#x20ac][#x2039]

BYLINE: Grant Maudsley, AgForce General President

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 271 words


The defeat of the laws has meant that proposed new 'high value regrowth'
restrictions and the extension of Category R vegetation (regrowth watercourse
areas) won't go ahead for now.

The Palaszczuk government has indicated it will try to introduce these changes
again if they are re-elected. So it's important to ensure you have a Property
Map of Assessable Vegetation (PMAV). Don't rely on the government's regulated
vegetation mapping as it is not certified, often has errors and isn't locked in
for the future.

Locking in a PMAV with vegetation marked as Category X (white) - non-remnant
areas of unregulated vegetation - should ensure future laws on regrowth and Reef
watercourses do not affect your individual vegetation management plan.

If Parliament had passed the proposed changes to vegetation management laws last
month, some producers without a locked in PMAV would have experienced up to 80
per cent loss of non-remnant areas to the new regrowth and Reef watercourse
regulations.

I can't stress enough how important it is for producers with PMAVs to check all
government vegetation mapping annually. For producers who have converted a
property to freehold, it is also important to check whether changes may have
resulted in the removal of Category C (regrowth, light blue areas), leaving
additional non-remnant areas to consider locking in.

For a small fee, AgForce can assist with your whole of property vegetation
mapping, PDF maps or digital mapping layers. For details go to the AgForce
Queensland website or contact AgForce GIS technical officer Noel Brinsmead on
3236 3100. - Grant Maudsley, AgForce General President

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              707 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Cotton & Grains Outlook

                          September 7, 2016 Wednesday
                           Internet & Print Editions

Lock in your property maps nowâ[#x20ac][#x2039]

BYLINE: Grant Maudsley, AgForce General President

LENGTH: 271 words


The defeat of the laws has meant that proposed new 'high value regrowth'
restrictions and the extension of Category R vegetation (regrowth watercourse
areas) won't go ahead for now.

The Palaszczuk government has indicated it will try to introduce these changes
again if they are re-elected. So it's important to ensure you have a Property
Map of Assessable Vegetation (PMAV). Don't rely on the government's regulated
vegetation mapping as it is not certified, often has errors and isn't locked in
for the future.

Locking in a PMAV with vegetation marked as Category X (white) - non-remnant
areas of unregulated vegetation - should ensure future laws on regrowth and Reef
watercourses do not affect your individual vegetation management plan.

If Parliament had passed the proposed changes to vegetation management laws last
month, some producers without a locked in PMAV would have experienced up to 80
per cent loss of non-remnant areas to the new regrowth and Reef watercourse
regulations.

I can't stress enough how important it is for producers with PMAVs to check all
government vegetation mapping annually. For producers who have converted a
property to freehold, it is also important to check whether changes may have
resulted in the removal of Category C (regrowth, light blue areas), leaving
additional non-remnant areas to consider locking in.

For a small fee, AgForce can assist with your whole of property vegetation
mapping, PDF maps or digital mapping layers. For details go to the AgForce
Queensland website or contact AgForce GIS technical officer Noel Brinsmead on
3236 3100. - Grant Maudsley, AgForce General President

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              708 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Queensland Country Life

                          September 7, 2016 Wednesday
                           Print & Internet Editions

Lock in your property maps nowâ[#x20ac][#x2039]

BYLINE: Grant Maudsley, AgForce General President

LENGTH: 271 words


The defeat of the laws has meant that proposed new 'high value regrowth'
restrictions and the extension of Category R vegetation (regrowth watercourse
areas) won't go ahead for now.

The Palaszczuk government has indicated it will try to introduce these changes
again if they are re-elected. So it's important to ensure you have a Property
Map of Assessable Vegetation (PMAV). Don't rely on the government's regulated
vegetation mapping as it is not certified, often has errors and isn't locked in
for the future.

Locking in a PMAV with vegetation marked as Category X (white) - non-remnant
areas of unregulated vegetation - should ensure future laws on regrowth and Reef
watercourses do not affect your individual vegetation management plan.

If Parliament had passed the proposed changes to vegetation management laws last
month, some producers without a locked in PMAV would have experienced up to 80
per cent loss of non-remnant areas to the new regrowth and Reef watercourse
regulations.

I can't stress enough how important it is for producers with PMAVs to check all
government vegetation mapping annually. For producers who have converted a
property to freehold, it is also important to check whether changes may have
resulted in the removal of Category C (regrowth, light blue areas), leaving
additional non-remnant areas to consider locking in.

For a small fee, AgForce can assist with your whole of property vegetation
mapping, PDF maps or digital mapping layers. For details go to the AgForce
Queensland website or contact AgForce GIS technical officer Noel Brinsmead on
3236 3100. - Grant Maudsley, AgForce General President

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              709 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      Courier Mail (Queensland, Australia)

                          November 22, 2000, Wednesday

Specials  from the heartland

BYLINE: Ken Gargett

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 932 words


The Barossa is synonymous with shiraz, but the region offers a host of other
wines to tempt, writes Ken Gargett

IN 1983, renowned Australian viticulturist Dr Richard Smart predicted the demise
of the Barossa Valley.

By 2001, he suggested, production would decline from the then 46,000 tonnes to
about 9000. Had he been right, the Australian wine industry would be sick as a
parrot today.

The beautiful Barossa Valley is the heart and soul of Australian wine. It is the
Aussie region best known overseas and it is where major companies like Penfolds,
Yalumba, Peter Lehmann, Grant Burge, Wolf Blass and Orlando have their
headquarters.

Yet there is room for tiny operations crafting special wines, many of which are
available in Queensland bottle shops. Barossa shiraz has taken its place among
the great wines of the world. While the Barossa is strong, so is Australian
wine.

While Smart's comments may look ludicrous now, for a while it seemed he was
spot-on. Red wine was out of favour and grape prices plummeted. Total plantings
in the Barossa dropped by more than one-third in just a few years.

Whites have never returned to that level and reds have only recently done so.

Current plantings, which are yet to produce grapes (it takes a few years for a
vine to produce worthwhile grapes, something investors would do well to
remember), will take production out to record levels over the next few years.

There are more than 50 wineries open to the public, which makes it a
wine-lovers' mecca while wines from these and other local wineries are readily
available in bottle shops.

Barossa shiraz is world famous. We may have known that for years but until
recently treated it with a familiarity bordering on contempt.

Now, the Americans have discovered the stuff and love the opulence and richness
of the generous flavours. They eagerly seek out the best and are prepared to pay
for it.

Cabernet can do very well in the right years, the good ones richer, less herbal
and perhaps not as obviously varietal as cabernet from other regions.

Some of the most exciting reds are the GSMs. These are the traditional Rhone
blends of grenache, shiraz and mourvedre, a style first championed by Charlie
Melton's Nine Popes, which still leads the pack, though these days there is
considerable competition.

Whites often do better than expected. There are quality chardonnays and some
terrific semillon, many providing excellent value such as the Grant Burge
Barossa Vines semillon at under $12.

There was a time when local producers would embalm semillon in oak, obscuring
the fruit.

While they can benefit from some time in oak, the best wines are where this has
been kept to a minimum. Leave the valley floor and venture up into the
neighbouring and considerably cooler hills and you'll find the region known as
Eden Valley, which produces some of our greatest rieslings.

And, of course, the Barossa has always been the home of some of our best
fortifieds.

For value, try the newly released Grant Burge aged tawny for $12.

Every visit to the Barossa seems to throw up a few new producers and some
stunning new discoveries. At the recent Barossa Show, the trophies for both the
best semillon and best white wine went to the 2000 unwooded semillon from
Whistler Wines, a real cracker.

A COUPLE of other newcomers worth chasing are Torbreck, Greenock Creek and
Hewitson.

Don't be fooled by reports suggesting that the 2000 vintage whites are not up to
scratch. Some exciting wines are coming through.

A look at Grant Burge rieslings over the past half dozen years had the 2000 way
out in front, blowing away the reputation of such fancied years as 1997 and
1998. At about $14, an excellent buy.

The GSM blends are definitely worth a look. While you'll have to knock on the
door or get on the mailing list of some of the smaller producers who are doing
some good things here, there are a few that will be available closer to home.

Penfolds has released one dubbed Old Vines ($22), its only regularly released
Barossa red.

Grant Burge's first effort from the 1995 vintage was the aptly named Holy
Trinity ($28). Each release has been better than the last as Burge comes to
grips with the style and eases the throttle on the oak.

While quality Barossa shiraz can handle just about as much oak as you can throw
at it, though it is not always better for the experience, these wines are at
their best when the earthy rich roasted fruit flavours come through.

Each grape contributes different characters though it is important that the
grenache be not too lolly-like, which can happen if it doesn't have the
requisite concentration.

Melton's Nine Popes ($36), quirkily named after the Chateauneuf-du-Pape region
in France, sets the standard. The 1998 is a gloriously lush and opulent style,
bursting with concentrated fruit, yet with the structure to last for a decade or
more -- one of the best wines of a great vintage.

A roll call of the best shiraz should include almost every winery in the
district. The icon wines, the Meshachs, Penfolds' RWT, Lehmann's Stonewall,
Yalumba's Octavius and others all have strong followings, a healthy sign for
wines that range between $50 and $80.

Rockford's Basket Press ($35 CD) is as good as any of them and the
about-to-be-released 1998 promises much. There are many other top-notch, and
much cheaper, wines but few from any region that represent such a bargain as the
Peter Lehmann shiraz 1998. Widely available for under $20, this stunning wine is
the very essence of fine Barossa shiraz.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: CML

                   Copyright 2000 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              710 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                            The Press (Christchurch)

                            August 12, 1997, Tuesday

Smell inevitable near works, says manager

SECTION: NEWS; NATIONAL; Pg. 4; REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 257 words


Some kind of smell is always likely near a freezing works, says the processing
manager of the Primary Producers Co-Operative Society Ltd.

PPCS has applied to the Canterbury Regional Council for air discharge permits
for its Belfast and Canterbury processing plants.

At a resource consent hearing yesterday, Jo Appleyard, counsel for PPCS, said
that while the applications were for the purpose of authorising existing
activities, it was the first time air-discharge permits for the plants had been
considered under the Resource Management Act.

Its provisions meant PPCS had to assess the discharges' effects on the
environment, and the public had a right of involvement in the resource consent
process.

The Belfast application attracted 246 submissions, 244 opposed, and the
Canterbury application 524 submissions, 522 opposed.

Almost all submissions came from residents living immediately around the works.

They were concerned with smell and the effect on Belfast residential values, and
about airborne contaminants from the plants' coal-fired boilers.

Ms Appleyard said the company accepted the genuine concerns raised in the
submissions.

In answer to a question from Cr Neil Cherry, PPCS processing manager Grant
Pearson said there would always be some problem for people living next to a
freezing works. The wisdom of allowing residential zonings next to land zoned
for offensive trade could be questioned, but that was the situation the company
found itself in, Mr Pearson said.

The hearing continues today.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1997 Fairfax New Zealand


                              711 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                  The State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL)

                            October 29, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 449 words


USDA hikes funding for ethanol projects

Ethanol seems to be the golden child of the U.S. Department of Agriculture these
days. Last week, Agriculture Secretary Ann Veneman announced $7.2 million in
projects to support ethanol and bioenergy - more than double the amount in
fiscal 2001.

In total, the USDA approved 35 grants meant to foster development of alternative
energy sources, create jobs and spur economic growth.

Ethanol projects are being funded in the Midwestern states of Illinois, Iowa,
South Dakota and Wisconsin. All together, more than $5 million in grant funds
were awarded to 22 proposed ethanol ventures in 14 states. Iowa got the largest
amount - $2.2 million for several projects.

In Illinois, a $500,000 grant was awarded to LincolnLand Agri-Energy of Robinson
to help build and operate a producer-owned ethanol facility.

In addition to LincolnLand Agri-Energy, Illinois grants went to:

* Shawnee Winery Cooperative Inc. of Vienna - $52,000 to allow grape growers to
establish market and capture the advantages of centralized marketing,
processing, bottling and retail wine sales.

* Illinois Branded Beef LLC, Scales Mound - $92,200 to market high-quality
branded beef products to Chicago consumers through a marketing alliance with
independent grocers.

* Illinois Corn Marketing Board of Bloomington - $30,000 to conduct a market
study and update a business plan for the producers' two corn value-added
co-products: oil and zein.

* Ag Guild of Illinois of Minier - $11,050 to develop a grain-segregation
program for AGI members.

* Midwest Prairie Products LLC of Walnut - $59,400 to determine feasibility and
business model for establishing a flexible soybean-processing plant in
north-central Illinois.

* Meadowbrook Farms Cooperative of Belleville - $500,000 to develop an "identity
preservation and carcass tracking system."

Warehouse update

Industry representatives' views vary regarding the new law (currently on hold
for 90 days) that gives the U.S. Department of Agriculture, rather than
individual states, authority over grain elevators and for protecting farmers who
store grain in local elevators.

"We agree the state system is very good," said Jeff Adkisson, executive director
of the Grain and Feed Association of Illinois. "But why can't there be two
competing systems? Have an elevator decide which one he wants to go with. If you
have competition, it will make both systems better."

He thinks if given the choice, most grain elevator operators would chose the
state system for protection.

"Maybe they need to set up a federal grain insurance fund like the one in
Illinois," Adkisson said.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: ON WEB SITE

TYPE: COLUMN. LOCAL

                   Copyright 2002 The State Journal-Register


                              712 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   The National Business Review (New Zealand)

                             Image: LOTR 17_2-17875

                                  July 4, 2003

Film makers see light at end of the lens;
Media

SECTION: Pg.24

LENGTH: 1317 words


John Drinnan

New film and television incentives have removed barriers to attracting Hollywood
projects to New Zealand and, according to the government, will provide an
immediate funding boost for several film projects.

The grants scheme for films that spend more than $15 million in New Zealand on
production was announced by Economic Development Minister Jim Anderton on
Monday.

Mr Anderton said the grants scheme was not meant solely for big Hollywood
productions but local producers say that is likely to be the reality.

The scheme became operative on Monday. But Ministry of Economic Development
officials have acknowledged some aspects may need to be fine tuned during an
initial review period until mid-August.

As it stands, for every $8 spent in production locally, makers of big-budget
films will be given a rebate of $1 from the taxpayer.

Projects that spend more than $15 million but less than $50 million will have to
prove that 70% of the total production budget was spent in New Zealand.

But under these rules few local projects will qualify.

Although $15 million is a tiny budget by Hollywood standards, it's at the upper
limit of New Zealand films (apart from Peter Jackson films backed by Hollywood).
Typically films on that scale would be financed through international
co-productions accessing public funds in other countries.

Like Mr Anderton's new grant scheme, foreign incentives and co-production
agreements usually come with a rider that at least part of the production budget
must be spent in their country.

As often as not that may start at 30% of the production spend, a level that
would make them ineligible for the Anderton grants scheme. An internationally
known foreign star for the movie could also make a big hole in the local
production budget.

The scheme as announced on Monday also rules out grantsfor films that access New
Zealand public funding such as through the Film Commission or the government's
new film production fund. But any intrinsically New Zealand film is likely to
receive public funding.

Local producers such as South Pacific Pictures (Whale Rider) and First Sun (The
Price of Milk) were at pains to be upbeat about a boost for activity in the
local film production industry. (Mr Anderton estimates the scheme will cost $40
million this year and there is no cap.)

"It's great for the crews and for the people who service these films. But at the
moment it seems very much geared toward Hollywood," said First Sun's Dave
Gibson, a veteran of pulling together international financing deals.

The government has been heavily lobbied by the Hollywood studios and Mr
Jackson's interests claiming that, without a sweetener, New Zealand risked
losing big foreign projects without some form of sweetener.

New Zealand has been alone in relying on scenery and cheap labour rates to draw
Hollywood downunder. With the Kiwi dollar rising against the greenback there
were valid concerns New Zealand was becoming less attractive.

At 12.5%, the benefits under the Anderton scheme match those offered under the
tax-based scheme in Australia and put New Zealand on an even footing for
attracting big budget Hollywood productions.

Crucial to Mr Anderton winning approval from Finance Minister Michael Cullen was
making it a direct grant, which does not impinge on the tax system.

Local lawyers representing Hollywood interests had pressed for a tax-based
scheme.

But Dr Cullen has been a vehement opponent of tax incentives after loopholes
exploited by The Lord of the Rings, which left a big hole in the tax base.

So, subject to amendments, the Anderton scheme marks a cautious and
straightforward step into the international market for attracting film and TV
productions.

It offers direct subsidies to producers with quantifiable returns and avoids
"leakage" in financing costs when lawyers and middlemen are hired to find new
interpretations of tax laws.

The argument from Mr Anderton is that the incentives will pay their own way
through the tax revenue generated by the extra economic activity, through GST,
income tax for workers and businesses servicing overseas production.

"This grant will encourage more production here, which will in turn bring more
money into New Zealand, creating jobs and increasing the size of our local
screen production industry," Mr Anderton said.

"Although the scheme is focused on large budget production there will be many
beneficial spillover effects.

"It will provide local screen producers with continuity of work as well as
helping them develop their skills and allow them to work with top-class
directors," Mr Anderton said.

Deborah Fox worked with US studio Fineline on the Lord of The Rings deal and is
the head of the film and television at the law firm of Simpson Grierson in
Auckland.

She said that as a result of Monday's announcement two projects were likely to
get the green light to go ahead.

Peter Jackson said: "I am thrilled ... this incentive allows the opportunity for
New Zealand producers and directors to make larger budget films in their home
country, which, in turn will result in more jobs and will have obvious flowon
financial benefits for the local economy.

"The government is to be congratulated for its continued support of New Zealand
film makers and industry crafts people."

Mr Anderton has secured an important win for the big budget, mostly foreign
projects.

But there is some concern in the local industry that the government may have
been lured by the glamour of Hollywood. They are hoping the government will
deliver a promised second phase incentives to bolster local producers and their
lower budget projects.

Many details are still to be worked out in the Anderton scheme, not least who
will manage the new bureaucracy - Inland Revenue, the New Zealand Film
Commission or Mr Anderton's own Ministry of Economic Development.

The scheme will require audits of production spending - an arcane area of
accounting in its own right. Ask anybody associated with film finance and they
will tell you the greatest creativity coming out of Hollywood is not in the
acting or scripts but in the accounting,

Other issues include fears these new incentives could create such a boom in
demand for workers that rates will rise until Hollywood producers on big budgets
are the only ones who can afford to hire them

Sydney-based New Zealand film maker Vincent Ward said that was what had happened
in Australia.

Hollywood producers are drawn by Australian tax incentives and are using Fox
studios in Sydney and Warner Bros on the Gold Coast.

It has got to the point where many Sydney producers now shoot their films in
Melbourne where there are fewer Hollywood projects and where crew rates are
cheaper.

Yet the overall feeling in the film industry is positive that after years of
promises the government has delivered funding that will boost the local
industry.

Sue Thompson is the chief executive of the Film Unit, the post-production
facilities owned by Peter Jackson and a company that stands to gain
substantially from the new incentives.

Foreign producers frequently do their post production work - such as editing -
in the US but under this new scheme there will be an added incentive to do it
here.

"The most exciting aspect for me is that because everything will be monitored,
we will be able to conclusively measure the value of the film industry dollar to
our commercial community.

"Most of our domestic producers have been compelled to seek co-production
investment, which means that at least four Kiwi films will post-produce offshore
over the next year.

"So the pressure on giving a return on investment is immense. I can see a beam
at the end of the tunnel now."

ONE-EIGHTH OFF: Michael Cullen has been a vehement opponent of tax incentives
after loopholes exploited by The Lord of the Rings

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

        Copyright 2003 Fourth Estate Holdings Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


                              713 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  The Press-Republican (Plattsburgh, New York)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           October 10, 2015 Saturday

Essex County food hub open to local farms, producers

BYLINE: Kim Smith Dedam, The Press-Republican, Plattsburgh, N.Y.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 928 words


Oct. 10--ESSEX -- Time to start thinking about what to grow next year.

That's when Essex County will have a food hub in place for processing and
distribution of wholesale products made from local foods.

The new project, called Hub on the Hill, was awarded $95,000 as a pilot program
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Owners of the 3,000-square-foot facility are looking to develop wholesale
processing, juicing, bottling, food-drying, storage and distribution systems for
local growers.

Situated at 545 Middle Road in Essex, the innocuous warehouse-type building sits
on a hill just above Lake Champlain.

It's within a mile or so of the Lake Champlain ferry dock.

SIZED COMMERCIAL

The Adirondack North Country Association and Hub owner Dak & Dill are helping
local producers expand out of incubator processing operations begun at the
Whallonsburg Grange Hall's community kitchen.

The grange continues to provide workshops in food-preservation and commercial
kitchen space.

But the Hub on the Hill is installing a larger kitchen with dehydration and
juice-processing equipment.

ANCA spokesman Josh Bakelaar said the new space in Essex is scaled for
commercial food production.

Dak & Dill founder Jori Wekin is coordinator of the Hub, a nonprofit
organization.

"The space will be a shared community kitchen, scaled up for commercial food
production with a co-packaging component and a service to help process food
products for value-added ventures," Bakelaar said.

"There is a lot of local food distribution capacity from just this food hub
being there. The storage is key for farmers, but we're also thinking about
others who want to develop our food system.

"It's available to everyone."

INCUBATOR SPACE

It is also available as incubator space for farmers and producers looking to
explore new ways to preserve and sell their food products.

"The longer-term goal is to develop new market channels for farmers and
producers, including wholesale opportunities to schools, hospitals and
restaurants," Bakelaar explained.

"Farm-to-institution is a more general concept than farm-to-school and might
include supplying local food to elder-care facilities in the region.

"We are looking to create a hub that links producers and their markets, so that
neither has to spend as much time to find each other."

FLEXIBILITY

The new facility and equipment complies with State Department of Health
commercial kitchen regulations as well as those of the State Department
Agriculture and Markets.

"That's one of the big barriers being taken down by this system," Bakelaar said.

Right now the site is set up mostly for baking, for the use of steam kettles and
large-quantity produce production.

Estimates suggest the facility would be able to process more than 50,000 pounds
of food in a year, compared to 10,000 pounds now coming through the Whallonsburg
Grange kitchen.

"Right now, it's at about 50 percent capacity. We hope to add another 10 or so
producers using it on a regular basis," Bakelaar said.

Local distribution would expand with an eye toward flexibility.

"There is an established distribution system that goes along with Hub on the
Hill," Bakelaar said. "And there has been discussion of expanding this service
should the need arise.

"The initial system is designed to allow food producers to use their existing
distribution channels."

WORK IN PROGRESS

Essex County food hub organizers are searching to define the distribution radius
of "local food."

It's still largely a work in progress.

"We did put a definition into this," Bakelaar said. "I think the focus right now
is processing for producers within a radius of about 30 miles.

"We're thinking food hubs should have a distribution reach of about 100 miles --
about a two-hour drive -- to avoid competition, but we're not sure.

"One of our objectives is to figure out how far our products are going for a
reasonable price. And that could change over time."

The pilot grant project, written by ANCA, continues through June 2017 and
includes a plan to share the hub's experience through the USDA.

Models used in the Hub on the Hill project exist at the Vermont Food Venture
Center in Hardwick, Vt., and at the Hudson Valley Farm Hub, Bakelaar said.

The USDA funds will cover three-quarters of the overall cost of the project.

COLD STORAGE

It is a timely effort, according to recent USDA data.

Since 2009, the United States has seen a 75 percent growth in farmers markets
nationwide, and sales of local food rose to an estimated $12 billion in 2014 --
much of it through sales from farms to local grocers, institutions and
restaurants.

"The Hub is key to assisting the growing number of small farmers and food
entrepreneurs in our region successfully create value-added food products and
access wholesale markets," Wekin said in a news release.

"We just finished installing cold storage equipment funded by a grant from the
Workforce Development Institute, and this new award will help us move forward
quickly."

Hub developers are working with Cornell Cooperative Extension of Essex County to
help entrepreneurs establish new products for wholesale markets.

The processing facilities are not currently set up to work with meats, meat
production or elaborate cheesemaking, Bakelaar said.

"This is a produce-focused food hub, primarily."

Email Kim Smith Dedam:

kdedam@pressrepublican.com

Twitter: @KimDedam

TO LEARN MORE

For more information, contact Jori Wekin at hubonthehill@gmail.com or at
418-5564.

___ (c)2015 the Press-Republican (Plattsburgh, N.Y.) Visit the Press-Republican
(Plattsburgh, N.Y.) at pressrepublican.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20151010-ZI-Essex-County-food-hub-open-to-local-farms-producers
-1010-20151010

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZI


                      Copyright 2015 The Press-Republican


                              714 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Concord Times (Freetown)

                            August 12, 2010 Thursday

RPSDP Training for Development Farming Underway

BYLINE: Zainab Kanu

LENGTH: 437  words

DATELINE: Freetown


The Rural and Private Sector Development (RPSDP) in collaboration with Leone
Consultancy (LEKON) is presently holding a week-long training of trainers'
workshop with its nationwide development and working partners on the need to
increase the value chain for farmers in Sierra Leone.

Speaking at the programme which is underway at the Santano House in Freetown,
the marketing and communications specialist of RPSDP, Abdul Salim said the
session aims to train farmers on the effect of the RPSPD and its contribution
towards food security as part of the country's agenda for change, noting that
the marketing aspect for farmers has a crucial role to play in the development
of agriculture.

Salim also revealed that another important aspect of the training is to educate
participants on the difference between sales and marketing, which according to
him, the farmers did not know about. He noted that in agriculture time factor,
hard work and expertism is very important in adding the value chain in enhancing
more value to farmers and producers.

During the training, Salim said they will be looking at business planning, price
promotion and various packages with the need to increase on the market. The
trainers will at the end of the training train market facilitators so as to be
able to in turn educate farmers and producers. He encouraged the trainees to
take part in the discussions and make positive inputs for the wayward for
farmers and producers.

Lead consultant for LEKON, Sherman Kamara said one way to gauge the success of
farmers is by visiting farmer groups and map out their specific needs for a
better outcome. He noted that famers' income will not increase if the necessary
systems are not put in place for them to grow. Kamara observed that stakeholders
need to be familiar with the market chain, as there are many options for farmers
which is not only to go on the field to plant.

He referred to PRSDP as one major development partner that is helping the rural
people who are actively engaged in agriculture. He said they are also
introducing producers and making lots of interventions and plan of action in
reducing constraints areas that need leverage, draft line and business plan.

Making a statement, the grant manager of RPSDP, Sulaiman Sesay said the training
is very important in order to improve the value chain, ranging from support
needed like farming tools, storage to post harvest facilities.

He stressed that farmers are not fully aware of the strategies involved in post
harvest facilities but revealed that they at the RPSDP will develop a manual for
farmers that will be dealing with post harvest.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              715 of 998 DOCUMENTS



               South Burnett Times and Rural Weekly (Queensland)

                               November 18, 2016

AgForce set to tackle future with management structure changes

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 302  words


IMPROVING transport routes and regulations, ending the data drought in the bush
and ensuring government policies allow agriculture to grow and prosper will be
among the key issues the new AgForce Queensland Farmers Limited board will
pursue over the next two years.

The new nine-member board took over this week as the main governing body of the
rural representative organisation, with Mitchell cattle and grains producer
Grant Maudsley to continue as AgForce general president for the next two years.

Mr Maudsley said he looked forward to continuing to represent Queensland's beef,
sheep and grain producers as the most senior elected representative of AgForce.

"Agriculture is one of the foundations of the economy, with a State Government
report out this month putting the value of Queensland's primary industries at
more than $18.5 billion in 2016/17," he said.

"Demand for our high quality food and fibre is growing and Queensland has the
potential to almost double its agricultural industry to $30 billion a year over
the next decade - but only with the right policy settings from governments and a
measured development agenda."

The new nine-member AgForce Queensland Farmers board takes over from the
24-member state council as part of a modernisation of the organisation's
governance structure.

The new AgForce board includes:

Grant Maudsley: AgForce general president

Anthony "Bim" Struss: AgForce cattle president

Alan Rae: AgForce sheep and wool president

Wayne Newton: AgForce grains president

Russell Lethbridge: AgForce North Queensland regional director

Guy Newell: AgForce south-west Queensland regional director

John Baker: AgForce central Queensland regional director

Georgie Somerset: AgForce south-east Queensland regional director

Robyn Bryant: AgForce southern inland Queensland regional director

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TRW


                    Copyright 2016 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              716 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                        Warwick Daily News (Queensland)

                              May 8, 2012 Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 447  words

Southern Downs sustainability day

KARARA pork producer Belle Marriage will be one of several local farmers lending
their time, expertise and animals to the first Southern Downs' Sustainability
Day in June.

The event is a joint initiative of Warwick Central State School and Condamine
Headwaters Landcare Group and aims to raise awareness about our local
environment.

It will be held as part of World Environment Day Celebrations on June 5.

CHLG co-ordinator Catherine Potter said sharing knowledge about what produce was
available in our region was a key factor in supporting the local agricultural
community and in turn the environment.

"The purpose of the day is to showcase local examples of people and businesses
that are actively helping to protect our environment," Mrs Potter said.

"We hope to supplement these activities by offering opportunities for students
and their families to become more aware of local produce," she said.

Primary producers or local businesses keen to be involved or to find out more
should contact Catherine Potter at the Landcare Office on 46619909.

At the start of the Murray-Darling

KILLARNEY locals are invited to a meeting to discuss the key issues affecting
the Cambanoora Gorge in May 16.

The gorge stands at the beginning of the Condamine River system, headwaters of
the Murray-Darling Basin.

A project to develop a management plan for the Cambanoora Gorge was developed in
late 2010 and was funded through the Australian Government's Community Action
Grant program.

The plan seeks to engage as many users of the Gorge and sectors of the local
community as possible, to exchange knowledge and ideas that will support the
rehabilitation and protection of this unique stretch of river.

Killarney Bushcare Group, which is co-ordinating this project, has already
sought information and ideas from more than 50 individuals and community
organisations, as well as government representatives. A discussion paper is
available that summarises the feedback to date.

Key issues that have emerged include communication; cultural and heritage
values; road management; funding; tourism and recreation; natural biodiversity
values and fire management.

A public meeting will be hosted by KAPA on May 16 from 6.30pm at the Killarney
QCWA Hall to progress the discussion.

Cattle drive wrap

THE Allora Cattle Drive Auction committee might be quietly weighing up the
options for its next fundraiser but members put aside some time recently to
celebrate their initial success.

Organiser Garry Wilson said committee raised an impressive $72,682.50 as part of
the cattle auction, cash donations and sponsors contributions, which will go
towards a new medical centre in the town.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WDN


                    Copyright 2012 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              717 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The Financial Express

                              March 2, 2015 Monday

Union Budget 2015: Service charge impact across the spectrum

BYLINE: Gireesh Chandra Prasad

LENGTH: 560  words

DATELINE: New Delhi


Spectrum auctions just got costlier for the mobile operators who are faced with
the prospect of doling out a fortune to bag the airwaves in the auctions
starting March 4. The operators will now have to shell out more because finance
minister Arun Jaitley has brought all the government services under the 14%
service tax net and this includes spectrum, too. Since the auctions are expected
to fetch around R100,000 crore to the exchequer, the operators would have to pay
an extra R14,000 crore as service tax.

At present, services provided by the government, except for a limited few, are
exempt from tax by way of their inclusion in a negative list. The Finance Bill
proposes that "all services provided by the government or local authority to a
business entity, except the services that are specifically exempted, or covered
under any other entry in the negative list, shall be liable to service tax."

Experts said that with this change, even receipts under coal auction and the
profit share that the government gets from oil and gas producers could be
subject to service tax. The spectrum buyer would have to pay service tax to
government upfront at the time of paying for the facility, but would eventually
be able to take credit for the tax paid against its output tax liability. This
would pose a cash flow issue to the successful bidders. Since companies could
make a third of the payment in the first year, followed by a two-year moratorium
and another 10 instalments, the tax payment to the government, too, would flow
in accordingly. Receipts from spectrum sale and other communication services is
estimated at R43,162 crore in 2014-15.

This is not the first time the government has made changes in taxation that
caught private contracting parties on the wrong foot. In 2009, the government
limited the seven-year income tax holiday for refiners to entities that started
production before 2012 March.

Also, consumers could end up paying as much as 16% tax on many services with the
Finance Bill 2015 seeking to give government the power to levy a 2% Swachh
Bharat Cess on the "value of all or certain" services that will be notified.
Since this cess is applied on the value of the service instead of the usual
practice of applying it on the actual tax outgo, the rate would be as high as
16% on the items it is applied.

Experts said the changes in the service tax regime are geared towards
implementing GST. "The Finance Bill makes a strong push towards the introduction
of GST by increasing the rate of service tax and by curtailing the list of items
on the exempted and negative lists significantly," explained Pratik Jain,
partner, Grant Thornton.

The Budget has also lowered or removed Special Additional Duty (SAD) on select
imported items aimed at addressing the accumulation of Cenvat credit that
businesses are unable to utilise. In industries where the value addition is less
or the excise duty on the final product is low, a high SAD leads to the
producer's inability to use credit for the duty paid on the raw material to meet
the output tax liability, explained R Muralidharan, senior director, Deloitte.
This has led to accumulation of tax credits for many industries. The items that
benefited from the cut include reed switch, diodes, transistors, capacitors and
controllers for use in making pacemakers and parts for making tablet computers.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2015 The Financial Express, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              718 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                            March 20, 2014 Thursday

Rennylea secures $13,000 top

BYLINE: SIMONE NORRIE

SECTION: LIVESTOCK GENERAL; Pg. 67

LENGTH: 388 words


VOLUME buyers were out in force at Rennylea Angus' annual sale at Culcairn last
Tuesday.

Prices topped at $13,000 and averaged $5467 with 68 of 73 bulls sold.

Mount Schanck Estate, Mount Gambier, South Australia, secured six bulls to an
average of $8167.

Mount Schanck Estate targets the direct-to-processor market selling its heavier
cattle, about 550 kilograms, to Thomas Foods and the lighter end at 480kg, to
Coles.

It secured Rennylea H516 for $13,000.

A son of NORC574 Rennylea C574, he was in the top one per cent for intramuscular
fat (IMF) and long-fed indices at +3.8 and +155, respectively.

The 766kg bull had a low birth- weight of +3.8 and a +110 600-day growth, and a
high milking value of +24.

He tested positive for rib and rump fats with +2.8 and +3.4, respectively, and
had an eye muscle area (EMA) of +5.7.

The SA producer also paid an equal second-top price of $11,000 for Rennylea
H851, a son of NORF384 Rennylea F384.

The 668kg bull ranked in the top one per cent for scrotal (42).

He had a +5.0bw, a 600-day growth of +114, tested positive in rib and rump
scores, an EMA of +7.5 and had a dollar index of +148 for long fed.

Daryl and Grant Ford, Ford Cattle Company, Tea Gardens, secured five bulls to a
top of $11,000 and an average of $7800.

They paid $11,000 for Rennylea H73, a son of BNAD145 Tuwharetoa Regent D145.

The 732kg bull was in the top one per cent for IMF at +3.5, had an EMA of +6.8
and had positive rib and rump fats.

He had a +5.0bw, a 600-day growth of +110 and a long-fed dollar index value of
+142.

The Fords were first-time Rennylea clients and said they'd travelled based on
the reputation of the genetics.

"We're looking for meat and marbling to target that purebred, grass-fed Angus
market, and we'd heard of the Rennylea brand," Grant Ford said.

The father and son run 3500 breeders, and raise both weaner cattle and also grow
out cattle for feedlotters.

Tarlo producer KR Reed, Taralga Road, also took home five bulls to average
$4900.

Central West bidder D.W. Haley, Fitzgerald's Valley, secured Rennylea H638 for
$10,500.

The son of NAQA241 Ardrossan Equator A241 was in the top one per cent for IMF
(+3.5) and long-fed index dollar value (+152).

He weighs 732kg, had a +4.2bw and a +110 600-day growth, tested positive in rib
and rump scores and has an EMA of +6.8.

The sale was conducted by Landmark.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              719 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                     Lyon County News, Inc. (George, Iowa)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                               September 24, 2015

USDA Commits $2.5 Million to Expand New Farmer Education;
Training will also help returning service members, underserved, and urban
producers

BYLINE: Lyon County News, Inc. staff

LENGTH: 394  words


PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 22, 2015 -- Agriculture Deputy Secretary Krysta Harden today
announced that $2.5 million in grants is now available for projects to educate
new and underserved farmers about more than 20 U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) Farm Service Agency programs that can provide financial, disaster or
technical assistance to the agricultural community.

The grants will be awarded to nonprofits and public higher education
institutions that develop proposals to improve farmer education on topics such
as financial training, value-added production, recordkeeping, property
inheritance, and crop production practices.

"We want to partner with nonprofits, colleges and universities who share USDA's
priority of helping more' Americans enter farming as a profession, whether they
are new or underserved farmers, returning Service members, minorities, women,
and urban producers or those who sell their crops locally," said Harden.

USDA will conduct four evaluation periods to review applications, with the
deadlines of Nov. 20, 2015, Jan. 22, 2015, Mar. 18, 2016, and May 27, 2016.
Awards between $20,000 and $100,000 per applicant will be available. To learn
more about the funding solicitation and the related Farm Service Agency
programs, details can be found at www.grants.gov with the reference number
USDA-FSA-CA-2015-001. For nonprofits and public institutions of higher education
that are considering participation, an online informational session will be
conducted on Sept. 28, 2015. Additional information is posted on the Web at
www.fsa.usda.gov/outreach.

This funding builds on historic investments made in rural America over the past
six years and supports programs enacted by the 2014 Farm Bill, which achieved
meaningful reform and billions of dollars in savings for the taxpayer. Since
enactment, the U.S. Department of Agriculture has progressively implemented each
provision of this critical legislation, including providing disaster relief to
farmers and ranchers; strengthening risk management tools; expanding access to
rural credit; funding critical research; establishing innovative public-private
conservation partnerships; developing new markets for rural-made products; and
investing in infrastructure, housing and community facilities to help improve
quality of life in rural America. For more information, visit
www.usda.gov/farmbill.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Farming

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: LYY

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2015 Lyon County News, Inc.


                              720 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          Bush Telegraph (Queensland)

                                January 22, 2013

Hands-on role for butcher;
Getaway: Murwillumbah businessman regards weekly visit to Warwick saleyards as a
"~bit of a break'

SECTION: Pg. 6

LENGTH: 780  words


Toni Somes

REPORTER

For Granted...

Butcher Jim Grant shares his thoughts on meat trends...

Cooking shows have had the biggest impact on butchers in a decade.

Australians are back in the kitchen after 10 years focused on fast food and
eating out.

Customers now want special cuts so they are turning from supermarkets back to
butchers.

One of his top sellers is beef cuts that can be slow cooked.

And customers are prepared to pay more for quality products.

WHEN you are a butcher, businessman, livestock buyer, father to seven, as well
as a husband, you can be hard pushed to find time to be a holidaymaker: Just ask
Jim Grant.

The Murwillumbah-based operator, who makes the four-hour return trip to Warwick
cattle sale each Tuesday, admits he finds it difficult to factor in a break.

"I had a long weekend off about four years ago," he laughed.

"Nowadays I think of a day buying cattle at Warwick as a bit of a break."

Like many small business owners - he and wife Isobel have four butcher shops
along the coast - he feels a pressing need to have a constant and hands-on role
in his operation, Grant's Quality Meats.

Four of his children have followed his lead with full-time roles in the
business, which has stores at Murwillumbah, Pottsville Beach, Burleigh Waters
and Maroochydore.

"My family were farmers and I started my apprenticeship as a butcher about 40
years ago," Mr Grant said.

"We expanded the business about 26 years ago and it's had its highs and lows,
but we've got through."

Early on he sourced beef from the Kyogle and Casino region but a few years ago
he shifted his buying focus to Warwick, preferring the well-finished
British-breeds from the Southern Downs.

"There started to be more Brahman and French-cross cattle around Kyogle and
Casino and the region was so far from the grain growing area that producers were
reluctant to pay $30 or $40 a tonne to finish their stock on grain," Mr Grant
said.

"At Warwick I find producers often grow their own grain or have close access to
grain that they tend to produce some well finished, British bred cattle, which
suits us."

These days he buys 20-30 head of cattle out of Warwick saleyards each week,
favouring Angus and Hereford lines and preferring young cattle in the 250-400kg
live weight range.

As the sole cattle buyer for the business, he has an "open book" when it comes
to price.

"If you want the best cattle, you have to be prepared to pay for them," Mr Grant
said.

"I pay the market value from week to week and I work on the principle quality
always sells itself.

"The market has been a little soft lately and I don't think it is a good thing
for anybody.

"When prices are good, cattle producers put more money back into their business
and that results in a better product for butchers like me."

He also buys trade lambs from Warwick's Wednesday sheep sale, taking an average
60 head in the 40kg-plus weight range each week.

"We then get our livestock processed by Carey Brothers at Yangan because they
offer exceptional service and I feel very strongly about supporting other
family-owned businesses," Mr Grant said.

"I believe the bigger the business, the worse the quality of product.

"Once you get bigger and it becomes mass processing, you lose the ability to
really control quality.

"And it is the small businesses across Australia that continues to keep local
people in a job."

His ardent passion for small enterprise also puts something akin to a "cap" on
his own operation.

"We are at the size where we have 14 employees over the four shops and getting
bigger means we cross the magic line from small to medium business," Mr Grant
said.

"I also make all the ham, bacon and small goods for us and I think you get a
better result when you do it in a small way: Quality control changes when
products are mass produced.

"Business in Australia is so over-regulated that for many small businesses just
the level of paperwork discourages growth."

On a different level Mr Grant said there were challenges when you merged family
and profession.

"Working with family means having clear roles and good communication," he said.

"My wife and I have the biggest share in the business but, when it comes to
decisions, we make sure there is "~consultation and debate' which involves all
the family."

Family is also high on the list of reasons why Grant's Quality Meats doesn't
trade seven days a week at any of its stores.

"We did try seven-day trading at a couple of stores for a while but it didn't
work for us," Mr Grant said.

"We don't try to compete with the supermarkets: We offer quality rather than
quantity.

"If you want to buy our product you have to come in on one of the six days we
are open."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WBT


                    Copyright 2013 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              721 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 EKantipur.com

                              July 5, 2010 Monday

Accord for agro project inked

LENGTH: 347  words

DATELINE: KATHMANDU


KATHMANDU, July 5 -- The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
and the government of Nepal on Monday signed a loan agreement of US$ 7.6 million
and a grant agreement of US$ 7.6 million aiming to reduce poverty and
vulnerability of people living in the hills and mountains through agricultural
diversification.

The diversification effort will focus on high-value crops, non-timber forest
products, medicinal and aromatic plants and livestock.

Lal Shankar Ghimire, joint secretary at the Ministry of Finance, and Ron
Hartman, IFAD country programme manager, signed the loan agreement.

The project aims to reduce poverty and social disharmony in the hills and
mountains of the Mid-Western Development Region and address the issue of
economic isolation. Poverty persists in these areas because of conflict, poor
infrastructure and lack of access to services and markets. The project will help
to integrate the rural poor, especially women and marginalized groups, into
high-value agriculture, value chains and markets and employment opportunities
that lead to improved incomes.

This IFAD project is expected to benefit about 52,000 households (285,000
people). The target group consists of members of poor and vulnerable households
that lack access to resources and opportunities. The most vulnerable among this
group are women and members of socially disadvantaged groups such as Dalits and
indigenous groups. The project will have an innovative approach to market-led
value chain development, using the entrepreneur as the starting point rather
than the producer, said IFAD.

Expected results include more efficient and profitable value chain systems for
high-value commodities for producers, improved status and incomes for women and
enhanced gender balance in rural households and increased employment
opportunities for the landless and quasi-landless through project vocational
training and job placement. Published by HT Syndication with permission from
EKantipur.com. For more information on news feed please contact Sarabjit
Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                 Copyright 2010 Kantipur Publications Pvt. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              722 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                     The Glenville Democrat (West Virginia)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                December 4, 2014

USDA Announces New Support to Help Schools Purchase More Food from Local Farmers

BYLINE: The Glenville Democrat staff

LENGTH: 1042  words


Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced more than $5 million in grants for
82 projects spanning 42 states and the U.S. Virgin Islands that support the U.S.
Department of Agriculture's (USDA) efforts to connect school cafeterias with
local farmers and ranchers through its Farm to School Program. The program helps
schools purchase more food from local farmers and ranchers in their communities,
expanding access to healthy local food for school children and supporting local
economies. According to USDA's first-ever Farm to School Census released earlier
this year, school districts participating in farm to school programs purchased
and served over $385 million in local food in school year 2011-2012, with more
than half of participating schools planning to increase their purchases of local
food in the future.

"USDA is proud to support communities across the country as they plan and
implement innovative farm to school projects," said Vilsack. "These inspiring
collaborations provide students with healthy, fresh food, while supporting
healthy local economies. Through farm to school projects, community partners are
coming together to ensure a bright future for students, and for local farmers
and ranchers."

Secretary Vilsack made this announcement at Common Market, a pioneering food hub
in Philadelphia that connects wholesale customers to farmers in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Delaware. Common Market is receiving a grant to support their
"An Apple a Day" Program. The facility will act as a bridge between Pennsylvania
Family Farms, a small Pennsylvania value-added processor, and public charter
schools to provide food safety, product development, packaging, educational,
marketing, planning, ordering and delivery support to farm and school food
service partners.

Together, Common Market and the other selected projects will serve more than
4,800 schools and 2.8 million students, nearly 51 percent of whom live in rural
communities. A few additional examples include:

Tift County School System in Georgia will build on its current efforts to
provide agriculture and nutrition programs that are experiential, educational
and better connect students to local and regional food. Proposed activities
include retrofitting a school bus to serve as a farm bus/rolling
classroom,retrofittingacanningplant to preserve local tomatoes, and irrigating
the school farm to expand the growing season and increase yield.

Colonial School District in Delaware will have students and staff directly
engaged in the entire process of planning, growing and processing foods,
creating new menus, and placing healthy foods directly into school nutrition
programs. At the Historic Penn Farm, high school students will grow crops for
both the school's breakfast and lunch programs.

The Inter Tribal Buffalo Council in South Dakota intends to provide locally
raised tribal bison meat into the school lunch programs, procure other locally
produced food products, and implement school gardens.

The National Future Farmers of America Organization (FFA) will connect local
youth producers/FFA members to school food buyers and host a series of webinars
focused on developing state level partnerships.

For a complete list of FY 15 Farm to

School grant recipients, please visit:
http://www.Jhs.usda.gov/sites/default/fileslf2s/FY_2015_Grant_
A-ward_Summaries.pdf

USDA's Farm to School Grants help schools respond to the growing demand for
locally sourced foods and increase market opportunities for producers and food
businesses, including food processors, manufacturers, and distributors. Grants
will also be used to support agriculture and nutrition education efforts such as
school gardens, field trips to local farms, and cooking classes. USDA Farm to
School Conference and Event Grants support regional, state, and national
conferences, events and/or trainings that have a specific emphasis on developing
supply chain relationships by connecting local producers to school food buyers,
along with events and trainings that provide technical assistance or other
programming in the area of local procurement, food safety, culinary education
and integration of agriculture-based curriculum.

USDA's Farm to School Program is made possible by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act of 2010, which authorized USDA to provide grants and technical assistance to
help schools gain better access to local foods. Since 2012, USDA has awarded
$15.1 million in grants to 221 Farm to School projects in 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and the Virgin Islands. The Farm to School program is a
core element of the USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food Initiative, which
coordinates the department's work on local food systems.

USDA is focused on improving childhood nutrition and empowering f amilies to
make healthier food choices by providing science-based information and advice,
while expanding the availability of healthy food.

America's students now have healthier and more nutritious school meals due to
improved nutrition standards implemented as a result of the historic Healthy,
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010.

USDA's MyPlate symbol and the resources at ChooseMyPlate.gov provide quick, easy
reference tools for parents, teachers, healthcare professionals and communities.

USDA awarded $5.2 million in grants to provide training and technical assistance
for child nutrition foodservice professionals and support stronger school
nutrition education programs.

Since 2009, USDA has provided $160 million in kitchen equipment funding to
states and schools. The President's fiscal year 2015 budget requests an
additional $35 million for kitchen equipment grants. These grants are one of
several ways that USDA is supporting schools as the implement the updated
nutrition standards.

USDA recently launched a pilot project, called Team Up for School Nutrition
Success, which is working with schools to identify challenges, provide free,
customized training, and match schools with mentors who have successfully
addressed similar challenges.

Collectively these policies and actions are helping to combat child hunger and
obesity, while improving the health and nutrition of the nation's children. For
more information on USDA's Farm to School Program, please visit
www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GNV

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2014 The Glenville Democrat


                              723 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The Financial Express

                              March 1, 2015 Sunday

Union Budget 2015: Service charge impact across the spectrum

BYLINE: Gireesh Chandra Prasad

LENGTH: 560  words


Spectrum auctions just got costlier for the mobile operators who are faced with
the prospect of doling out a fortune to bag the airwaves in the auctions
starting March 4. The operators will now have to shell out more because finance
minister Arun Jaitley has brought all the government services under the 14%
service tax net and this includes spectrum, too. Since the auctions are expected
to fetch around R100,000 crore to the exchequer, the operators would have to pay
an extra R14,000 crore as service tax.

At present, services provided by the government, except for a limited few, are
exempt from tax by way of their inclusion in a negative list. The Finance Bill
proposes that "all services provided by the government or local authority to a
business entity, except the services that are specifically exempted, or covered
under any other entry in the negative list, shall be liable to service tax."

Experts said that with this change, even receipts under coal auction and the
profit share that the government gets from oil and gas producers could be
subject to service tax. The spectrum buyer would have to pay service tax to
government upfront at the time of paying for the facility, but would eventually
be able to take credit for the tax paid against its output tax liability. This
would pose a cash flow issue to the successful bidders. Since companies could
make a third of the payment in the first year, followed by a two-year moratorium
and another 10 instalments, the tax payment to the government, too, would flow
in accordingly. Receipts from spectrum sale and other communication services is
estimated at R 43,162 crore in 2014-15.

This is not the first time the government has made changes in taxation that
caught private contracting parties on the wrong foot. In 2009, the government
limited the seven-year income tax holiday for refiners to entities that started
production before 2012 March.

Also, consumers could end up paying as much as 16% tax on many services with the
Finance Bill 2015 seeking to give government the power to levy a 2% Swachh
Bharat Cess on the "value of all or certain" services that will be notified.
Since this cess is applied on the value of the service instead of the usual
practice of applying it on the actual tax outgo, the rate would be as high as
16% on the items it is applied.

Experts said the changes in the service tax regime are geared towards
implementing GST. "The Finance Bill makes a strong push towards the introduction
of GST by increasing the rate of service tax and by curtailing the list of items
on the exempted and negative lists significantly," explained Pratik Jain,
partner, Grant Thornton.

The Budget has also lowered or removed Special Additional Duty (SAD) on select
imported items aimed at addressing the accumulation of Cenvat credit that
businesses are unable to utilise. In industries where the value addition is less
or the excise duty on the final product is low, a high SAD leads to the
producer's inability to use credit for the duty paid on the raw material to meet
the output tax liability, explained R Muralidharan, senior director, Deloitte.
This has led to accumulation of tax credits for many industries. The items that
benefited from the cut include reed switch, diodes, transistors, capacitors and
controllers for use in making pacemakers and parts for making tablet computers.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2015 The Financial Express, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              724 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                            March 3, 2001, Saturday

Wisconsin farmers need to document nutrient-management plans

BYLINE: JOHN EVERLY

SECTION: Pg. a3

LENGTH: 554 words


LANCASTER, Wis. - It is no longer enough for Wisconsin farmers to be good
stewards of the land.

Now they have to prove it.

Increasing scrutiny by federal, state and local governments is requiring farmers
to document their farming practices. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
and other governmental agencies are focusing on agriculture's effects on water
quality.

"It's something farmers are definitely going to have to address," said Ted Bay,
of Grant County Extension. "Demonstrating this understanding of nutrient
management through a formal plan will help minimize EPA's intrusion into
day-to-day farming practices."

A meeting last week in Lancaster focused on the fundamentals of farm
nutrient-management plans.

A nutrient-management plan is a blueprint for a farm's program to protect water
quality. It combines soil-conservation practices, manure management and crop
management strategies.

"Nutrient-management planning is one of the best tools to use to control high
fertilizer costs. In addition to giving producers an in-depth look at their crop
fertilizer system, nutrient-management planning also shows farmers how to
minimize the environmental impact of their farming operation," Bay said.

Bryan Black, owner of Ag-Trac in Darlington, agreed. Black said regular soil
testing helps farmers determine the optimum fertilization needs of their land.

The idea is to "keep money in the farmer's pocket, keep him more profitable,"
Black said. "Whether you've got 5,000 cows or 50 cows, it's equally important."

Gary Brandt, crop consultant with Quality Crop Care in Darlington, advises his
clients to take credit for nitrogen in manure. Rather than looking at manure as
waste, farmers should consider its dollar value as a resource, he said.

Grant County adopted its own water-quality regulations in 1999. Local ordinances
can be more restrictive than state water-quality standards.

Grant County livestock producers planning new manure-storage structures, or
modifying existing structures, are required to obtain permits. Permits are
issued to farms with nutrient-management plans. Producers must submit a
construction plan that meets standards and specifications set by the Natural
Resource Conservation Service. The plans must also be engineer-certified.

The permits are issued by the Grant County Land Conservation Department. Lynda
Wilburn, with the department, said the agency reviews the plans "to ensure that
the siting of these were in an environmentally suitable area, and that they
weren't endangering our ground water."

The Grant County ordinance applies to farms of all sizes. Plans must be based on
soil tests that are no more than four years old.

State law requires permits for large livestock farms to dispose of manure.
Permitted operations must have a nutrient-management plan in place.

<B>__________________________</B>

<B>News you can use</B>

A nutrient management planning meeting will be held from 12:30 to 3 p.m.
Thursday at the Youth and Ag Center in Lancaster.

The meeting will take planners through the first step in developing a plan that
meets Natural Resource Conservation Service technical standards.

The program is free of charge.

For more information, or to register, contact the Grant County Extension office
at 608/723-2125.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 2001, Telegraph-Herald


                              725 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                             August 9, 1988 Tuesday
                                  Late Edition

SUBSIDIES OF $US8BN PROP UP HIGH-COST COAL PRODUCERS

BYLINE: PETER GILL

SECTION: RESOURCES; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 429 words


Subsidisation of high-cost coal producers cost $US8 billion last year and
continued to deflect sales away from low-cost producers like Australia.

The extent of financial support for high-cost producers is detailed in the
latest review of the coal industry world-wide by the Paris-based International
Energy Agency. Its report, Coal Prospects and Policies in IEA Countries, was
published last week.

And despite a May 1987 agreement by the 21 IEA member governments to reduce and
eventually eliminate trade barriers, the IEA says support for high-cost coal
production is increasing.

On the broader outlook for the coal industry, the IEA presents a mixed view.

"The present and short to medium term picture of stiff competition, low profits,
cost containment and rationalisation in the coal industry contrasts sharply with
the longer term prospect of expansion for faster growth in coal demand," the IEA
report says.

It suggests that demand will accelerate in the 1990s due to higher demand for
electricity and lower prospects for nuclear power than previously envisaged.

The IEA has assessed financial support for high-cost producers with the Producer
Subsidy Equivalent (PSE) analysis developed within the OECD for assigning a
single monetary measure to the value of subsidies and other indirect support
mechanisms.

Support measures can include direct subsidies, purchases by government utilities
above market prices, and restrictions on coal imports.

The IEA analysis reveals Germany and Japan as providing the most support, with
subsidies under the PSE calculation of $US5.8 billion and $US1.3 billion
respectively in 1987. In support per tonne, Belgium tops the list with $US96 a
tonne - almost double the current price of coking coal. (See table for full
details).

The IEA questions the validity of one of the key arguments for price support
measures - that of ensuring energy security from domestic coal production. It
suggests claims that imported coal supply is less secure than domestic sources
are "over-simplified", and points out that political support for high-cost
domestic production "may not always be available".

The IEA concludes: "The financial burdens of the government subsidies and the
higher prices paid by consumers (for services like electricity) have increased
recently as world coal prices have fallen.

"Furthermore, these practices have diverted coal sales away from low-cost
producers at times of over-supply. Governments, in both high-cost and low-cost
producing areas, face severe political, social and regional problems in
restructuring their coal industries."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: World coal subsidies given in total value and value per tonne
for 1985 to 1987

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1988 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              726 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Business Day (South Africa)

                             March 24, 2017 Friday
                              Business Day Edition

Black producers still excluded from mainstream value chain

BYLINE: Bekezela Phakathi

SECTION: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE

LENGTH: 291  words


AGRICULTURAL CHALLENGES

Black producers still excluded from mainstream value chain

Black farmers continue to face challenges in accessing markets, finance and
technical support to link them with integrated value chains, the Land Bank says.

Pleas by black farmers for more state support have been drowned out by the
land-reform debate and talk of expropriation without compensation.

Black farmers are largely not organised and remain excluded from the mainstream
agricultural value chain, says Land Bank CEO Tshokolo Nchocho.

Current producer support is uncoordinated and not comprehensive. Further
challenges include poor production and market infrastructure.

The Land Bank, a statutory body with a mandate to support the development of the
agricultural sector, has said it will pay special attention to the needs of
previously disadvantaged players including black farmers.

The Institute for Poverty, Land and Agrarian Studies, has stated that more than
70% of commercial farms in SA are owned by white farmers. There are about 39,000
white commercial farmers and 5,300 black farmers, says the African Farmers
Association of SA.

General secretary Aggrey Mahanjana said on Monday that while the Land Bank was
doing all it could to support black farmers, they lacked & comprehensive
support& including working capital and training. & Without postresettlement
support, land reform will fail. It will be meaningless and we will hear of farms
becoming white elephants,& said Mahanjana.

Funding should be tackled jointly by government and the private sector.

In his 2017 budget review, Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said the government
would over the next three years, spend more than R5.5bn on conditional grants to
support programmes.

phakathib@businesslive.co.za

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              727 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Business Day (South Africa)

                             March 24, 2017 Friday
                              Business Day Edition

Black producers still excluded from mainstream value chain

BYLINE: Bekezela Phakathi

SECTION: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE

LENGTH: 291  words


AGRICULTURAL CHALLENGES

Black producers still excluded from mainstream value chain

Black farmers continue to face challenges in accessing markets, finance and
technical support to link them with integrated value chains, the Land Bank says.

Pleas by black farmers for more state support have been drowned out by the
land-reform debate and talk of expropriation without compensation.

Black farmers are largely not organised and remain excluded from the mainstream
agricultural value chain, says Land Bank CEO Tshokolo Nchocho.

Current producer support is uncoordinated and not comprehensive. Further
challenges include poor production and market infrastructure.

The Land Bank, a statutory body with a mandate to support the development of the
agricultural sector, has said it will pay special attention to the needs of
previously disadvantaged players including black farmers.

The Institute for Poverty, Land and Agrarian Studies, has stated that more than
70% of commercial farms in SA are owned by white farmers. There are about 39,000
white commercial farmers and 5,300 black farmers, says the African Farmers
Association of SA.

General secretary Aggrey Mahanjana said on Monday that while the Land Bank was
doing all it could to support black farmers, they lacked & comprehensive
support& including working capital and training. & Without postresettlement
support, land reform will fail. It will be meaningless and we will hear of farms
becoming white elephants,& said Mahanjana.

Funding should be tackled jointly by government and the private sector.

In his 2017 budget review, Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said the government
would over the next three years, spend more than R5.5bn on conditional grants to
support programmes.

phakathib@businesslive.co.za

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              728 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Business Day (South Africa)

                             March 24, 2017 Friday
                              Business Day Edition

Black producers still excluded from mainstream value chain

BYLINE: Bekezela Phakathi

SECTION: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE

LENGTH: 291  words


AGRICULTURAL CHALLENGES

Black producers still excluded from mainstream value chain

Black farmers continue to face challenges in accessing markets, finance and
technical support to link them with integrated value chains, the Land Bank says.

Pleas by black farmers for more state support have been drowned out by the
land-reform debate and talk of expropriation without compensation.

Black farmers are largely not organised and remain excluded from the mainstream
agricultural value chain, says Land Bank CEO Tshokolo Nchocho.

Current producer support is uncoordinated and not comprehensive. Further
challenges include poor production and market infrastructure.

The Land Bank, a statutory body with a mandate to support the development of the
agricultural sector, has said it will pay special attention to the needs of
previously disadvantaged players including black farmers.

The Institute for Poverty, Land and Agrarian Studies, has stated that more than
70% of commercial farms in SA are owned by white farmers. There are about 39,000
white commercial farmers and 5,300 black farmers, says the African Farmers
Association of SA.

General secretary Aggrey Mahanjana said on Monday that while the Land Bank was
doing all it could to support black farmers, they lacked & comprehensive
support& including working capital and training. & Without postresettlement
support, land reform will fail. It will be meaningless and we will hear of farms
becoming white elephants,& said Mahanjana.

Funding should be tackled jointly by government and the private sector.

In his 2017 budget review, Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said the government
would over the next three years, spend more than R5.5bn on conditional grants to
support programmes.

phakathib@businesslive.co.za

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              729 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Business Day (South Africa)

                             March 24, 2017 Friday
                              Business Day Edition

Black producers still excluded from mainstream value chain

BYLINE: Bekezela Phakathi

SECTION: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE

LENGTH: 291  words


AGRICULTURAL CHALLENGES

Black producers still excluded from mainstream value chain

Black farmers continue to face challenges in accessing markets, finance and
technical support to link them with integrated value chains, the Land Bank says.

Pleas by black farmers for more state support have been drowned out by the
land-reform debate and talk of expropriation without compensation.

Black farmers are largely not organised and remain excluded from the mainstream
agricultural value chain, says Land Bank CEO Tshokolo Nchocho.

Current producer support is uncoordinated and not comprehensive. Further
challenges include poor production and market infrastructure.

The Land Bank, a statutory body with a mandate to support the development of the
agricultural sector, has said it will pay special attention to the needs of
previously disadvantaged players including black farmers.

The Institute for Poverty, Land and Agrarian Studies, has stated that more than
70% of commercial farms in SA are owned by white farmers. There are about 39,000
white commercial farmers and 5,300 black farmers, says the African Farmers
Association of SA.

General secretary Aggrey Mahanjana said on Monday that while the Land Bank was
doing all it could to support black farmers, they lacked & comprehensive
support& including working capital and training. & Without postresettlement
support, land reform will fail. It will be meaningless and we will hear of farms
becoming white elephants,& said Mahanjana.

Funding should be tackled jointly by government and the private sector.

In his 2017 budget review, Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said the government
would over the next three years, spend more than R5.5bn on conditional grants to
support programmes.

phakathib@businesslive.co.za

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              730 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              Western Daily Press

                                  May 6, 2003

Huge Grant For Elephant Grass Business

SECTION: News; Business; Agri/Fish/Food; Pg. 1 0605WESTDP2D3hugeg

LENGTH: 267 words


A Somerset farmer is processing his first king-sized commercial crop in a new
enterprise set up with support from Defra.  Stanley Dusting, from Kingston St
Mary, near Taunton, has established Fennington Fibres to process and pack the
miscanthus he grows on his farm.

Miscanthus, which grows up to 10 feet high and is also know as Elephant Grass -
is being hailed as an ideal diversification, and dozens of producers across the
West are now growing it.

The versatile low-input crop can be used for everything from thatch to fuel for
power stations, but Mr Dusting is using his for high-quality horse bedding.

Defra's £51,000 grant has helped him buy equipment to remove dust and package
harvested grass in 20kg bags.

Miscanthus produces highly effective horse bedding - it is very absorbent, lasts
longer than wood shavings and is biodegradable.

The business will establish a market outlet for other local producers.

"It has meant that the cost of the baler was not too prohibitive and we have
been able to harvest and bag our first cut of the cane early this year," Mr
Dusting said.

"The grass grows well and is a perennial crop that requires no fertiliser - an
ideal cash crop." Malcolm Chalmers, of Defra's rural development team in the
South West, said: "We are very pleased to be able to support Mr Dusting in an
enterprise that enables him to diversify and add value to his product.

"It is cheering to see there is such a demand for this quality bedding." Defra
has been allocated £44million for the Processing and Marketing Grant Programme
from 2001 to 2006.


LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                      Copyright 2003 Bristol United Press


                              731 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                              May 9, 1991 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

NEW C & A REPORT SAYS CRA'S BID 'TOO LOW'

BYLINE: SUE MITCHELL

SECTION: INVESTMENT; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 387 words


A second independent report has backed up BT Australia's view that CRA Ltd's
$437 million takeover offer for Coal and Allied Industries Ltd significantly
undervalues the company.

The report by Grant Samuel and Associates, commissioned by C&A to add weight to
its takeover defence, values Australia's third-largest coal producer at between
$10.70 and $11.20 a share and says the CRA offer is neither fair nor reasonable.

This is well above the $7.85 a share being offered by the CRA bidding vehicle,
Kembla Coal and Coke.

However, it is below the controversial BT valuation of $12 a share, which was
attacked by CRA and its adviser, Macquarie Bank, as being excessively
optimistic.

CRA also attacked BT on the grounds it was not independent because the bank is
advising C&A on its defence, has built up a 7 per cent shareholding and is
entitled to an incentive payment, the size of which will be determined by the
outcome of the bid.

CRA remained unimpressed last night and a spokesman said: "Clearly the market
wasn't influenced by the last report and even though this is 10 to 40 per cent
below the last we don't believe the market will be influenced by this one
either."

C&A's chairman, Sir Neil Currie, said both reports clearly showed that CRA's
price was inadequate and urged shareholders to ignore the offer.

Grant Samuel valued C&A's mining assets at between $799.5 million and$828.1
million, compared with BT's $786 million.

It put C&A's liabilities at $191.7 million, compared with BT's $119 million,
estimating net assets of $607.8 million to $636.4 million compared with BT's net
of $667 million.

Grant Samuel used an exchange rate of US77c compared with BT's US78c and applied
a cash-flow discount rate of 13.7 per cent, considerably higher than BT's 12.8
per cent, which attracted the strongest criticism from CRA.

It said $10.70 was equivalent to a cost of $61 per annual tonne of coal, well
below corresponding figures for recent coal company acquisitions.

"Acquisition of Coal and Allied at $10.70 to $11.20 a share would represent very
low cost expansion for an existing coal producer," Grant Samuel said.

It added that C&A shares were due for a rerating and could reasonably trade
above $7.85 in the absence of CRA's bid because of stronger management, lower
overheads, greater output and significant growth potential.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1991 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              732 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 15, 2010 Wednesday

Funds available to help farmers

BYLINE: Dawn Kurry, Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 472 words


Sept. 15--Dawn M. Kurry

Richmond County Daily Journal

Farming families in Richmond County may have funds becoming available to them.

The N.C. Tobacco Trust Fund Commission and the N.C. Rural Center have partnered
to bring more grant funds to North Carolina Farmers. The Family Farm Innovation
Fund combines $1 million of state funding administered through the Rural Center,
with a match of $1 million from the N.C. Tobacco Trust Fund Commission. The $2
million has been combined with grant funding available to farmers from several
other funding agencies that are already underway as NCTTFC projects.

Over the next year, the programs are expected to provide grants for up to 1,500
farm projects and energy efficiency training for an additional 2,400 farmers.

Applications are available for three grants. Farmers can apply for the Farm
Energy Efficiency Project which provides low-cost energy audits and grants to
help farmers boost energy efficiency. The energy audits and grants may be used
to fulfill requirements of USDA's REAP program. They can apply for the Tobacco
Communities Reinvestment Fund which the Rural Advancement Foundation
International has set aside as cost-sharing grants to help farmers develop new
farm income. The N.C. Value-Added Cost Sharing Program provides farmers with
grant writing assistance, feasibility assessments, matching funds and equipment
to help farmers implement value-added production.

Federal programs for which farmers may leverage grant funds include the Rural
Energy for America Program (REAP), which has grants and guaranteed loans to help
farmers, ranchers and rural small businesses with energy efficiency improvements
and renewable energy projects, or the Value-Added Producer Grants, which help
farmers produce and market value-added agricultural products.

Anyone interested in the Farm Energy Efficiency Project can visit
www.ncfarmenergy.org. For more information on the Tobacco Communities
Reinvestment fund can visit www.ncfarmgrants.org for more information on how to
apply. For information on the N.C. Value-Added cost Sharing Program visit
www.ncmarketready.org.

Any other information about the Family Farm Innovation Fund can be found at
www.tobaccotrustfund.org or call the NCTTFC office at 919-733-2160.

Dawn Kurry can be reached at dkurry@yourdailyjournal.com or by calling 997-3111
ext. 15.

To see more of the Richmond County Daily Journal, or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.yourdailyjournal.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Richmond
County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune
Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com,
e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or call 866-280-5210 (outside the United
States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100915-RU-Funds-available-to-help-farmers-0915-20100915

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RU


                                 Copyright 2010


                              733 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                      Northern Farmer Bulletin (Australia)

                                 June 29, 2009

Help at hand after flooding disaster

SECTION: Pg. 13

LENGTH: 846  words



HIGHLIGHT: Eligible producers can claim on invoices


CLAIMS by eligible producers for the 'up to $15,000' grant following the recent
floods can now be made on invoices. This is a great help to the cash-strapped
producers that lost roads, yards, fences, pastures and stock - and many who have
been forced to sell stock.

Eligible producers are those that earn more than 50 per cent of their gross
income from agriculture and are located in the local government areas of
Ballina, Bellingen, Byron, Clarence, Coffs Harbour, Kempsey, Kyogle, Lismore,
Nambucca, Port Macquarie, Hastings, Richmond Valley and the Tweed.

The application form can be obtained from the NSW Rural Assistance Authority by
ringing 1800 678 593 or 6387 3000, or from the website www.raa.nsw.gov.au.

The application must accompany a copy of your latest council rate notice to
prove ownership of the property. A copy of the latest personal and farm
enterprise taxation return and profit or expenditure is also required in the
form of invoices or receipts.

It is very important to record that payment assistance can only occur on
production of tax invoices for damages and the claim must be received by the
authority by September 30, 2009.

With cattle producers, the main claims will be against loss of roads, damage to
yards, fences and pastures. Fencing infrastructure like posts, droppers, wire
and steel posts will be needed as will labour to assist removal and erection.

Boundary fences are the first concern. Where this has taken time to get to,
because of lack of casual labour and access, the cost of sending any stock to
agistment must be met. Half the freight to and from is claimable thought the
LHPA.

I'd hope the costs included in forced sale, getting to saleyards and abattoirs,
would also be met. There is a big call for heavy machinery to repair or replace
farm roads and bridges and yards and operators may not be able to get to jobs
for some time, so it is important to obtain invoices before the cut-off date,
now that the details of the grants are formalised.

Neighbours really should get together and do the many clean-up jobs required. It
may be appropriate to charge this cost out, although in times past such help
just came naturally and gratis.

But whether or not, it is essential to fix those boundary fences and gates and
keep the stock in winter maintenance or production order. The case may be that
farmers are buying fodder for flood-stricken stock and that must come under
'damage to livestock'.

It is here the authority should take note of those who prepared for such a
crisis by conserving their own feed. Many, of which I am one, are feeding out
silage conserved for the months of July to September and have been feeding this
precious resource since April 1.

Others, who punt on getting through winter and don't conserve anything, get the
assistance to do so because of the floods. It doesn't seem right that those who
thought ahead will run out just when they need it in winter and early spring and
then not be eligible.

The horticulturalists and small croppers have had a battering with many losing
this year's production. To be eligible they and others must prove they intend to
continue or re-establish their agricultural enterprise. Many are part-time
farmers and are important to regional agriculture.

There is no doubt this $15,000 grant will be invaluable to those in agricultural
production earning above 50 per cent of their income from agriculture, but I do
feel concerned for those that are part-time farmers who rely on some income from
their land to keep the wolf from the door. Many are themselves part-time workers
and need this income. Their production, when added up, makes them very important
food producers in the whole scheme of things. But I suppose the line must be
drawn somewhere.

However, I had hoped, where deserving cases existed, some help to these
part-timers, who are not hobby farmers, would have been granted for certain
infrastructure and crop losses.

There are also low-interest loans available for those in distress with no
interest for two years and then, 2 per cent for 10 years - up to $130,000
depending on circumstances.

The condition of pastures and winter production must be a cause of great
concern. The soil is still boggy and there is no evaporation from wind . With
little sun from the short days it will stay moisture-laden for a long time.

The farmers who sowed grass and oats with fertiliser prior to the last flood
will be praying for signs of germination. Others have re-sown already if they
can get into their paddocks. Pastures have been badly damaged and will be of
little value until spring as the colder winter sets in.

And the last word on the disaster. The Minister for Families, Housing, Community
Services and Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin, said on the ABC that people
affected by the April flood couldn't get the $1000 grant because that flood was
not a major disaster like it was in the north of Queensland.

So now we are categorising disasters into major and minor and ordinary?A
disaster is a disaster and how anyone can draw the line between major and minor
is beyond me.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: LFB


                    Copyright 2009 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              734 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 6, 2014 Saturday

Nevada: USDA Announces New Support to Help Schools Purchase More Food from Local
Farmers

LENGTH: 1086  words

DATELINE: Carson City


United States Department of Agriculture, The State of Nevada has issued the
following news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced more than $5 million in grants
for 82 projects spanning 42 states and the U.S. Virgin Islands that support the
U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) efforts to connect school cafeterias
with local farmers and ranchers through its Farm to School Program. The program
helps schools purchase more food from local farmers and ranchers in their
communities, expanding access to healthy local food for school children and
supporting local economies. According to USDA's first-ever Farm to School Census
released earlier this year, school districts participating in farm to school
programs purchased and served over $385 million in local food in school year
2011-2012, with more than half of participating schools planning to increase
their purchases of local food in the future.

"USDA is proud to support communities across the country as they plan and
implement innovative farm to school projects," said Vilsack. "These inspiring
collaborations provide students with healthy, fresh food, while supporting
healthy local economies. Through farm to school projects, community partners are
coming together to ensure a bright future for students, and for local farmers
and ranchers."

Secretary Vilsack made this announcement at Common Market, a pioneering food hub
in Philadelphia that connects wholesale customers to farmers in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Delaware. Common Market is receiving a grant to support their
"An Apple a Day" Program. The facility will act as a bridge between Pennsylvania
Family Farms, a small Pennsylvania value-added processor, and public charter
schools to provide food safety, product development, packaging, educational,
marketing, planning, ordering and delivery support to farm and school food
service partners.

Together, Common Market and the other selected projects will serve more than
4,800 schools and 2.8 million students, nearly 51 percent of whom live in rural
communities. A few additional examples include:

Tift County School System in Georgia will build on its current efforts to
provide agriculture and nutrition programs that are experiential, educational
and better connect students to local and regional food. Proposed activities
include retrofitting a school bus to serve as a farm bus/rolling classroom,
retrofitting a canning plant to preserve local tomatoes, and irrigating the
school farm to expand the growing season and increase yield.
    Colonial School District in Delaware will have students and staff directly
engaged in the entire process of planning, growing and processing foods,
creating new menus, and placing healthy foods directly into school nutrition
programs. At the Historic Penn Farm, high school students will grow crops for
both the school's breakfast and lunch programs.
    The Inter Tribal Buffalo Council in South Dakota intends to provide locally
raised tribal bison meat into the school lunch programs, procure other locally
produced food products, and implement school gardens.
    The National Future Farmers of America Organization (FFA) will connect local
youth producers/FFA members to school food buyers and host a series of webinars
focused on developing state level partnerships.

For a complete list of FY15 Farm to School grant recipients, please visit:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/f2s/FY_2015_Grant_
Award_Summaries.pdf

USDA's Farm to School Grants help schools respond to the growing demand for
locally sourced foods and increase market opportunities for producers and food
businesses, including food processors, manufacturers, and distributors. Grants
will also be used to support agriculture and nutrition education efforts such as
school gardens, field trips to local farms, and cooking classes. USDA Farm to
School Conference and Event Grants support regional, state, and national
conferences, events and/or trainings that have a specific emphasis on developing
supply chain relationships by connecting local producers to school food buyers,
along with events and trainings that provide technical assistance or other
programming in the area of local procurement, food safety, culinary education
and integration of agriculture-based curriculum.

USDA's Farm to School Program is made possible by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act of 2010, which authorized USDA to provide grants and technical assistance to
help schools gain better access to local foods. Since 2012, USDA has awarded
$15.1 million in grants to 221 Farm to School projects in 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and the Virgin Islands. The Farm to School program is a
core element of the USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food Initiative, which
coordinates the department's work on local food systems.

USDA is focused on improving childhood nutrition and empowering families to make
healthier food choices by providing science-based information and advice, while
expanding the availability of healthy food.

America's students now have healthier and more nutritious school meals due to
improved nutrition standards implemented as a result of the historic Healthy,
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010.
    USDA's MyPlate symbol and the resources at ChooseMyPlate.gov provide quick,
easy reference tools for parents, teachers, healthcare professionals and
communities.
    USDA awarded $5.2 million in grants to provide training and technical
assistance for child nutrition foodservice professionals and support stronger
school nutrition education programs.
    Since 2009, USDA has provided $160 million in kitchen equipment funding to
states and schools. The President's fiscal year 2015 budget requests an
additional $35 million for kitchen equipment grants. These grants are one of
several ways that USDA is supporting schools as the implement the updated
nutrition standards.
    USDA recently launched a pilot project, called Team Up for School Nutrition
Success, which is working with schools to identify challenges, provide free,
customized training, and match schools with mentors who have successfully
addressed similar challenges.

Collectively these policies and actions are helping to combat child hunger and
obesity, while improving the health and nutrition of the nation's children. For
more information on USDA's Farm to School Program, please visit
www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.come

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              735 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 6, 2014 Saturday

Nevada: USDA Announces New Support to Help Schools Purchase More Food from Local
Farmers

LENGTH: 1086  words

DATELINE: Carson City


United States Department of Agriculture, The State of Nevada has issued the
following news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced more than $5 million in grants
for 82 projects spanning 42 states and the U.S. Virgin Islands that support the
U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) efforts to connect school cafeterias
with local farmers and ranchers through its Farm to School Program. The program
helps schools purchase more food from local farmers and ranchers in their
communities, expanding access to healthy local food for school children and
supporting local economies. According to USDA's first-ever Farm to School Census
released earlier this year, school districts participating in farm to school
programs purchased and served over $385 million in local food in school year
2011-2012, with more than half of participating schools planning to increase
their purchases of local food in the future.

"USDA is proud to support communities across the country as they plan and
implement innovative farm to school projects," said Vilsack. "These inspiring
collaborations provide students with healthy, fresh food, while supporting
healthy local economies. Through farm to school projects, community partners are
coming together to ensure a bright future for students, and for local farmers
and ranchers."

Secretary Vilsack made this announcement at Common Market, a pioneering food hub
in Philadelphia that connects wholesale customers to farmers in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Delaware. Common Market is receiving a grant to support their
"An Apple a Day" Program. The facility will act as a bridge between Pennsylvania
Family Farms, a small Pennsylvania value-added processor, and public charter
schools to provide food safety, product development, packaging, educational,
marketing, planning, ordering and delivery support to farm and school food
service partners.

Together, Common Market and the other selected projects will serve more than
4,800 schools and 2.8 million students, nearly 51 percent of whom live in rural
communities. A few additional examples include:

Tift County School System in Georgia will build on its current efforts to
provide agriculture and nutrition programs that are experiential, educational
and better connect students to local and regional food. Proposed activities
include retrofitting a school bus to serve as a farm bus/rolling classroom,
retrofitting a canning plant to preserve local tomatoes, and irrigating the
school farm to expand the growing season and increase yield.
    Colonial School District in Delaware will have students and staff directly
engaged in the entire process of planning, growing and processing foods,
creating new menus, and placing healthy foods directly into school nutrition
programs. At the Historic Penn Farm, high school students will grow crops for
both the school's breakfast and lunch programs.
    The Inter Tribal Buffalo Council in South Dakota intends to provide locally
raised tribal bison meat into the school lunch programs, procure other locally
produced food products, and implement school gardens.
    The National Future Farmers of America Organization (FFA) will connect local
youth producers/FFA members to school food buyers and host a series of webinars
focused on developing state level partnerships.

For a complete list of FY15 Farm to School grant recipients, please visit:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/f2s/FY_2015_Grant_
Award_Summaries.pdf

USDA's Farm to School Grants help schools respond to the growing demand for
locally sourced foods and increase market opportunities for producers and food
businesses, including food processors, manufacturers, and distributors. Grants
will also be used to support agriculture and nutrition education efforts such as
school gardens, field trips to local farms, and cooking classes. USDA Farm to
School Conference and Event Grants support regional, state, and national
conferences, events and/or trainings that have a specific emphasis on developing
supply chain relationships by connecting local producers to school food buyers,
along with events and trainings that provide technical assistance or other
programming in the area of local procurement, food safety, culinary education
and integration of agriculture-based curriculum.

USDA's Farm to School Program is made possible by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act of 2010, which authorized USDA to provide grants and technical assistance to
help schools gain better access to local foods. Since 2012, USDA has awarded
$15.1 million in grants to 221 Farm to School projects in 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and the Virgin Islands. The Farm to School program is a
core element of the USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food Initiative, which
coordinates the department's work on local food systems.

USDA is focused on improving childhood nutrition and empowering families to make
healthier food choices by providing science-based information and advice, while
expanding the availability of healthy food.

America's students now have healthier and more nutritious school meals due to
improved nutrition standards implemented as a result of the historic Healthy,
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010.
    USDA's MyPlate symbol and the resources at ChooseMyPlate.gov provide quick,
easy reference tools for parents, teachers, healthcare professionals and
communities.
    USDA awarded $5.2 million in grants to provide training and technical
assistance for child nutrition foodservice professionals and support stronger
school nutrition education programs.
    Since 2009, USDA has provided $160 million in kitchen equipment funding to
states and schools. The President's fiscal year 2015 budget requests an
additional $35 million for kitchen equipment grants. These grants are one of
several ways that USDA is supporting schools as the implement the updated
nutrition standards.
    USDA recently launched a pilot project, called Team Up for School Nutrition
Success, which is working with schools to identify challenges, provide free,
customized training, and match schools with mentors who have successfully
addressed similar challenges.

Collectively these policies and actions are helping to combat child hunger and
obesity, while improving the health and nutrition of the nation's children. For
more information on USDA's Farm to School Program, please visit
www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.come

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              736 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 5, 2014 Friday

Nevada: USDA Announces New Support to Help Schools Purchase More Food from Local
Farmers

LENGTH: 1086  words

DATELINE: Carson City


United States Department of Agriculture, The State of Nevada has issued the
following news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced more than $5 million in grants
for 82 projects spanning 42 states and the U.S. Virgin Islands that support the
U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) efforts to connect school cafeterias
with local farmers and ranchers through its Farm to School Program. The program
helps schools purchase more food from local farmers and ranchers in their
communities, expanding access to healthy local food for school children and
supporting local economies. According to USDA's first-ever Farm to School Census
released earlier this year, school districts participating in farm to school
programs purchased and served over $385 million in local food in school year
2011-2012, with more than half of participating schools planning to increase
their purchases of local food in the future.

"USDA is proud to support communities across the country as they plan and
implement innovative farm to school projects," said Vilsack. "These inspiring
collaborations provide students with healthy, fresh food, while supporting
healthy local economies. Through farm to school projects, community partners are
coming together to ensure a bright future for students, and for local farmers
and ranchers."

Secretary Vilsack made this announcement at Common Market, a pioneering food hub
in Philadelphia that connects wholesale customers to farmers in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Delaware. Common Market is receiving a grant to support their
"An Apple a Day" Program. The facility will act as a bridge between Pennsylvania
Family Farms, a small Pennsylvania value-added processor, and public charter
schools to provide food safety, product development, packaging, educational,
marketing, planning, ordering and delivery support to farm and school food
service partners.

Together, Common Market and the other selected projects will serve more than
4,800 schools and 2.8 million students, nearly 51 percent of whom live in rural
communities. A few additional examples include:

Tift County School System in Georgia will build on its current efforts to
provide agriculture and nutrition programs that are experiential, educational
and better connect students to local and regional food. Proposed activities
include retrofitting a school bus to serve as a farm bus/rolling classroom,
retrofitting a canning plant to preserve local tomatoes, and irrigating the
school farm to expand the growing season and increase yield.
    Colonial School District in Delaware will have students and staff directly
engaged in the entire process of planning, growing and processing foods,
creating new menus, and placing healthy foods directly into school nutrition
programs. At the Historic Penn Farm, high school students will grow crops for
both the school's breakfast and lunch programs.
    The Inter Tribal Buffalo Council in South Dakota intends to provide locally
raised tribal bison meat into the school lunch programs, procure other locally
produced food products, and implement school gardens.
    The National Future Farmers of America Organization (FFA) will connect local
youth producers/FFA members to school food buyers and host a series of webinars
focused on developing state level partnerships.

For a complete list of FY15 Farm to School grant recipients, please visit:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/f2s/FY_2015_Grant_
Award_Summaries.pdf

USDA's Farm to School Grants help schools respond to the growing demand for
locally sourced foods and increase market opportunities for producers and food
businesses, including food processors, manufacturers, and distributors. Grants
will also be used to support agriculture and nutrition education efforts such as
school gardens, field trips to local farms, and cooking classes. USDA Farm to
School Conference and Event Grants support regional, state, and national
conferences, events and/or trainings that have a specific emphasis on developing
supply chain relationships by connecting local producers to school food buyers,
along with events and trainings that provide technical assistance or other
programming in the area of local procurement, food safety, culinary education
and integration of agriculture-based curriculum.

USDA's Farm to School Program is made possible by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act of 2010, which authorized USDA to provide grants and technical assistance to
help schools gain better access to local foods. Since 2012, USDA has awarded
$15.1 million in grants to 221 Farm to School projects in 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and the Virgin Islands. The Farm to School program is a
core element of the USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food Initiative, which
coordinates the department's work on local food systems.

USDA is focused on improving childhood nutrition and empowering families to make
healthier food choices by providing science-based information and advice, while
expanding the availability of healthy food.

America's students now have healthier and more nutritious school meals due to
improved nutrition standards implemented as a result of the historic Healthy,
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010.
    USDA's MyPlate symbol and the resources at ChooseMyPlate.gov provide quick,
easy reference tools for parents, teachers, healthcare professionals and
communities.
    USDA awarded $5.2 million in grants to provide training and technical
assistance for child nutrition foodservice professionals and support stronger
school nutrition education programs.
    Since 2009, USDA has provided $160 million in kitchen equipment funding to
states and schools. The President's fiscal year 2015 budget requests an
additional $35 million for kitchen equipment grants. These grants are one of
several ways that USDA is supporting schools as the implement the updated
nutrition standards.
    USDA recently launched a pilot project, called Team Up for School Nutrition
Success, which is working with schools to identify challenges, provide free,
customized training, and match schools with mentors who have successfully
addressed similar challenges.

Collectively these policies and actions are helping to combat child hunger and
obesity, while improving the health and nutrition of the nation's children. For
more information on USDA's Farm to School Program, please visit
www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.come

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              737 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 4, 2014 Thursday

Nevada: USDA Announces New Support to Help Schools Purchase More Food from Local
Farmers

LENGTH: 1086  words

DATELINE: Carson City


United States Department of Agriculture, The State of Nevada has issued the
following news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced more than $5 million in grants
for 82 projects spanning 42 states and the U.S. Virgin Islands that support the
U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) efforts to connect school cafeterias
with local farmers and ranchers through its Farm to School Program. The program
helps schools purchase more food from local farmers and ranchers in their
communities, expanding access to healthy local food for school children and
supporting local economies. According to USDA's first-ever Farm to School Census
released earlier this year, school districts participating in farm to school
programs purchased and served over $385 million in local food in school year
2011-2012, with more than half of participating schools planning to increase
their purchases of local food in the future.

"USDA is proud to support communities across the country as they plan and
implement innovative farm to school projects," said Vilsack. "These inspiring
collaborations provide students with healthy, fresh food, while supporting
healthy local economies. Through farm to school projects, community partners are
coming together to ensure a bright future for students, and for local farmers
and ranchers."

Secretary Vilsack made this announcement at Common Market, a pioneering food hub
in Philadelphia that connects wholesale customers to farmers in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Delaware. Common Market is receiving a grant to support their
"An Apple a Day" Program. The facility will act as a bridge between Pennsylvania
Family Farms, a small Pennsylvania value-added processor, and public charter
schools to provide food safety, product development, packaging, educational,
marketing, planning, ordering and delivery support to farm and school food
service partners.

Together, Common Market and the other selected projects will serve more than
4,800 schools and 2.8 million students, nearly 51 percent of whom live in rural
communities. A few additional examples include:

Tift County School System in Georgia will build on its current efforts to
provide agriculture and nutrition programs that are experiential, educational
and better connect students to local and regional food. Proposed activities
include retrofitting a school bus to serve as a farm bus/rolling classroom,
retrofitting a canning plant to preserve local tomatoes, and irrigating the
school farm to expand the growing season and increase yield.
    Colonial School District in Delaware will have students and staff directly
engaged in the entire process of planning, growing and processing foods,
creating new menus, and placing healthy foods directly into school nutrition
programs. At the Historic Penn Farm, high school students will grow crops for
both the school's breakfast and lunch programs.
    The Inter Tribal Buffalo Council in South Dakota intends to provide locally
raised tribal bison meat into the school lunch programs, procure other locally
produced food products, and implement school gardens.
    The National Future Farmers of America Organization (FFA) will connect local
youth producers/FFA members to school food buyers and host a series of webinars
focused on developing state level partnerships.

For a complete list of FY15 Farm to School grant recipients, please visit:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/f2s/FY_2015_Grant_
Award_Summaries.pdf

USDA's Farm to School Grants help schools respond to the growing demand for
locally sourced foods and increase market opportunities for producers and food
businesses, including food processors, manufacturers, and distributors. Grants
will also be used to support agriculture and nutrition education efforts such as
school gardens, field trips to local farms, and cooking classes. USDA Farm to
School Conference and Event Grants support regional, state, and national
conferences, events and/or trainings that have a specific emphasis on developing
supply chain relationships by connecting local producers to school food buyers,
along with events and trainings that provide technical assistance or other
programming in the area of local procurement, food safety, culinary education
and integration of agriculture-based curriculum.

USDA's Farm to School Program is made possible by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act of 2010, which authorized USDA to provide grants and technical assistance to
help schools gain better access to local foods. Since 2012, USDA has awarded
$15.1 million in grants to 221 Farm to School projects in 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and the Virgin Islands. The Farm to School program is a
core element of the USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food Initiative, which
coordinates the department's work on local food systems.

USDA is focused on improving childhood nutrition and empowering families to make
healthier food choices by providing science-based information and advice, while
expanding the availability of healthy food.

America's students now have healthier and more nutritious school meals due to
improved nutrition standards implemented as a result of the historic Healthy,
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010.
    USDA's MyPlate symbol and the resources at ChooseMyPlate.gov provide quick,
easy reference tools for parents, teachers, healthcare professionals and
communities.
    USDA awarded $5.2 million in grants to provide training and technical
assistance for child nutrition foodservice professionals and support stronger
school nutrition education programs.
    Since 2009, USDA has provided $160 million in kitchen equipment funding to
states and schools. The President's fiscal year 2015 budget requests an
additional $35 million for kitchen equipment grants. These grants are one of
several ways that USDA is supporting schools as the implement the updated
nutrition standards.
    USDA recently launched a pilot project, called Team Up for School Nutrition
Success, which is working with schools to identify challenges, provide free,
customized training, and match schools with mentors who have successfully
addressed similar challenges.

Collectively these policies and actions are helping to combat child hunger and
obesity, while improving the health and nutrition of the nation's children. For
more information on USDA's Farm to School Program, please visit
www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.come

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              738 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 3, 2014 Wednesday

Nevada: USDA Announces New Support to Help Schools Purchase More Food from Local
Farmers

LENGTH: 1086  words

DATELINE: Carson City


United States Department of Agriculture, The State of Nevada has issued the
following news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced more than $5 million in grants
for 82 projects spanning 42 states and the U.S. Virgin Islands that support the
U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) efforts to connect school cafeterias
with local farmers and ranchers through its Farm to School Program. The program
helps schools purchase more food from local farmers and ranchers in their
communities, expanding access to healthy local food for school children and
supporting local economies. According to USDA's first-ever Farm to School Census
released earlier this year, school districts participating in farm to school
programs purchased and served over $385 million in local food in school year
2011-2012, with more than half of participating schools planning to increase
their purchases of local food in the future.

"USDA is proud to support communities across the country as they plan and
implement innovative farm to school projects," said Vilsack. "These inspiring
collaborations provide students with healthy, fresh food, while supporting
healthy local economies. Through farm to school projects, community partners are
coming together to ensure a bright future for students, and for local farmers
and ranchers."

Secretary Vilsack made this announcement at Common Market, a pioneering food hub
in Philadelphia that connects wholesale customers to farmers in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Delaware. Common Market is receiving a grant to support their
"An Apple a Day" Program. The facility will act as a bridge between Pennsylvania
Family Farms, a small Pennsylvania value-added processor, and public charter
schools to provide food safety, product development, packaging, educational,
marketing, planning, ordering and delivery support to farm and school food
service partners.

Together, Common Market and the other selected projects will serve more than
4,800 schools and 2.8 million students, nearly 51 percent of whom live in rural
communities. A few additional examples include:

Tift County School System in Georgia will build on its current efforts to
provide agriculture and nutrition programs that are experiential, educational
and better connect students to local and regional food. Proposed activities
include retrofitting a school bus to serve as a farm bus/rolling classroom,
retrofitting a canning plant to preserve local tomatoes, and irrigating the
school farm to expand the growing season and increase yield.
    Colonial School District in Delaware will have students and staff directly
engaged in the entire process of planning, growing and processing foods,
creating new menus, and placing healthy foods directly into school nutrition
programs. At the Historic Penn Farm, high school students will grow crops for
both the school's breakfast and lunch programs.
    The Inter Tribal Buffalo Council in South Dakota intends to provide locally
raised tribal bison meat into the school lunch programs, procure other locally
produced food products, and implement school gardens.
    The National Future Farmers of America Organization (FFA) will connect local
youth producers/FFA members to school food buyers and host a series of webinars
focused on developing state level partnerships.

For a complete list of FY15 Farm to School grant recipients, please visit:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/f2s/FY_2015_Grant_
Award_Summaries.pdf

USDA's Farm to School Grants help schools respond to the growing demand for
locally sourced foods and increase market opportunities for producers and food
businesses, including food processors, manufacturers, and distributors. Grants
will also be used to support agriculture and nutrition education efforts such as
school gardens, field trips to local farms, and cooking classes. USDA Farm to
School Conference and Event Grants support regional, state, and national
conferences, events and/or trainings that have a specific emphasis on developing
supply chain relationships by connecting local producers to school food buyers,
along with events and trainings that provide technical assistance or other
programming in the area of local procurement, food safety, culinary education
and integration of agriculture-based curriculum.

USDA's Farm to School Program is made possible by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act of 2010, which authorized USDA to provide grants and technical assistance to
help schools gain better access to local foods. Since 2012, USDA has awarded
$15.1 million in grants to 221 Farm to School projects in 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and the Virgin Islands. The Farm to School program is a
core element of the USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food Initiative, which
coordinates the department's work on local food systems.

USDA is focused on improving childhood nutrition and empowering families to make
healthier food choices by providing science-based information and advice, while
expanding the availability of healthy food.

America's students now have healthier and more nutritious school meals due to
improved nutrition standards implemented as a result of the historic Healthy,
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010.
    USDA's MyPlate symbol and the resources at ChooseMyPlate.gov provide quick,
easy reference tools for parents, teachers, healthcare professionals and
communities.
    USDA awarded $5.2 million in grants to provide training and technical
assistance for child nutrition foodservice professionals and support stronger
school nutrition education programs.
    Since 2009, USDA has provided $160 million in kitchen equipment funding to
states and schools. The President's fiscal year 2015 budget requests an
additional $35 million for kitchen equipment grants. These grants are one of
several ways that USDA is supporting schools as the implement the updated
nutrition standards.
    USDA recently launched a pilot project, called Team Up for School Nutrition
Success, which is working with schools to identify challenges, provide free,
customized training, and match schools with mentors who have successfully
addressed similar challenges.

Collectively these policies and actions are helping to combat child hunger and
obesity, while improving the health and nutrition of the nation's children. For
more information on USDA's Farm to School Program, please visit
www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.come

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              739 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 2, 2014 Tuesday

Arizona: USDA Announces New Support to Help Schools Purchase More Food from
Local Farmers

LENGTH: 1155  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Agriculture has issued the following news release:

PHILADELPHIA, Dec. 2, 2014 - Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced
more than $5 million in grants for 82 projects spanning 42 states and the U.S.
Virgin Islands that support the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) efforts
to connect school cafeterias with local farmers and ranchers through its Farm to
School Program. The program helps schools purchase more food from local farmers
and ranchers in their communities, expanding access to healthy local food for
school children and supporting local economies. According to USDA's first-ever
Farm to School Census released earlier this year, school districts participating
in farm to school programs purchased and served over $385 million in local food
in school year 2011-2012, with more than half of participating schools planning
to increase their purchases of local food in the future.

"USDA is proud to support communities across the country as they plan and
implement innovative farm to school projects," said Vilsack. "These inspiring
collaborations provide students with healthy, fresh food, while supporting
healthy local economies. Through farm to school projects, community partners are
coming together to ensure a bright future for students, and for local farmers
and ranchers."

Secretary Vilsack made this announcement at Common Market, a pioneering food hub
in Philadelphia that connects wholesale customers to farmers in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Delaware. Common Market is receiving a grant to support their
"An Apple a Day" Program. The facility will act as a bridge between Pennsylvania
Family Farms, a small Pennsylvania value-added processor, and public charter
schools to provide food safety, product development, packaging, educational,
marketing, planning, ordering and delivery support to farm and school food
service partners.

Together, Common Market and the other selected projects will serve more than
4,800 schools and 2.8 million students, nearly 51 percent of whom live in rural
communities. A few additional examples include:

Tift County School System in Georgia will build on its current efforts to
provide agriculture and nutrition programs that are experiential, educational
and better connect students to local and regional food. Proposed activities
include retrofitting a school bus to serve as a farm bus/rolling classroom,
retrofitting a canning plant to preserve local tomatoes, and irrigating the
school farm to expand the growing season and increase yield.
    Colonial School District in Delaware will have students and staff directly
engaged in the entire process of planning, growing and processing foods,
creating new menus, and placing healthy foods directly into school nutrition
programs. At the Historic Penn Farm, high school students will grow crops for
both the school's breakfast and lunch programs.
    The Inter Tribal Buffalo Council in South Dakota intends to provide locally
raised tribal bison meat into the school lunch programs, procure other locally
produced food products, and implement school gardens.
    The National Future Farmers of America Organization (FFA) will connect local
youth producers/FFA members to school food buyers and host a series of webinars
focused on developing state level partnerships.

For a complete list of FY15 Farm to School grant recipients, please visit:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/f2s/FY_2015_Grant_
Award_Summaries.pdf

USDA's Farm to School Grants help schools respond to the growing demand for
locally sourced foods and increase market opportunities for producers and food
businesses, including food processors, manufacturers, and distributors. Grants
will also be used to support agriculture and nutrition education efforts such as
school gardens, field trips to local farms, and cooking classes. USDA Farm to
School Conference and Event Grants support regional, state, and national
conferences, events and/or trainings that have a specific emphasis on developing
supply chain relationships by connecting local producers to school food buyers,
along with events and trainings that provide technical assistance or other
programming in the area of local procurement, food safety, culinary education
and integration of agriculture-based curriculum.

USDA's Farm to School Program is made possible by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act of 2010, which authorized USDA to provide grants and technical assistance to
help schools gain better access to local foods. Since 2012, USDA has awarded
$15.1 million in grants to 221 Farm to School projects in 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and the Virgin Islands. The Farm to School program is a
core element of the USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food Initiative, which
coordinates the department's work on local food systems.

USDA is focused on improving childhood nutrition and empowering families to make
healthier food choices by providing science-based information and advice, while
expanding the availability of healthy food.

America's students now have healthier and more nutritious school meals due to
improved nutrition standards implemented as a result of the historic Healthy,
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010.
    USDA's MyPlate symbol and the resources at ChooseMyPlate.gov provide quick,
easy reference tools for parents, teachers, healthcare professionals and
communities.
    USDA awarded $5.2 million in grants to provide training and technical
assistance for child nutrition foodservice professionals and support stronger
school nutrition education programs.
    Since 2009, USDA has provided $160 million in kitchen equipment funding to
states and schools. The President's fiscal year 2015 budget requests an
additional $35 million for kitchen equipment grants. These grants are one of
several ways that USDA is supporting schools as the implement the updated
nutrition standards.
    USDA recently launched a pilot project, called Team Up for School Nutrition
Success, which is working with schools to identify challenges, provide free,
customized training, and match schools with mentors who have successfully
addressed similar challenges.

Collectively these policies and actions are helping to combat child hunger and
obesity, while improving the health and nutrition of the nation's children. For
more information on USDA's Farm to School Program, please visit
www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool.

#

USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. To file a complaint of
discrimination, write to USDA, Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Stop
9410, Washington, DC 20250-9410, or call toll-free at (866) 632-9992 (English)
or (800) 877-8339 (TDD) or (866) 377-8642 (English Federal-relay) or (800)
845-6136 (Spanish Federal-relay).

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              740 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Deming Headlight (New Mexico)

                            December 18, 2009 Friday

Workshops to benefit farmers' markets

BYLINE: For the Headlight

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 736 words


New Mexico State University's Cooperative Extension Service will hold six
workshops for current and future farmers' market vendors across the state during
January, February and March. The events are jointly sponsored with the New
Mexico Farmers' Marketing Association and Farm to Table.

"With 58 farmers' markets now in New Mexico, there is more demand than ever for
locally grown food. Gross sales have been on the rise, but in many cases farmers
can use some outside assistance to help make their operations more profitable.
These workshops connect farmers to new ideas and good resources for working into
the future," said Denise Miller, executive director of the New Mexico Farmers'
Marketing Association.

With the increased opportunities to market their produce through farmers'
markets, NMSU's Cooperative Extension Service wants to help farmers increase
their profitability through the sale of high-value crops and value-added
products.

"Farmers' markets are a growing direct-marketing arena, where the business
transaction occurs between the grower and the consumer. Through these workshops
we want to help producers reduce their risk and increase their profits," said
Michael Patrick, NMSU Extension community resource and economic development
specialist, who is coordinating the program that is funded by a Western Center
for Risk Management Education grant.

Scheduled Saturday workshops include Las Cruces on Jan. 16, Silver City on Jan.
23, Los Lunas on Feb. 6, and Clovis on Feb. 27. Two additional workshops will be
on Wednesday, March 3, in Espanola and Tuesday, March 30, in Farmington.
Registration fee is $10, which includes lunch and workshop material. For
location and an agenda for a specific workshop, contact the local Cooperative
Extension Service office.

The workshops are being developed by local teams of farmers' market managers,
local producers and vendors, and county Extension agents.

"We did some market research to determine the topics of each session. We
surveyed the farmers' market managers and vendors to see what information they
would like us to present. So each workshop is tailor-made for the producers in
the area where it is presented," said Patrick.

Workshop topics will include crop diversification, growing season extension,
value-added products, recordkeeping, enterprise budgets, and marketing and sales
strategies. Each workshop will have a session unique to the location and a
specific presentation during the lunch.

"The main area in which workshops will vary is in what crops and value-added
products we discuss," Patrick said. "We will have Ron Walser, Extension fruit
specialist, and Stephanie Walker, Extension vegetable specialist, discussing a
variety of high-value crops that producers in the various areas are interested
in growing."

Besides talking about how to grow the produce, home economists will discuss food
demonstration and food preparation in the marketing portion of the workshop.

"Many people will see produce at a farmers' market that is new to them and they
will ask how to use it," Patrick said. "The vendor has to be prepared to educate
people on how to use or prepare their product."

For vendors who plan to make a product to sell at the market, Nancy Flores,
Extension food technology specialist, will present information about processing
and preserving produce and producing value-added products such as jams and
jelly. She will discuss the regulations associated with producing these products
in home kitchens and commercial kitchens.

One aspect of farmers' markets is that many vendors are not aware of the
economics and marketing side of the business.

"We find that a lot of folks don't keep good records so they don't know if they
are making a profit or not," Patrick said. "Moreover, some are producing two or
three items and selling them. One item may be making money and another is not,
and the vendor doesn't know that because they are not keeping good records. So
we're going to talk a little about recordkeeping and enterprise budgets."

Merchandising and marketing practices will also be presented, including how to
display produce, pricing and signage techniques. Ideas will also be presented on
using promotional materials such as brochures, flyers and recipes for produce
preparation.

To register, contact Rosanne Lehman at (575) 646-3215. For more information
about the specific agenda for each location contact the local Extension office.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2009 Deming Headlight, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              741 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           North Queensland Register

                            April 19, 2012 Thursday

INTELLECTUAL property is an extremely valuable

SECTION: LIVESTOCK; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 466 words


INTELLECTUAL property is an extremely valuable asset but its importance in the
agricultural indus-try, particularly for cattle producers, does not always get
the attention it deserves, according to Brett Heading and Sarah North of
McCullogh Robertson lawyers.

Cattle producers who intend to brand or earmark stock in Queens-land must first
register the brand or earmark with the Queensland Brands Office. All cattle of
100kg or more live weight must bear a registered brand before being sold in
Queensland.

Registering a brand denotes stock ownership but does not confer exclusive
ownership for ancillary goods and services provided under the business name
associated with the brand, such as transportation services, cattle breeding and
sale of meat.

The same applies to business, company and domain names, which are no more than
legal requirements and registration does not give the owner any exclusive
ownership as such to the name. Similarly, registration of a domain name does not
give exclusive rights to that name.

To have a proprietary form of intellectual property which grants exclusive
ownership rights in a business name or brand, you must have a registered
trademark. Trademark protection is the most effective way to protect the
business names, brands and 'get up' of businesses, and ensures money and time
invested in a business is well preserved.

Cattle producers should ensure that their business names, brands, logos and
designs relevant to its business operations as a whole are identified and if
possible, registered as trademarks. Good examples include AA Co's 'bullhorn'
logo and the '1824' name.

In Australia, trade mark registration grants an owner the exclusive right to use
or authorise the use of the trade mark for the goods and services claimed under
the trade mark, for ongoing renewable periods of 10 years, as well as bring an
action for infringement.

Cattle producers should also ensure that the name under which they are trading
in Queensland is registered as a business name or that they trade under their
full company name.

Business names are registered on a state by state basis and trading under an
unregistered business name in Queensland can carry penalties such as a fine.

The nationalisation of business names (effective May 28) makes it even more
important to get your business name on the register now to avoid any potential
conflict and expense later on.

Ideally domain names should also be registered for your business name. Domain
names are registered on a 'first come first serve' basis and can be difficult
and often costly to obtain once registered by a third party.

By taking these measures cattle producers will maximise the value of their
intellectual property and better manage the risks involved in what is being seen
as an increasingly competitive market.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cattle producers who intend to brand or earmark stock in Queensland
must first register the brand or earmark with the Queensland Brands Office.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              742 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             National Post (Canada)

                   December 01, 2000 Friday NATIONAL EDITIONS

Junior energy players sidelined: Growth a concern

BYLINE: Ian McKinnon;imckinnon@nationalpost.com

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST INVESTING; Pg. D01 / Front

LENGTH: 592 words

DATELINE: CALGARY


Grant Fagerheim smiles when his firm's stock price is mentioned.

The president and chief executive of Ketch Energy Ltd., a well-regarded but
small petroleum producer, puts on a brave face about the stock, which is trading
at less than two times next year's expected cash flow.

'I don't think for a minute that we're going back to the multiples that we
enjoyed even three or two years ago. Do I expect to move back to the six to
eight times [cash flow] environment? No, I don't, but I think we should be
valued in a three to four times multiple environment.'

Despite unbelievably strong oil and gas prices leading to forecast-crushing
financial results, the stocks of Ketch and other juniors (firms with market
capitalization of less than $250-million) are struggling. Several analysts do
not anticipate a big improvement in the short term because of concerns about
liquidity, limited growth opportunities in the maturing Canadian sedimentary
basin and competition for capital.

Institutional investors have abandoned the field because they do not want to
hold large positions in illiquid stocks. But many retail buyers are ignoring the
sector despite returns on equity of 20% or more predicted for this year and next
for many players.

Concern about sustainable growth is one reason investors are staying away from
the small fry, said Andrew Boland, an analyst with Peters & Co. in Calgary.

With the future of the Canadian energy industry lying in deeper, more expensive,
higher risk projects, juniors are unlikely to see a return to the heady days of
the mid-1990s when equity values grew as fast as Jack's beanstalk.

Mr. Boland said juniors appeal to investors willing to ride out several
commodity cycles or bottom fishers willing to take a chance on firms trading at
a discount to their asset value in anticipation of a takeover bid. 'You have to
either commit to the long term or be bottom feeding. If you want to buy a
company that is going to grow, then at some point you're going to have to take a
risk.'

The analyst said it is difficult for his top picks, which include Ketch, BXL
Energy Ltd. and Ionic Energy Inc., to compete for attention with giants such as
Talisman Energy Inc. and Canadian Natural Resources Ltd., which trade at
slightly higher multiples.

One fund manager said ignoring juniors could be a mistake. Margot Naudie, lead
manager of two funds that invest in the energy sector for TD Asset Management
Inc., said gas-oriented firms could fetch premiums from U.S. firms, which have
been shopping hard north of the border for the past year and snapped up many
larger producers.

'I think there are some smart managers among the junior companies that have
strategic asset bases, that are gassy and particularly interesting to U.S.
acquirers,' she said. 'I think there is an opportunity to make money there.'

Her funds have holdings in Purcell Energy Ltd., Search Energy Corp. and Ventus
Energy Ltd.

Rather than gambling on which firm will be taken out in the ongoing
consolidation, Yorkton Securities Inc. recommends firms with proven management
and good assets so earnings and production grow consistently on a per share
basis. 'Our top picks are companies that we think will greatly outperform the
sector and we're focusing on those companies where we see very high quality
management and very high quality growth,' said Andrew Hogg, a Calgary analyst
with the brokerage. Heading Yorkton's selections for small caps are Avid Oil &
Gas Ltd., Olympia Energy Inc. and Peyto Exploration and Development Corp.

LOAD-DATE: December 01, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Color Photo: Todd Korol, National Post / Grant Fagerheim, president and
CEO of Calgary-based Ketch Energy, maps out his company's exploration
sites.Financial Post

TYPE: Business

                    Copyright 2000 Financial Post DataGroup,
                    A division of The National Post Company
                              All rights reserved.


                              743 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                            November 16, 2015 Monday

Kentucky: Kentucky Department of Agriculture awarded nearly $300,000 for
specialty crop projects

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Frankfort: Kentucky Agriculture Department has issued the following news
release:



 The Kentucky Department of Agriculture was awarded a Specialty Crop Block Grant
for $291,564.95 from the U.S. Department of Agriculture to work with Kentucky
institutions and organizations to strengthen markets for specialty crops in
Kentucky.





 &ldquo;This investment in Kentucky&rsquo;s specialty crop industry will give
our agricultural economy a boost,&rdquo; Agriculture Commissioner James Comer
said. &ldquo;This funding will greatly enhance our efforts to support the
marketing and development of our state&rsquo;s specialty crop production. And it
will help us continue to diversify Kentucky&rsquo;s agriculture industry.&rdquo;






 A USDA news release announced eight Kentucky projects in which the KDA will
partner with:



     the University of Kentucky to increase the demand for Kentucky fruits,
vegetables, nuts, and herbs by increasing child and adult nutrition knowledge
and consumption of specialty crops through workshops, trainings, and targeted
marketing material.

     Hickory Lane Farms to increase sales of regional specialty crop producers
by bringing together producers and schools and restaurants, teaching farmers
about how to use CSAs and other direct sales strategies, and initiating a
program of nutritional education and marketing to increase consumer demand for
local specialty crops.

     Kentucky Specialty Grains to commercialize Summer Flowering Chia by
identifying growth management strategies; working with the food industry to
highlight the values of the crop, including its high omega-3 oil content; and
raising awareness among consumers of this type of chia in order to build demand.


     the University of Kentucky to develop new, and update existing, resources
to help Kentucky growers transitioning away from growing tobacco to begin
growing specialty crops, such as how to identify which crops would be best for
them, and help them identify marketing and sales opportunities, and specialty
crop profiles and budgets.

     the Berry Center to increase the sales of Kentucky specialty crop farmers
who are looking to scale up their production. This grant aims to offer a series
of conferences and meetings designed to help farmers take advantage of underused
resources in terms of capital, certifications, crop budgets, and marketing
opportunities in order to help Kentucky specialty crop producers overcome the
barriers preventing them from entering agriculture supply chains.

     the University of Kentucky to extend the growing season leading to
increased vegetable production by evaluating which varieties and growing
strategies Kentucky growers can use for winter vegetable production and
disseminating this information to growers through workshops and distributed
training materials.

     the Barren Country Beekeepers Association to boost the region&rsquo;s honey
production and sales by giving local growers access to updated harvest
strategies and technologies that lower the amount of damage done to honeycombs
during the harvest process.

     the University of Kentucky to increase the total yield of Uba Tuba peppers
through studying the varieties that grow best in Kentucky&rsquo;s climate;
identifying the best ways to extend the peppers&rsquo; shelf life by examining
how they stand up to canning, pickling, and dehydrating; and doing a marketing
assessment of local demand for these specialty peppers.







 The projects were selected through a competitive process prior to being awarded
Specialty Crop Block Grant funds. The Kentucky Department of Agriculture works
with numerous public and private partners to promote specialty crops and other
Kentucky food products and help Kentucky producers find markets for their
products.





 USDA awarded a total of $63 million in Specialty Crop Block Grants to perform
755 projects in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and five U.S.
territories. Specialty crops include fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, dried
fruits, horticulture, and nursery crops (including floriculture).





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              744 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                            November 13, 2015 Friday

Kentucky: Kentucky Department of Agriculture awarded nearly $300,000 for
specialty crop projects

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Frankfort: Kentucky Agriculture Department has issued the following news
release:



 The Kentucky Department of Agriculture was awarded a Specialty Crop Block Grant
for $291,564.95 from the U.S. Department of Agriculture to work with Kentucky
institutions and organizations to strengthen markets for specialty crops in
Kentucky.





 &ldquo;This investment in Kentucky&rsquo;s specialty crop industry will give
our agricultural economy a boost,&rdquo; Agriculture Commissioner James Comer
said. &ldquo;This funding will greatly enhance our efforts to support the
marketing and development of our state&rsquo;s specialty crop production. And it
will help us continue to diversify Kentucky&rsquo;s agriculture industry.&rdquo;






 A USDA news release announced eight Kentucky projects in which the KDA will
partner with:



     the University of Kentucky to increase the demand for Kentucky fruits,
vegetables, nuts, and herbs by increasing child and adult nutrition knowledge
and consumption of specialty crops through workshops, trainings, and targeted
marketing material.

     Hickory Lane Farms to increase sales of regional specialty crop producers
by bringing together producers and schools and restaurants, teaching farmers
about how to use CSAs and other direct sales strategies, and initiating a
program of nutritional education and marketing to increase consumer demand for
local specialty crops.

     Kentucky Specialty Grains to commercialize Summer Flowering Chia by
identifying growth management strategies; working with the food industry to
highlight the values of the crop, including its high omega-3 oil content; and
raising awareness among consumers of this type of chia in order to build demand.


     the University of Kentucky to develop new, and update existing, resources
to help Kentucky growers transitioning away from growing tobacco to begin
growing specialty crops, such as how to identify which crops would be best for
them, and help them identify marketing and sales opportunities, and specialty
crop profiles and budgets.

     the Berry Center to increase the sales of Kentucky specialty crop farmers
who are looking to scale up their production. This grant aims to offer a series
of conferences and meetings designed to help farmers take advantage of underused
resources in terms of capital, certifications, crop budgets, and marketing
opportunities in order to help Kentucky specialty crop producers overcome the
barriers preventing them from entering agriculture supply chains.

     the University of Kentucky to extend the growing season leading to
increased vegetable production by evaluating which varieties and growing
strategies Kentucky growers can use for winter vegetable production and
disseminating this information to growers through workshops and distributed
training materials.

     the Barren Country Beekeepers Association to boost the region&rsquo;s honey
production and sales by giving local growers access to updated harvest
strategies and technologies that lower the amount of damage done to honeycombs
during the harvest process.

     the University of Kentucky to increase the total yield of Uba Tuba peppers
through studying the varieties that grow best in Kentucky&rsquo;s climate;
identifying the best ways to extend the peppers&rsquo; shelf life by examining
how they stand up to canning, pickling, and dehydrating; and doing a marketing
assessment of local demand for these specialty peppers.







 The projects were selected through a competitive process prior to being awarded
Specialty Crop Block Grant funds. The Kentucky Department of Agriculture works
with numerous public and private partners to promote specialty crops and other
Kentucky food products and help Kentucky producers find markets for their
products.





 USDA awarded a total of $63 million in Specialty Crop Block Grants to perform
755 projects in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and five U.S.
territories. Specialty crops include fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, dried
fruits, horticulture, and nursery crops (including floriculture).



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              745 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                Daily Times (PK)

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday

WB approves $76.4m for Sindh Agricultural Growth Project

LENGTH: 360  words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD


ISLAMABAD, July 9 -- The World Bank (WB) approved Sindh Agricultural Growth
Project in an amount of $76.4 million, aiming to improve the productivity and
market access of small and medium producers in important commodity value chains.
The project would benefit approximately 112,000 farmers covering over 66,000
hectares of land.In a statement WB's Board of Executive Directors said the
project was intended to achieve this objective by investing in knowledge and
technology for producers and sub-sectors of crops and livestock and
strengthening public sector institutions to enhance the enabling environment for
sustained sectoral growth.

More the credit is financed from the International Development Association
(IDA), the WB Group's grant and low-interest arm. It will be on standard IDA
terms, with a maturity of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years. The
project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive growth by
prioritising support to small and medium sized producers who are trying to
compete in horticulture markets, said Rachid Benmessaoud WB Country Director for
Pakistan.

Investing in horticulture offers the best potential for increased small producer
incomes, new employment opportunities in production and processing, improved
resource productivity and enhanced micronutrient availability in the market.

The project focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small
farmer focus, have significant involvement of women in production and processing
and from a national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest competitive advantage
in these pro-poor production value chains.

Capacity building, technical assistance and strategic planning for sector growth
will also be provided through this project, WB said. The WB said the project
would also promote the private sector participation in the agricultural
development and sector growth through public-private models for agribusiness
development and support services.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Daily Times. For any query with
respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor
at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              746 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 13, 2014 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Jane Chu, regarded as skilled fundraiser, is confirmed as NEA chief

BYLINE: Lonnae O'Neal Parker

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 453 words


The Senate confirmed Jane Chu as the 11th chairman of the National Endowment for
the Arts on Thursday. Chu, president and chief executive of the Kauffman Center
for the Performing Arts in Kansas City, Mo., was nominated in February by
President Obama after the position had remained vacant for more than a year.

"I'm honored to receive the Senate's vote of confirmation, and I look forward to
serving our nation as chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts," Chu said
in a statement. "Together, we have the opportunity to show the value of
connecting the arts to all Americans, and the importance of the arts in bringing
communities together."

Senior Deputy Chairman Joan Shigekawa had been acting chairman since former
Broadway producer Rocco Landesman stepped down in December 2012, prompting
criticism from arts organizations concerned that the lengthy vacancy made an
overarching vision for the agency difficult. As the nation's largest arts grant
-making organization, the NEA has awarded more than $5 billion since its 1965
congressional founding but saw its budget cut in half in the mid-1990s after a
firestorm of conservative criticism killed the agency's awards to individual
artists. Recent years have been marked by declining budgets amid the recession
and the across-the-board government cuts known as the sequester. This year's
$146 million appropriation was about equal to 2012 funding levels.

Chu, who is regarded as a skilled fundraiser, will need "number one, to be a
national spokesperson about the value of the arts and the value of investment in
the arts," said Robert Lynch, president and chief executive  of the advocacy
organization Americans for the Arts. Part of the NEA's leverage involves being
in dialogue with multiple sources of money, he said. "What I see is she has a
deep knowledge of philanthropy in general. She is knowledgeable about multiple
art forms, both performing and visual and that's important," and she has a
strong business background.

And although he would have liked to have seen the position filled sooner, "what
we have every day is opportunity," Lynch said. "I do think a lot can be
accomplished in the next two years, and I'm looking forward to that."

In Kansas City, Chu oversaw a $413 million campaign to build the Kauffman Center
- home of the Kansas City Ballet, Kansas City Symphony and Lyric Opera of Kansas
City - which opened in 2011. Before that, Chu, the daughter of Chinese
immigrants  who was raised in Arkansas, had been an executive at the Kauffman
Fund for Kansas City and vice president of external relations for Union Station
Kansas City. She has advanced degrees in music, business administration and
philanthropic studies.

lonnae.oneal@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              747 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                           Ivanhoe Times (Minnesota)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                               September 10, 2015

Grants available through MDA that add value to agriculture

BYLINE: Ivanhoe Times staff

LENGTH: 284  words


MINNEAPOLIS -- The Minnesota Department of Agriculture (MDA) recently announced
funding for projects to help farmers, producers and processors add value to
their operations and the state agricultural economy.

Funding for the grants was established by the Minnesota legislature to advance
the state's agricultural and renewable energy industries. Applicants have
several options to boost their businesses with a portion of the $1 million
available through the Value Added grants.

Grant recipients will be able to start, expand or update livestock product
processing;

Purchase equipment to start, upgrade or modernize a business;

Increase on-farm food safety;

Increase processing and aggregating capacity to sell to schools, hospitals or
others;

And Increase the use and processing of Minnesota agricultural products.

Eligible applicants must be involved in production, processing or marketing
Minnesota agricultural products. Farmers, agricultural businesses, agricultural
cooperatives or local government entities operating farmers markets or food hubs
are eligible.

"We have seen a 10 percent increase in our sales to date and we're expecting
that to double in six months, thanks to the project completed with the grant
money," said grant recipient Cody Koebke of Ody's Country Meats and Catering.

The grant reimburses up to 25 percent of the total project cost with a minimum
award of $150,000 and a minimum of $1,000. Equipment purchases and facility
improvements are eligible.

Applications must be received no later than 4 p.m. on Tuesday, October 6, 2015.
Apply online at www.mda.state.mn.us/valueadded.aspx or submit an application by
e-mail, or in person. Another application round is scheduled for early 2016.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Agriculture

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IVN

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                          Copyright 2015 Ivanhoe Times


                              748 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Australian

                            June 22, 2000, Thursday

Car leather company deal heads off trade war with US

BYLINE: ROBERT GARRAN

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 396 words


AUSTRALIANS could pay less for condoms, kitchen knives, outboard motors, food
mixers, microwave ovens and toy electric trains under a deal to avert a
potential $100million trade war with the US.

Trade Minister Mark Vaile yesterday announced tariffs would be abolished on 30
products as part of a breakthrough in the row over an illegal Australian subsidy
to Victorian automotive leather producer Howe and Company.

Failure to resolve the deal could have led to hundreds of millions of dollars in
retaliatory sanctions by the US, with possible targets including the wine, meat,
citrus and automotive parts industries, Mr Vaile said.

Other elements of the deal were an agreement by Howe to repay $7.2million to the
Government out of a one-off $30million grant made in April 1997, even though it
had no legal obligation to do so, and removal of automotive leather from two
government industry support schemes.

US automotive leather manufacturers had complained to the World Trade
Organisation that the Australian grants and earlier subsidies had given the
Australian company an unfair advantage in the US market.

The World Trade Organisation in February ruled the $30million grant to Howe was
illegal.

The grant itself had been made after Howe was excluded from exports subsidies
after an earlier WTO ruling.

Howe provoked the ire of US automotive leather producers after winning a
$250million, five-year contract in 1996 with General Motors in Detroit.

National Farmers Federation president Ian Donges said the outcome of the dispute
showed the "appalling weakness" of WTO rules on farm subsidies.

Australia agreed to remove for 12 years customs duty (tariffs) on 30 products,
with an import value of $600million a year.

All 30 products have tariffs set at 5per cent, but many are imported duty free
under so-called by-law concessions. Officials could not say last night which of
the 30 products were already imported duty-free.

However, revenue lost is believed to be only $1.6million, compared with
$30million if all were subject to the 5per cent tariff.

Mr Vaile said resolving the dispute had helped save 700 jobs with Howe.

Howe and Company executive director Graeme Monkhouse said last night the outcome
was positive, and removed uncertainty from staff, suppliers, customers and the
company's financiers.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS

                   Copyright 2000 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              749 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Australian

                            June 22, 2000, Thursday

Car leather company deal heads off trade war with US

BYLINE: ROBERT GARRAN

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 396 words


AUSTRALIANS could pay less for condoms, kitchen knives, outboard motors, food
mixers, microwave ovens and toy electric trains under a deal to avert a
potential $100million trade war with the US.

Trade Minister Mark Vaile yesterday announced tariffs would be abolished on 30
products as part of a breakthrough in the row over an illegal Australian subsidy
to Victorian automotive leather producer Howe and Company.

Failure to resolve the deal could have led to hundreds of millions of dollars in
retaliatory sanctions by the US, with possible targets including the wine, meat,
citrus and automotive parts industries, Mr Vaile said.

Other elements of the deal were an agreement by Howe to repay $7.2million to the
Government out of a one-off $30million grant made in April 1997, even though it
had no legal obligation to do so, and removal of automotive leather from two
government industry support schemes.

US automotive leather manufacturers had complained to the World Trade
Organisation that the Australian grants and earlier subsidies had given the
Australian company an unfair advantage in the US market.

The World Trade Organisation in February ruled the $30million grant to Howe was
illegal.

The grant itself had been made after Howe was excluded from exports subsidies
after an earlier WTO ruling.

Howe provoked the ire of US automotive leather producers after winning a
$250million, five-year contract in 1996 with General Motors in Detroit.

National Farmers Federation president Ian Donges said the outcome of the dispute
showed the "appalling weakness" of WTO rules on farm subsidies.

Australia agreed to remove for 12 years customs duty (tariffs) on 30 products,
with an import value of $600million a year.

All 30 products have tariffs set at 5per cent, but many are imported duty free
under so-called by-law concessions. Officials could not say last night which of
the 30 products were already imported duty-free.

However, revenue lost is believed to be only $1.6million, compared with
$30million if all were subject to the 5per cent tariff.

Mr Vaile said resolving the dispute had helped save 700 jobs with Howe.

Howe and Company executive director Graeme Monkhouse said last night the outcome
was positive, and removed uncertainty from staff, suppliers, customers and the
company's financiers.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS

                   Copyright 2000 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              750 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)

                             October 2, 2005 Sunday
                                  City Edition

Chicory USA awarded $150,000

BYLINE: Lincoln Journal Star

SECTION: B; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 261 words

DATELINE: Lincoln, NE


A company connected to University of Nebraska Regent Dave Hergert has been
awarded a $150,000 U.S. Department of Agriculture grant.

The grant, part of the USDA's Value-Added Producer Grants program, was one of
more than $14.6 million of rural development grants announced by USDA Secretary
Mike Johanns last week.

The company, Chicory USA, LLC, will use the money to develop the only domestic
roasted chicory enterprise in North America and South America, according to the
announcement.

Hergert is president of a related chicory plant, U.S. Chicory, and according to
a story last year was slated to become the chairman and president of Chicory
USA. He could not be reached Saturday for comment.

The money can be used for planning activities, such as feasibility studies or
business plans, or to provide working capital for marketing value-added
agricultural products and for farm-based renewable energy projects.

The roasting operation reportedly is being developed in a partnership with
French chicory marketing firm Finaler.

Last week, an Omaha jury ruled that Hergert's company, U.S. Chicory, owed
$465,693 to a Minnesota company, Sinco, which alleged it had not been fully paid
for its work.

Chicory often is used in diet products and dog food. Roasted chicory is often
ground and blended with coffee to produce a stronger flavor.

The regent has been asked to resign by the Legislature for violating the state's
campaign finance laws.

A committee of 11 state senators was appointed last month to look into
impeachment, as Hergert has refused to step down.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: b/w head photo of David Hergert

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2005 Lincoln Journal Star,
                              All Rights Reserved


                              751 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           December 4, 1997 Thursday

BYLINE: Joe Gardyasz

LENGTH: 421 words


Helping producers get a bigger chunk of the retail dollar is what Northern
Plains Premium Beef is all about, says Sen. Kent Conrad. Conrad addressed more
than 230 people Wednesday at the kickoff luncheon for the cooperative's two-day
annual meeting at the Radisson Inn.

Electing a new board of directors and narrowing the field of possible cities to
locate the beef processing plant are on the agenda for the meeting. The
cooperative has enormous potential for North Dakota's economy, Conrad said prior
to the luncheon. ""To have a plant that would do $150 million a year would
provide a greater share of the retail dollar for our producers here in the
state,'' he said. ""If you look at where we've been successful in North Dakota
in adding value for producers, it has been in these kinds of cooperatives where
we get a larger chunk of the retail dollar.'' Conrad has sponsored several
measures designed to assist cooperatives like Northern Plains Premium Beef: þ A
provision in the 1996 Farm Bill that allows farmers to get loan guarantees up to
30 percent of their investment in cooperatives, up to $10,000. þ Another Farm
Bill provision that targets rural technology and cooperative grants for
cooperatives þ Drafted the Agricultural Safety Net Act, which would require the
secretary of agriculture to give priority to farmer-owned, value-added
processing facilities. þ Has proposed cooperative tax relief provision that
would allow up to $75 million in capital gains tax deferral if a cooperative
buys an existing facility. ""That's something that we hope we get passed this
year,'' Conrad said of the capital gains measure. The cooperative has a list of
eight cities it's considering for the processing plant, and is expected to
announce its top three choices today. The areas being considered for the plant
in North Dakota are Dickinson, Bismarck-Mandan, McLean County and Ellendale, as
well as Aberdeen, Huron, Pierre and Rapid City in South Dakota. A final site for
the plant should be decided by the board by early February, prior to the
beginning of a new equity drive, said Dean Meyer, chairman of the co-op's board
of directors. Rather than a 250,000-head plant as originally envisioned, the
co-op is now pursuing a plant that would process 100,000 to 150,000 head of
cattle per year. The revised business plan calls for the co-op to reduce the
per-share cost to about $50, through either a bonding program or an outside
investor that would put up money to be paid off by the plant's operating
profits, said Meyer.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 1997 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              752 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                             April 22, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Organic industry must meet standards

BYLINE: Glenda Luymes, Fraser Valley Reporter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 193  words


The organic-agriculture industry received $100,000 from Victoria yesterday to
adapt to new national standards for organic products.

By the end of 2008, organic producers across Canada will be required to meet the
same standard in order to use the "Canada Organic" label.

"This will mean consistency for the whole country," said Dag Falk, program
manager with Richmond-based Nature's Path Foods. "This is something we've been
working hard to get . . . Customers will be able to expect a certain standard in
organic food, no matter where it's coming from."

Imported organic food will have to meet the new standards, he said.

Delta MLA Val Roddick announced the funding at Expo West, the Canadian Health
Food Association's annual conference on natural products at Canada Place in
Vancouver.

The $100,000 grant will be used by the Certified Organic Associations of B.C. to
support producers in understanding and meeting the new national requirements --
"a big job," according to Deb Foote, the COABC's president.

There are more than 600 certified organic producers in B.C. The production value
of the certified farms was over $29 million in 2005.

gluymes@png.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


    Copyright 2007 The Vancouver Province, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                                Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              753 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 8, 2014 Monday

Washington: USDA Announces New Support to Help Schools Purchase More Food from
Local Farmers

LENGTH: 1063  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Agriculture, The Government of USA has issued the following
news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced more than $5 million in grants
for 82 projects spanning 42 states and the U.S. Virgin Islands that support the
U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) efforts to connect school cafeterias
with local farmers and ranchers through its Farm to School Program. The program
helps schools purchase more food from local farmers and ranchers in their
communities, expanding access to healthy local food for school children and
supporting local economies. According to USDA's first-ever Farm to School Census
released earlier this year, school districts participating in farm to school
programs purchased and served over $385 million in local food in school year
2011-2012, with more than half of participating schools planning to increase
their purchases of local food in the future.

"USDA is proud to support communities across the country as they plan and
implement innovative farm to school projects," said Vilsack. "These inspiring
collaborations provide students with healthy, fresh food, while supporting
healthy local economies. Through farm to school projects, community partners are
coming together to ensure a bright future for students, and for local farmers
and ranchers."

Secretary Vilsack made this announcement at Common Market, a pioneering food hub
in Philadelphia that connects wholesale customers to farmers in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Delaware. Common Market is receiving a grant to support their
"An Apple a Day" Program. The facility will act as a bridge between Pennsylvania
Family Farms, a small Pennsylvania value-added processor, and public charter
schools to provide food safety, product development, packaging, educational,
marketing, planning, ordering and delivery support to farm and school food
service partners.

Together, Common Market and the other selected projects will serve more than
4,800 schools and 2.8 million students, nearly 51 percent of whom live in rural
communities. A few additional examples include:

Tift County School System in Georgia will build on its current efforts to
provide agriculture and nutrition programs that are experiential, educational
and better connect students to local and regional food. Proposed activities
include retrofitting a school bus to serve as a farm bus/rolling classroom,
retrofitting a canning plant to preserve local tomatoes, and irrigating the
school farm to expand the growing season and increase yield.
 Colonial School District in Delaware will have students and staff directly
engaged in the entire process of planning, growing and processing foods,
creating new menus, and placing healthy foods directly into school nutrition
programs. At the Historic Penn Farm, high school students will grow crops for
both the school's breakfast and lunch programs.
 The Inter Tribal Buffalo Council in South Dakota intends to provide locally
raised tribal bison meat into the school lunch programs, procure other locally
produced food products, and implement school gardens.
 The National Future Farmers of America Organization (FFA) will connect local
youth producers/FFA members to school food buyers and host a series of webinars
focused on developing state level partnerships.

For a complete list of FY15 Farm to School grant recipients, please visit:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/f2s/FY_2015_Grant_
Award_Summaries.pdf

USDA's Farm to School Grants help schools respond to the growing demand for
locally sourced foods and increase market opportunities for producers and food
businesses, including food processors, manufacturers, and distributors. Grants
will also be used to support agriculture and nutrition education efforts such as
school gardens, field trips to local farms, and cooking classes. USDA Farm to
School Conference and Event Grants support regional, state, and national
conferences, events and/or trainings that have a specific emphasis on developing
supply chain relationships by connecting local producers to school food buyers,
along with events and trainings that provide technical assistance or other
programming in the area of local procurement, food safety, culinary education
and integration of agriculture-based curriculum.

USDA's Farm to School Program is made possible by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act of 2010, which authorized USDA to provide grants and technical assistance to
help schools gain better access to local foods. Since 2012, USDA has awarded
$15.1 million in grants to 221 Farm to School projects in 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and the Virgin Islands. The Farm to School program is a
core element of the USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food Initiative, which
coordinates the department's work on local food systems.

USDA is focused on improving childhood nutrition and empowering families to make
healthier food choices by providing science-based information and advice, while
expanding the availability of healthy food.

America's students now have healthier and more nutritious school meals due to
improved nutrition standards implemented as a result of the historic Healthy,
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010.
 USDA's MyPlate symbol and the resources at ChooseMyPlate.gov provide quick,
easy reference tools for parents, teachers, healthcare professionals and
communities.
 USDA awarded $5.2 million in grants to provide training and technical
assistance for child nutrition foodservice professionals and support stronger
school nutrition education programs.
 Since 2009, USDA has provided $160 million in kitchen equipment funding to
states and schools. The President's fiscal year 2015 budget requests an
additional $35 million for kitchen equipment grants. These grants are one of
several ways that USDA is supporting schools as the implement the updated
nutrition standards.
 USDA recently launched a pilot project, called Team Up for School Nutrition
Success, which is working with schools to identify challenges, provide free,
customized training, and match schools with mentors who have successfully
addressed similar challenges.

Collectively these policies and actions are helping to combat child hunger and
obesity, while improving the health and nutrition of the nation's children.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              754 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Times

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday

WB approves $76.4m for Sindh Agricultural Growth Project

SECTION: Vol. XIII No. 188

LENGTH: 325  words


The World Bank (WB) approved Sindh Agricultural Growth Project in an amount of
$76.4 million, aiming to improve the productivity and market access of small and
medium producers in important commodity value chains. The project would benefit
approximately 112,000 farmers covering over 66,000 hectares of land.

In a statement WB's Board of Executive Directors said the project was intended
to achieve this objective by investing in knowledge and technology for producers
and sub-sectors of crops and livestock and strengthening public sector
institutions to enhance the enabling environment for sustained sectoral growth.

More the credit is financed from the International Development Association
(IDA), the WB Group's grant and low-interest arm. It will be on standard IDA
terms, with a maturity of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years. The
project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive growth by
prioritising support to small and medium sized producers who are trying to
compete in horticulture markets, said Rachid Benmessaoud WB Country Director for
Pakistan.

Investing in horticulture offers the best potential for increased small producer
incomes, new employment opportunities in production and processing, improved
resource productivity and enhanced micronutrient availability in the market.

The project focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small
farmer focus, have significant involvement of women in production and processing
and from a national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest competitive advantage
in these pro-poor production value chains.

Capacity building, technical assistance and strategic planning for sector growth
will also be provided through this project, WB said. The WB said the project
would also promote the private sector participation in the agricultural
development and sector growth through public-private models for agribusiness
development and support services.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2014 Daily Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              755 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                            August 10, 2013 Saturday

Land grants concern blueberry farmers

SECTION: A; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 776 words


New Brunswick blueberry farmers have expressed their concerns over an alleged
deal between the provincial government and Nova Scotia-based blueberry goliath
Oxford Frozen Foods Inc.

Jean Maurice Landry, president of Northeast Wild Blueberry Growers Association
in New Brunswick, said yesterday that the New Brunswick government has given
vertically integrated companies like Oxford and Massachusetts cranberry producer
Ocean Spray control of more than 26,000 acres of New Brunswick farmlands in the
last 10 years, with plans to grant them another 15,000 Crown lands in
northeastern New Brunswick in exchange for the company setting up a processing
plant on the Acadian Peninsula.

While neither provincial ministers nor officials from Oxford Frozen Foods Inc.
could be reached for a response to Landry's statements yesterday, Minister of
Agriculture, Aquaculture and Fisheries Michael Olscamp addressed the issue of
Crown lands at the association's annual general meeting this spring.

"Last fall we began an evaluation process to identify suitable Crown land for
wild blueberries, and this assessment will continue to take place this summer
and fall in a number of regions in the province," said Olscamp at the time.

"Once suitable Crown land has been identified, then the question becomes how to
best allocate what is available."

Olscamp said that when allocating Crown lands, one needs to "take a number of
factors into consideration."

"Government must ensure that we use Crown land to its full benefit for now and
future generations. This means the approach to Crown land allocation and leasing
must be a balanced one that considers, among the many factors, local needs,
provincial needs and competing industry needs?... as Minister, I must be open to
all options for growth and development of this sector," he said.

A spokesperson for the Department of Agriculture, Aquaculture and Fisheries said
yesterday that the minister's position on this issue has not changed.

Landry claimed representatives of the Northeast Wild Blueberry Growers
Association in New Brunswick had their suspicions confirmed in a meeting with
provincial ministers Paul Robichaud and Olscamp this April.

"The Alward government is having negotiations with Oxford Frozen Foods Inc. for
another major allocation of (Crown) land in the range of 15,000 acres," said
Landry.

"We've been after the government to define what they meant by 'encouraging the
development of the blueberry industry in the Acadian Peninsula,' and we didn't
get answers. It took us months until we got to meet with the Minister of
Economic Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Aquaculture and Fisheries
and finally?... they confirmed this is happening."

Olscamp has professed that he "supports" local blueberry producers.

"Since 2005, the Department of Agriculture, Aquaculture and Fisheries has issued
about 45 new leases for wild blueberries, nearly all of them to local producers.
Once in full production, this would represent about 5,600 acres of land
producing close to seven million pounds of wild blueberries. I think those
figures are a strong indicator of government's commitment to the wild blueberry
sector," he said this spring.

This does little to quell the concerns of Landry, however, who is proposing the
establishment of a producers co-operative that would develop provincial Crown
lands and sell blueberries to companies like Oxford for processing.

"This would put farmers in the driver's seat in terms of having a way to prevent
that land from falling into the hands of speculators. Under such mass
production?... we could have a processing plant in the northeast. We don't have
to sell our souls to Oxford Frozen Foods Inc. and give our future to that
corporation in order to get a processing plant in northern New Brunswick," said
Landry.

Landry's proposal has several objectives, the chief of which is to allow
producers to be treated as partners in the wild blueberry industry value chain.

"We are proposing an approach that would allow us to generate and keep a mass of
economic wealth in the region exceeding $500,000 million over a 10-year period
in the region where there is a good blueberry potential."

This is certainly a proposal supported by Ed Goguen, a blueberry grower from
Minto.

"Oxford Frozen Foods Inc. already controls more than half of the blueberry land
in New Brunswick, and we're quite concerned that if they get more Crown land,
they'll be able to force prices down and really control the whole industry, and
that's a high concern for the independent growers," said Goguen.

"We're looking for some mechanism by which the growers have more of a say in
what happens to our Crown land."

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              756 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                          November 13, 1996 Wednesday
                                  Late Edition

One-time hobby turns into a town's boom employer;
Young

BYLINE: Christopher Jay

SECTION: SUPPLEMENT; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 812 words


'Waste not, want not' seems to be the motto that works for a successful Young
abattoir, Burrangong Meat Processors, reports Christopher Jay.

With the Young district of NSW noted for its intensive piggeries, cattle
feedlots and fat lambs and sheep, processing of livestock products is an avenue
for growth and industrial development.

This is the route followed by a retired bank manager, Mr Grant Edmonds, whose
hobby purchase of a run-down abattoir 12 years ago has become a success.

From 12 employees on acquisition, the abattoir, now Burrangong Meat Processors,
has almost 200 workers, an example of how a country centre can create employment
and growth through adding value to local resources.

Six months ago the works started exporting its own lamb skins to tanneries in
China and Turkey, with 10,000 skins a week going into leather clothing, rugs,
shoe liners and other applications.

At Hu Hot, the capital of Inner Mongolia, one producer uses the lamb skins from
Young to make $2,000 rugs with intricate designs for export to Japan.

The latest venture is an entry into the market for casings for thick sausages,
probably in the next week or so. This requires use of pig intestines, and a move
into a very competitive market dominated by a partnership between American
producers and Chinese processing interests exporting into Australia.

Burrangong Meat Processors is relying on its stable workforce and regular
supplies from the large local piggeries, which have around 58,000 breeding sows,
to counter the competition.

This is a development from an earlier move into thin sausage casings, produced
from sheep intestines and exported around the world from the group's factory
under the name Superior Casings.

The meat processing works handles 10,000 sheep and lambs, 3,000 pigs and 400
cattle a week, on three separate processing lines, putting it into the top three
abattoirs in NSW by volume.

"Last year we took on 10 full-time trainees in all aspects of slaughtering," Mr
Edmonds said.

A couple of years ago, the search for value added prompted expenditure of
$230,000 on pollution control equipment plus purchase of a nearby property to
secure a licence for a by-products plant.

The works renders down its own scraps and leftover portions to process about
30-40 tonnes a day, using a low temperature process from New Zealand to produce
tallow, bloodmeal and meatmeal.

Tallow goes to Tallowmasters in Melbourne for production of soap and other
tallow-based products. The brownish meatmeal is used as a stockfeed additive,
being driven in bulk to local pig and chicken farmers.

Bloodmeal is added to other stockfeed as a protein supplement. Where a producer
would be lucky to get a cent a litre for blood, as bloodmeal the return is
around $800 a tonne and $430 a tonne for meatmeal.Even discounting for some
weight loss in processing, this is a lot better than $50 a tonne for raw
product.

A bio-filter with a natural enzyme treatment, effectively odour-eating
organisms, removes the natural animal odours from the by-products' plant air.
The washing down water goes to anerobic (oxygen-free) and mechanical aeration
ponds for different stages of processing to reduce contamination in the
effluent.

The processed washing water, very high in phosphorus and nitrogen, is then
sprayed through irrigation systems onto 60ha of rye, lucerne and oats.

With four cuts of lucerne a year and strong growth encouraged by the fertiliser,
the crop returns should net around $100,000 a year. This makes the pollution
control measures a paying investment.

For good measure, some of the fertiliser-rich effluent is piped under the
adjacent Monteagle Road for irrigation of Mr Ian Hay's cherry orchard.

Twenty tonnes a week of frozen pet food travels to Uncle Ben's pet food plant at
Albury.

Administration is handled from Baulkham Hills, in Sydney's north-west, with Mr
Edmonds travelling down for a couple of days a week to see the plant's general
manager, Mr Ray Hardy, and the employees.

Burrangong is one of four processors in NSW which have invested in Meat Safety
Quality Assurance, implementing techniques originally developed to ensure food
safety for US space program astronauts.

"It was an enormous effort," Mr Edmonds said. "It cost half a million dollars.
Every person in the plant had to be trained, there were vehicle improvements,
extra sterilisations, improvements to machinery.

"We have a hazard analysis critical control point quality assurance, we have our
own inspectors, five of them. We did it in consultation with AQIS (Australian
Quarantine Inspection Service)."

Since using independent AQIS inspectors can cost $70,000 a year per inspector,
accreditation to use in-house inspectors has saved around $200,000 a year.

With the plant costing $4,000 an hour to run, the reductions in breakdowns as a
more involved workforce reports machinery needing maintenance produces further
savings.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illus: Burrangong proprietor Mr Grant Edmonds. Picture: Louise
Kennerley.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1996 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              757 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         The Chatfield News (Minnesota)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                               September 23, 2015

Grants available to add value to agriculture

BYLINE: The Chatfield News staff

LENGTH: 243  words


The Minnesota Department of Agriculture (MDA) announces funding for projects to
help farmers, producers and processors add value to their operations and the
state's agricultural economy.

Applicants have several options to boost their businesses with a portion of the
$1 million available through the Value Added grants:

Start, expand or update livestock product processing.

Purchase equipment to start, upgrade, or modernize a business.

Increase on-farm food safety.

Increase processing and aggregating capacity to sell to schools, hospitals or
others.

Increase the use and processing of Minnesota agricultural products.

Eligible applicants must be involved in production, processing or marketing
Minnesota agricultural products.

Farmers, agricultural businesses, agricultural cooperatives, or local government
entities operating farmers markets or food hubs are eligible.

"We have seen a 10 percent increase in our sales to date, but expecting that to
double in six months thanks to the project completed with the grant money," said
grant recipient Cody Koebke of Ody's Country Meats and Catering of Spring
Valley.

The grant reimburses up to 25 percent of the total project cost with a maximum
award of $150,000 and a minimum of $1,000. Equipment purchases and facility
improvements are eligible.

Applications must be received no later than 4 p.m. on Tuesday, Oct. 6. Apply
online www.mda.statemn.us/valueadded.aspx Another application round is scheduled
for early 2016.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Agriculture

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CHA

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                       Copyright 2015 The Chatfield News


                              758 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Australian

                July 2, 2003 Wednesday All-round Country Edition

Ethanol: leave it to consumers

SOURCE: MATP

SECTION: FEATURES-TYPE- LEADER-COLUMN- LEADER; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 455 words


IT will be a pity if Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson bows out of public life
-- but a bigger pity if his misbegotten legacy is an ethanol industry that
relies on government patronage rather than on a market for ethanol. His plan,
reported exclusively in The Australian yesterday, to give ethanol producers
start-up grants of up to $10 million per factory is a return to the bad old days
of vote-buying under the guise of "industry support".

Ethanol, a bio-friendly fuel additive derived as a waste-product in flour and
sugar production, has provided a study in the folly of industry assistance.
Kick-started with an exemption from fuel excise, the industry then received an
18c-a-litre subsidy from the Keating government in 1993, costing taxpayers $25
million. The Howard Government knocked over the Keating bounty, but maintained
ethanol's excise-free status -- until cheap Brazilian imports threatened. Then
the Government imposed an excise on ethanol, compensating local producers with a
bounty equal to the value of the original exemption. This scheme, which costs
taxpayers $150million a year, was extended to 2012 in the May federal budget.
Unfortunately, while desperately ploughing our money into the ethanol industry,
the Government has also had to give way to motorists' fears -- partly driven by
a scare-campaign from the oil companies -- that the additive can damage car
engines. Effective yesterday, the Government has capped ethanol content in
petrol at 10 per cent. And so we have the Government bankrolling ethanol
production while simultaneously limiting ethanol consumption.

None of the support schemes has really had anything to do with either cleaner
air or industry start-up, and everything to do with propping up wheat farmers
and canegrowers, and buying votes in the bush. Worse, the schemes to mandate a
market for ethanol and guarantee an income for producers undermine our free
trade credentials, and make a mockery of Trade Minister Mark Vaile's lectures to
the European Union on farm subsidy reform.

So please, let's not continue down the US track, where ethanol consumes $3
billion in taxpayer subsidies a year. Only consumers can decide if ethanol has a
future in Australia. That involves millions of motorists making independent
decisions about the value they place on ethanol, and wholesalers capitalising on
the demand. The only government involvement should be sooling the ACCC onto the
oil companies if their efforts to do ethanol down veer into anti-competitive
behaviour. Meanwhile, Mr Anderson should put away his ethanol white-board and
ponder an alternative legacy: eliminating the last vestiges of agrarian
socialist thinking from his own National Party.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS

                   Copyright 2003 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              759 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday

Logo row over levy payers' cash;
The Tenant Farmers' Association has told the newly formed Agricultural and
Horticultural Development Board that it should not be using levy payers' money
to fund the Red Tractor logo.

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 372 words


The TFA's national chairman, Greg Bliss, said: "The TFA has always been sceptic
of the value of the Red Tractor and the various assurance schemes to which the
Red Tractor logo applies.

"A major irritation of my members is the number and frequency of farm
inspections carried out throughout the year, often at the most inopportune
times.

"Assurance schemes, birthed in the 1990s, have certainly added to this burden,
but were originally launched on the premise that a farmer meeting assurance
standards would be able to command a higher price in the market place in
comparison to those who did not meet assurance standards. We have always been
unconvinced by this argument.

"There is no evidence of a producer premium for farm-assured produce."

Instead, the TFA believes that the Agricultural and Horticultural Development
Board should be providing grant aid to producers whether individually,
co-operatively or in farmer-controlled businesses, to assist them in the
development of their own brands and brand image which they can own, support and
develop themselves.

Part of this strategy could involve working with the English Food and Farming
Partnerships to assist in the development of co-operative and collaborative
thinking among levy payers in this area.

Mr Biss said: "While the Red Tractor logo may appear on £7.5 billion worth of
produce, the TFA does not believe that farmers have seen much of the benefit of
this.  The Red Tractor logo is not owned in the same way as a brand is owned.
Producer-owned brands allow for improvements in the value of market share to be
passed to the producers themselves in a way the Red Tractor logo will never do.

"As shoppers develop individual brand awareness and increasingly demand specific
brands within retail stores, retailers in turn will have to do market-driven
deals with brand owners to meet that demand.

"Retailers like the Red Tractor because it homogenises the products on their
shelves, enabling them to obtain maximum benefit from the shopper by sourcing at
the lowest price. While we see the importance of the Agricultural and
Horticultural Development Board in investing in quality assurance and brand
awareness, it should not be in a single marque  or within a single scheme."

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 83


                 Copyright 2008 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              760 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday

Logo row over levy payers' cash;
The Tenant Farmers' Association has told the newly formed Agricultural and
Horticultural Development Board that it should not be using levy payers' money
to fund the Red Tractor logo.

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 372 words


The TFA's national chairman, Greg Bliss, said: "The TFA has always been sceptic
of the value of the Red Tractor and the various assurance schemes to which the
Red Tractor logo applies.

"A major irritation of my members is the number and frequency of farm
inspections carried out throughout the year, often at the most inopportune
times.

"Assurance schemes, birthed in the 1990s, have certainly added to this burden,
but were originally launched on the premise that a farmer meeting assurance
standards would be able to command a higher price in the market place in
comparison to those who did not meet assurance standards. We have always been
unconvinced by this argument.

"There is no evidence of a producer premium for farm-assured produce."

Instead, the TFA believes that the Agricultural and Horticultural Development
Board should be providing grant aid to producers whether individually,
co-operatively or in farmer-controlled businesses, to assist them in the
development of their own brands and brand image which they can own, support and
develop themselves.

Part of this strategy could involve working with the English Food and Farming
Partnerships to assist in the development of co-operative and collaborative
thinking among levy payers in this area.

Mr Biss said: "While the Red Tractor logo may appear on £7.5 billion worth of
produce, the TFA does not believe that farmers have seen much of the benefit of
this.  The Red Tractor logo is not owned in the same way as a brand is owned.
Producer-owned brands allow for improvements in the value of market share to be
passed to the producers themselves in a way the Red Tractor logo will never do.

"As shoppers develop individual brand awareness and increasingly demand specific
brands within retail stores, retailers in turn will have to do market-driven
deals with brand owners to meet that demand.

"Retailers like the Red Tractor because it homogenises the products on their
shelves, enabling them to obtain maximum benefit from the shopper by sourcing at
the lowest price. While we see the importance of the Agricultural and
Horticultural Development Board in investing in quality assurance and brand
awareness, it should not be in a single marque  or within a single scheme."

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 83


                 Copyright 2008 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              761 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2017 ICC Information Group Ltd.
                         ICC Financial Analysis Reports
            ICC Information Limited is not an investment adviser and
          makes no warranties regarding merchantability or suitability
                     of material for a particular purpose.

                                January 19, 2017

                           HUGO FILM DEVELOPMENTS LTD

                  C/O SILVER LINING INNOVATIVE MANAGEMENT LTD
                                      110
                                 41 MILLHARBOUR
                                     LONDON
                                 LONDON E14 9ND


TRADE ADDRESS: 110 41 Millharbour, LONDON E14 9ND

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
REGISTRATION NO.: 09530926

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: April 8, 2015
JURISDICTION/PLACE OF REGISTRATION

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
DIRECTORS:

     ·    Mr Guy Stanley Collins, Film Producer
     ·    Mr Michael Patrick Ryan, Film Producer
     ·    Mr Leslie Grant Bradley, Film Producer
     ·    Mr Fredrik Jan Hedman, Film Producer


Go To ICC Directors

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
PRINCIPLE ACTIVITIES: Motion picture, video and television programme production
activities
INDUSTRY TYPE:
COMPANY TYPE:  Private Limited with share capital::Private Limited with share
capital::
COMPANY SIZE:  Ceased IRL

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC:
59110

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: April 30, 2016
FISCAL YEAR END: April 30

LAST FILED ACCOUNTS:  April 30, 2016
ACCOUNTS LODGED DATE:  January 5, 2017
ANNUAL RETURN:  April 8, 2016

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS
Date of Accounts                           30/04/201         -         -
                                                   6
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Tangible Assets                                    -         -         -
Intangible Assets                                  -         -         -
Total Fixed Assets                                 -         -         -
Stocks                                        20,000         -         -
Debtors                                            -         -         -
Cash                                             202         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Assets                       -         -         -
Other Current Assets                               -         -         -
Total Current Assets                         180,955         -         -
Fixed Assets                                       -         -         -
Intermediate Assets                                -         -         -
Due From Group, Non Current                        -         -         -
Due From Group, Current                            -         -         -
TOTAL ASSETS                                 180,955         -         -



LIABILITIES
Date of Accounts                           30/04/201         -         -
                                                   6
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Creditors                                          -         -         -
Bank Overdraft                                     -         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Liabilities                  -         -         -
Bank Loans - Current Portion                       -         -         -
Other Short Term Finance                           -         -         -
Due To Group, Current                              -         -         -
Due To Directors, Current                          -         -         -
Other Current Liabilities                          -         -         -
Short Term Loans                                   -         -         -
Long Term Loans                                    -         -         -
Long Term Bank Loan                                -         -         -
Other Long Term Finance                            -         -         -
Due To Group, Non Current                          -         -         -
Due To Directors, Non Current                      -         -         -
Other Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
Total Current Liabilities                    131,063         -         -
Total Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
TOTAL LIABILITIES                                  -         -         -
Called Up Share Capital and Sundry                 -         -         -
Reserves
Profit & Loss Account Reserve                  -1285         -         -
Revaluation Reserve                                -         -         -
Shareholder Funds                             49,892         -         -
Called Up Share Capital                          852         -         -
Sundry Reserves (Including Grants)                 -         -         -
Contingent Liabilities                             -         -         -
NET ASSETS                                    49,892         -         -


* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
Date of Accounts   30/04/201  -  -
                           6
                         GBP GB GB
                              P  P
Total Sales                -  -  -
Cost of Sales              -  -  -
Gross Profit               -  -  -
Operating Profit           -  -  -
Export                     -  -  -
Nontrading Income          -  -  -
Interest Payable           -  -  -
Pretax Profit              -  -  -
Taxation                   -  -  -
Profit After Tax           -  -  -
Dividends Payable          -  -  -
Retained Profits           -  -  -
Value Added                -  -  -
Capital Employed           -  -  -
Net Worth             49,892  -  -
Working Capital            -  -  -
Emp. Renumeration          -  -  -
Dir. Renumeration          -  -  -
Audit Fees                 -  -  -
Non-audit Fees             -  -  -
Depreciation               -  -  -
Number of                  -  -  -
Employees

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *


INDUSTRY AVERAGES
-
-
SIC
Code:
92110
Motion
picture
and
video
producti
on

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
CURRENT SHARES OUTSTANDING: GBP 49,892

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2017


                              762 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Scotsman

                           September 16, 2012 Sunday

Brewer behind 55% volume beer to get £550k grant from government

BYLINE: Tristan Stewart-robertson

LENGTH: 558  words


THE company behind one of the world's strongest beers is to receive a Scottish
Government grant to help open a new brewery.

Aberdeenshire-based firm BrewDog is to receive £551,000 from the Scottish
Government as part of the latest round of food and drink funding.

The cash will assist the company - which came under fire  after it launched a
limited-run 55 per cent volume beer called "The End of History" inside dead
stuffed animals - to set up a new brewery in Ellon.

BrewDog has repeatedly courted controversy with its strong beers and has
previously been criticised for its "hugely irresponsible" range. But the firm
said that as well as creating 20 new jobs, the funds will help them produce a
non-alcoholic malt-based range of soft drinks.

Alcohol campaigners cautiously welcomed the potential new products and said the
cost of the firm's high-proof beers meant it was not the chief cause of
Scotland's drink problems, despite criticism of past marketing campaigns.

Dr Evelyn Gillan, chief executive of Alcohol Focus Scotland, said: "The Scottish
Government has a role in funding a business economy, so that's a legitimate
role. BrewDog is not the real problem. Their products tend to be high-value,
high-end so less of a concern than more big, global producers and supermarkets.

"We would hope BrewDog would show a bit more responsibility in their marketing
activities. If BrewDog are genuinely looking to produce a non-alcoholic range,
that's to be welcomed. In terms of their other product range, it's a limited
market and pretty expensive - it's not the two-litre bottle of cheap cider the
kids can get someone to buy for them for a fiver."

BrewDog said the grant would also allow them to purchase more Scottish malted
barley thanks to the money from the Food Processing, Marketing and Co-operation
(FPMC) fund.

James Watt, the firm's co-founder, added: "We are extremely grateful for the
Scottish Government's help in making this project a reality."

A Glasgow drinks firm getting nearly £2 million from the FPMC said it would also
boost its use of Scottish barley with the money. Heidi Beers, which trades as
the WEST Brewery, said the expansion will support 18 new employees and see them
launch a low-alcohol lager.

Petra Wetzel, of Heidi Beers, said they were "thrilled" with the Scottish
Government's support. She added: "The food and drink industry in Scotland, in
particular the premium producers, play an increasingly important role for
Scotland - focusing on job creation, exporting Scotland the brand and providing
Scots with sustainable and well-sourced produce."

Since 2008, a total of 159 projects have benefited from £38 million under the
FPMC initiative, with £10m getting paid out in the latest round.

Rural affairs secretary Richard Lochhead said the food and drink industry was
"one of Scotland's greatest success stories".

He added: "The funding will benefit a wide range of small- and medium-sized
businesses across the country and support the creation of new jobs and further
investment."

Mr Lochhead said Scottish beers and ales were "highly sought after", and added:
"Heidi and BrewDog are innovative Scottish companies and this investment will
not only create jobs, but boost Scottish agriculture through more locally
sourced barley.

"I particularly welcome plans to diversify their products to include low and
non-alcoholic drinks."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STTS


                       Copyright 2012 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              763 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           December 4, 2008 Thursday

Wheat group supports research

SECTION: DAKOTA WIRE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 261 words


MANDAN (AP) - The North Dakota Wheat Commission is looking for ways to keep
money flowing for research.

"The federal grants, the federal earmarks are shrinking a bit," Administrator
Neal Fisher told the commission at its meeting this week in Mandan. "The state
puts in a couple of million dollars also, and then there are the small
contributions of commodity groups like ourselves, that provide about $8 million
a year, in round numbers, for wheat research."

Fisher said the commission might redirect some of its checkoff money from trade
policy to research. He also hopes the Legislature will help.

"We're hoping the state will value this $7 billion wheat industry - billion with
a B as we say - and see fit to invest some of additional dollars in this,"
Fisher said.

Wheat prices hit around $25 a bushel earlier this year, but have since fallen to
about a fourth of that high. County representatives to the Wheat Commission say
farmers worry about next year.

"Our costs of production on this '09 crop is going to go up dramatically," said
Harlan Klein, who farms near Elgin. "And the concern that I have - and I'm sure
a lot of other producers - is, we've got to have this thing to where we as a
producer can come out and make some money on this, otherwise we're not going to
be here."

"We know costs have gone up," Fisher said. "And now the commodity prices
themselves have gone down. Where's the balance going to be in that, and how can
we help?"

One good sign recently has been the weather. Farmers see the rain and snow that
hit the state as a sign of another strong crop.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2008 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              764 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    April 28, 1990, Saturday, Final Edition

Festival Gets Gift To Replace Frant;
TV Producer Makes Up for NEA Funds Spurned by Papp

BYLINE: Elizabeth Kastor, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: STYLE; PAGE C1

LENGTH: 762 words


Joseph Papp, producer of the New York Shakespeare Festival, said yesterday that
television producer Mark Goodson has given the festival a $ 50,000 gift to
replace a National Endowment for the Arts grant Papp refused this week.

Papp declined the NEA grant, earmarked for a Latino Festival scheduled for
August, rather than sign a congressionally mandated stipulation that no federal
money support work that might be deemed "obscene" and without artistic merit.

"People are calling and saying, 'You're doing a great job,' " Papp said.
Goodson, who has supported the Shakespeare Festival in the past, was one of the
callers, offering his gift before Papp finally decided to reject the grant.

"I am trying to encourage, perhaps, other people to stand up and say, 'Let's
deal with this and put our money where our mouth is,' " Goodson said yesterday.

Papp said he had received several promises of financial support following his
announcement that he would decline the grant, including a $ 10,000 gift from the
New York Times Co. Foundation. "We've been getting all kinds of calls, both of
verbal support and some financial support," he said. "I feel very good to have
that support. But I can't depend on an annual crisis to make up a gap. We're
talking half a million dollars we get from the NEA annually."

The festival received more than $ 400,000 from the NEA last year. Papp said he
will continue to apply for NEA grants but will not accept any federal funding as
long as the obscenity provision is attached. He believes much of the work he
produces could come into conflict with the restrictions.

Goodson said that until he heard of Papp's concern over the obscenity provision,
he had assumed the controversy surrounding the NEA would remain restricted to
federal funding of controversial visual art.

"I think people were more envisioning this as having to do with museums, and I
thought they would work it out," Goodson said. "I never thought it would involve
the NEA's effect on written work and experimental theater. But then I realized
perhaps half of what these theaters do wouldn't pass someone's standard. I was
thinking of David Mamet's plays, for example."

Papp expressed concern about the impression Goodson's gift might make.

"Some people who want to get rid of the NEA will say, 'Gee, you can get that
money. Just put up a smoke signal and you'll get it.' That's not true."

NEA spokesman Josh Dare said yesterday that California choreographer Ferne
Ackerman was the only other artist to refuse a grant because of the obscenity
restriction, returning a $ 7,000 grant last month. But a number of artist groups
are offering advice to their constituents on ways to respond to the obscenity
clause short of rejecting the money. New York's Artists Space is circulating a
memo with two examples of protest letters grantees can send to the NEA.

The obscenity statute was part of last year's NEA congressional compromise and
prevents funding of work that the NEA deems to be "obscene, including but not
limited to, depictions of sadomasochism, homoeroticism, the sexual exploitation
of children, or individuals engaged in sex acts and which, when taken as a
whole, do not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value."

The subject of NEA funding restrictions also occupied a Senate Labor and Human
Resources subcommittee yesterday during its second and last NEA reauthorization
hearing. Witnesses ranged from National Symphony Orchestra Artistic Director
Mstislav Rostropovich to an array of constitutional lawyers to Eagle Forum
President Phyllis Schlafly.

Rostropovich described smuggling Shostakovich's "Babi Yar" symphony out of the
Soviet Union, aware that he was risking his freedom by doing so.

"It was that life under censorship that led me to the United States," he said.
"Art and literature should be judged by the conscience of the creator, his peers
in his field and all of the people, not by a separate bureaucracy, artificially
compressing the arteries and veins of this life-sustaining circulation."

Schlafly was scheduled to speak last in a long day of testifying, and by the
time she took the microphone most of the senators and much of the audience had
left. Calling the NEA "out of touch and irresponsible," Schlafly said, "The NEA
was born in the mid-1960s, when unregulated handouts to targeted constituencies
were the passion of the day.  That era is over... .

"Having proved its irresponsibility in spending the taxpayers' money, the
National Endowment for the Arts should be completely de-funded."


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, MSTISLAV ROSTOPOVICH PREPARING HIS STATEMENT TO THE SENATE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WITH HIS ASSISTANT, NADYA EFREMOV. JAMES THRESHER

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1990 The Washington Post


                              765 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              Daily Mail (London)

                                  July 7, 1995

Does our TV really have to be so coarse?;
A LEADING WRITER EXPLAINS WHY EVEN TOP FIGURES IN THE BBC NOW BELIEVE THERE IS
TOO MUCH VULGARITY AND VIOLENCE ON TV

BYLINE: Rachel Billington

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1747 words


The BBC has announced it intends to re-examine its guidelines on taste and
decency and obscene language. Some people may be surprised to hear there are
still guidelines.

When I had my first television play produced about 15 years ago there were more
than guidelines, there were rules. My subject was wife battering and my wife
batterer, a nasty piece of work, opened the play with a series of angry
sentences using one particular expletive seven times.

The producer had objected. That was the way it was then. I expostulated until
the producer pointed out that I had been taking the easy option - immediate
shock value.

I remembered the rules when I heard Hugh Grant open Four Weddings And A Funeral
with so many expletives I lost count.

Recently, the writers' organisation, PEN, for which I work, held a discussion
about censorship and I was surprised to discover how many writers are worried
about the Liberty Hall atmosphere in television. There was a concern that
something had to change.

No one can envy the task ahead of the BBC. And we should be thankful, at least,
that it is still recognising its responsibility to the viewers. It can never be
said too often that television, in very many homes, is watched not as a matter
of choice, as a film, a book, or a play is chosen, but as a matter of course.

Programmes are watched because the television is there and most probably on.
Inertia watching is normal, and the off-button takes an act of will beyond the
strength of many - particularly exhausted parents in conflict with strong-willed
children.

John Birt, the Director General of the BBC, has identified the problem as the
generation gap: 'Increasingly we find a younger generation of writers and
comedians expressing themselves forcefully and talking about things an older
generation wouldn't have done.' Mr Birt would like to respect 'freedom of
material while not offending some sections of society'.

That is a reasonable enough comment on the face of it, but it leaves a
disconcerting sense that Mr Birt is suggesting that the BBC merely plans to
placate foolish oldies who are out of touch with modern thinking and only merit
attention because they constitute a large body of viewers.

But is it only 'Retired of Tunbridge Wells' who is finding things getting beyond
a joke on BBC TV? How many people really enjoyed the moment in Men Behaving
Badly on BBC1 last week when Gary passed Dorothy's severed appendix to an
unsuspecting Tony with the words: 'Fancy a chilli pickle'? Or if some did enjoy
it, was it doing much for the sensitive side of their natures? Or is it
ridiculous to even talk about sensitivity?

Clearly, the BBC will be asking a lot of questions in its re-examination, but
before it even starts formulating these questions, the men and women at the top
need to be clear about the principles behind the whole exercise.

Is it enough, as John Birt seems to suggest, simply to follow trends in sex,
violence and bad language, steering a middle course which does not infuriate
those who want to knock down all previous barriers of decency, and, at the same
time, just about keep on board with the less 'liberated'?  Or should Mr Birt and
the BBC itself have clearly-set standards, even when he feels most like King
Canute trying to hold back the waves?

It seems to me that I meet more and more people, not old, often liberal, who
feel that even Canute is preferable to what seems to be no attempt to resist the
tide at all.

There are a few easy options, of course. The famous nine o'clock watershed could
be moved to a later time for example.

When Melvyn Bragg's serial, A Time To Dance (which happened to be directed by my
husband, Kevin Billington) opened at nine o'clock with a rape, there were,
understandably, objections. A later watershed,

particularly in drama dealing with adult subjects, is a good idea. There could
be more warnings about, for example, bad language which is so offensive to some
and so inoffensive to others.

But these, in a way, are diversions from the main problem, as I feel Mr Birt's
comments were a diversion. The real difficulty is that a whole range of
programmes, from news to comedy to soap - and one shouldn't leave out
advertising - have changed in content and in presentation over the past ten
years or so.

I am not talking about an individual unclothed body or a violent act which could
be left on the cutting room floor. But about a changed atmosphere.  Sexual
deviations which used to be unknown to many people have become a subject for
lightweight comedy. Bodily functions in the past considered either too
disgusting or boring for the public arena are now staple fare for comedy.

There is an atmosphere of openness which could be seen as positive, because
tolerance is a positive virtue, but which carries with it the downside of a
gradual coarsening of the texture of words and behaviour.  Sometimes it seems
that verbal aggression and abuse have become the common language of
communication.

The question is whether the BBC will argue that this is a change in society
which the small screen is merely reflecting, or whether it recognises that
television writers have a profound influence on society.

This point has been much argued. At the time of the James Bulger case the effect
on young children of constantly watching violence on television was looked into.
Indeed, a Mori survey for the BBC found that two-thirds of the population
believed that violence on TV was directly linked to anti-social behaviour in
children.

However, in this context, it is interesting to point out that two of the
highest-rated programmes, Home And Away and Neighbours, genuinely follow the
family entertainment specifications and would shock nobody.

No one would want the airwaves to end up filled with Australian soap, but their
popularity does spike the guns of any TV mogul tempted to claim he would lose
ratings if he tried to clean up language or modify violence.

Sometimes it seems to me that we are still behaving as if nothing had changed
since the Sixties when there was a real need to push down some of the worst
forms of censorship.

But those days are long gone and the pendulum has swung the other way.  The BBC
is a remarkable institution in that it still has the power, in theory anyway, to
influence society. As the non-terrestrial channels become more prevalent and
more powerful, there will be less and less appearing on our televisions that is
susceptible to any control whatever.

Let us hope that Auntie, as the BBC used to be described in its days of
benevolent patronage, puts away her knitting basket and steps up onto the
platform. She might not only save her own good name but be a good influence well
beyond the realms of the box.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: Beyond the watershed: The Singing Detective aroused public anger over
its sex scenes

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                   Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.


                              766 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              Daily Mail (London)

                                  July 7, 1995

Does our TV really have to be so coarse?;
A LEADING WRITER EXPLAINS WHY EVEN TOP FIGURES IN THE BBC NOW BELIEVE THERE IS
TOO MUCH VULGARITY AND VIOLENCE ON TV

BYLINE: Rachel Billington

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1136 words


The BBC has announced it intends to re-examine its guidelines on taste and
decency and obscene language. Some people may be surprised to hear there are
still guidelines.

When I had my first television play produced about 15 years ago there were more
than guidelines, there were rules. My subject was wife battering and my wife
batterer, a nasty piece of work, opened the play with a series of angry
sentences using one particular expletive seven times.

The producer had objected. That was the way it was then. I expostulated until
the producer pointed out that I had been taking the easy option - immediate
shock value.

I remembered the rules when I heard Hugh Grant open Four Weddings And A Funeral
with so many expletives I lost count.

Recently, the writers' organisation, PEN, for which I work, held a discussion
about censorship and I was surprised to discover how many writers are worried
about the Liberty Hall atmosphere in television. There was a concern that
something had to change.

No one can envy the task ahead of the BBC. And we should be thankful, at least,
that it is still recognising its responsibility to the viewers. It can never be
said too often that television, in very many homes, is watched not as a matter
of choice, as a film, a book, or a play is chosen, but as a matter of course.

Programmes are watched because the television is there and most probably on.
Inertia watching is normal, and the off-button takes an act of will beyond the
strength of many - particularly exhausted parents in conflict with strong-willed
children.

John Birt, the Director General of the BBC, has identified the problem as the
generation gap: 'Increasingly we find a younger generation of writers and
comedians expressing themselves forcefully and talking about things an older
generation wouldn't have done.' Mr Birt would like to respect 'freedom of
material while not offending some sections of society'.

That is a reasonable enough comment on the face of it, but it leaves a
disconcerting sense that Mr Birt is suggesting that the BBC merely plans to
placate foolish oldies who are out of touch with modern thinking and only merit
attention because they constitute a large body of viewers.

But is it only 'Retired of Tunbridge Wells' who is finding things getting beyond
a joke on BBC TV? How many people really enjoyed the moment in Men Behaving
Badly on BBC1 last week when Gary passed Dorothy's severed appendix to an
unsuspecting Tony with the words: 'Fancy a chilli pickle'? Or if some did enjoy
it, was it doing much for the sensitive side of their natures? Or is it
ridiculous to even talk about sensitivity?

Clearly, the BBC will be asking a lot of questions in its re-examination, but
before it even starts formulating these questions, the men and women at the top
need to be clear about the principles behind the whole exercise.

Is it enough, as John Birt seems to suggest, simply to follow trends in sex,
violence and bad language, steering a middle course which does not infuriate
those who want to knock down all previous barriers of decency, and, at the same
time, just about keep on board with the less 'liberated'?  Or should Mr Birt and
the BBC itself have clearly-set standards, even when he feels most like King
Canute trying to hold back the waves?

It seems to me that I meet more and more people, not old, often liberal, who
feel that even Canute is preferable to what seems to be no attempt to resist the
tide at all.

There are a few easy options, of course. The famous nine o'clock watershed could
be moved to a later time for example.

When Melvyn Bragg's serial, A Time To Dance (which happened to be directed by my
husband, Kevin Billington) opened at nine o'clock with a rape, there were,
understandably, objections. A later watershed,

particularly in drama dealing with adult subjects, is a good idea. There could
be more warnings about, for example, bad language which is so offensive to some
and so inoffensive to others.

But these, in a way, are diversions from the main problem, as I feel Mr Birt's
comments were a diversion. The real difficulty is that a whole range of
programmes, from news to comedy to soap - and one shouldn't leave out
advertising - have changed in content and in presentation over the past ten
years or so.

I am not talking about an individual unclothed body or a violent act which could
be left on the cutting room floor. But about a changed atmosphere.  Sexual
deviations which used to be unknown to many people have become a subject for
lightweight comedy. Bodily functions in the past considered either too
disgusting or boring for the public arena are now staple fare for comedy.

There is an atmosphere of openness which could be seen as positive, because
tolerance is a positive virtue, but which carries with it the downside of a
gradual coarsening of the texture of words and behaviour.  Sometimes it seems
that verbal aggression and abuse have become the common language of
communication.

The question is whether the BBC will argue that this is a change in society
which the small screen is merely reflecting, or whether it recognises that
television writers have a profound influence on society.

This point has been much argued. At the time of the James Bulger case the effect
on young children of constantly watching violence on television was looked into.
Indeed, a Mori survey for the BBC found that two-thirds of the population
believed that violence on TV was directly linked to anti-social behaviour in
children.

However, in this context, it is interesting to point out that two of the
highest-rated programmes, Home And Away and Neighbours, genuinely follow the
family entertainment specifications and would shock nobody.

No one would want the airwaves to end up filled with Australian soap, but their
popularity does spike the guns of any TV mogul tempted to claim he would lose
ratings if he tried to clean up language or modify violence.

Sometimes it seems to me that we are still behaving as if nothing had changed
since the Sixties when there was a real need to push down some of the worst
forms of censorship.

But those days are long gone and the pendulum has swung the other way.  The BBC
is a remarkable institution in that it still has the power, in theory anyway, to
influence society. As the non-terrestrial channels become more prevalent and
more powerful, there will be less and less appearing on our televisions that is
susceptible to any control whatever.

Let us hope that Auntie, as the BBC used to be described in its days of
benevolent patronage, puts away her knitting basket and steps up onto the
platform. She might not only save her own good name but be a good influence well
beyond the realms of the box.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: Beyond the watershed: The Singing Detective aroused public anger over
its sex scenes

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                   Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.


                              767 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                            August 6, 2015 Thursday

Farmer co-ops can match the corporates

BYLINE: ROB ROBINSON

SECTION: STUD STOCK; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 585 words


THE federal government has just released its Agriculture White Paper with the
promise of $4 billion "to assist the farming sector and assist farmers in
becoming more competitive on the global stage".

Hmm, I have read the press release three times and eagerly await the small print
as we all know, the devil is always in the detail.

If this government is sincere and I am sure it is, it must ensure that the funds
go to the entrepreneurs, creative small farmers and ag businesses to create new
employment and truly stimulate the sector.

If previous grant money for SA industry is anything to go by and if the same
model is to apply forget it! The real people desperately requiring assistance,
the ones who employ the majority of workers and can improve our state, are
usually cut from the process at an early stage.

We are in urgent need of a new model to assist the ag sector not the same
regurgitated one of the previous 30 years which never has, nor ever will
succeed.

The usual model is for a producer, processor or wholesaler to go to the relevant
public servant, placed in charge of the lolly bag from Canberra. He, in turn,
will direct you to an approved consultant to help your business plan, and so on
it goes.

Twelve months after the release of the plan, the relevant minister will be
informed that 50 per cent of the funding is used and only a few applications
have succeeded. Desperate for a positive result and overwhelmed by the pressure
coming from hundreds of lobbyists in Canberra, they will open the lolly bag and
throw it at the big corporates, who have been waiting in the background.

Thus, several large corporations will finally be able to goldplate the urinals
in the executive washrooms, replace their tired (three-year-old plant) and
travel with their families and government trade advisers to Brussels to study
new techniques in keeping small business in line.

You think this is all a fantasy? Follow the promised money trail and see how it
eventuates. At the end, Canberra will chastise small business for its lethargy
and lack of innovation and develop more grant money from another white paper.

All jokes aside the federal government if it is serious needs to create a team
of public servants with integrity and a genuine desire to improve Australia for
the future. There are such creatures and many have great ideas. Give them the
power to bypass the old-model public servants and state governments and approve
the funding directly to qualified, experienced and genuine rural business
people. We must avoid at all cost the consultant and adviser mire that consume
the energy and money to move forward.

I have stated in previous articles that the only way to move forward in the
rural sector is to look back at our own past. We must redevelop and establish
co-ops to establish a competitive farming sector, and once established and
profitable, resist with all our might the inevitable pressure to have them go
public and be consumed by the large corporates.

The lead taken by European Union farmers to register areas and brands is a great
example of the marketing and brand development needed to value-add to livestock
and crops. Consistent quality, consistent price and consistent delivery is the
key to long-term success for the sector.

This cannot happen without producer involvement. Regional branding is an
important asset for producers, as is a co-op owned by them and profiting them.

The only ones who can make it happen are you the producers of SA, so start now
and make your own future!

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              768 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                            August 6, 2015 Thursday

Co-ops can match corporates

BYLINE: ROB ROBINSON

SECTION: STUD STOCK; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 583 words


THE federal government has just released its Agriculture White Paper with the
promise of $4 billion "to assist the farming sector and assist farmers in
becoming more competitive on the global stage".

I have read the press release three times and eagerly await the small print as
we all know, the devil is always in the detail.

If this government is sincere and I am sure it is, it must ensure that the funds
go to entrepreneurs, creative small farmers and ag businesses to create new
employment and truly stimulate the sector.

If previous grant money for SA industry is anything to go by and if the same
model is to apply forget it! The real people desperately requiring assistance,
the ones who employ the majority of workers and can improve our state, are
usually cut from the process at an early stage.

We are in urgent need of a new model to assist the ag sector not the same
regurgitated one of the previous 30 years which never has, nor ever will
succeed.

The usual model is for a producer, processor or wholesaler to go to the relevant
public servant, placed in charge of the lolly bag from Canberra. He, in turn,
will direct you to an approved consultant to help your business plan, and so on
it goes.

Twelve months after the release of the plan, the relevant minister will be
informed that 50 per cent of the funding is used and only a few applications
have succeeded. Desperate for a positive result and overwhelmed by the pressure
coming from hundreds of lobbyists in Canberra, they will open the lolly bag and
throw it at the big corporates, who have been waiting in the background.

Thus, several large corporations will finally be able to goldplate the urinals
in the executive washrooms, replace their tired (three-year-old) plant and
travel with their families and government trade advisers overseas to study new
techniques in keeping small business in line.

You think this is all a fantasy? Follow the promised money trail and see how it
eventuates. At the end, Canberra will chastise small business for its lethargy
and lack of innovation and develop more grant money from another white paper.

All jokes aside the federal government if it is serious needs to create a team
of public servants with integrity and a genuine desire to improve Australia for
the future. There are such creatures and many have great ideas. Give them the
power to bypass the old-model public servants and state governments and approve
the funding directly to qualified, experienced and genuine rural business
people. We must avoid at all cost the consultant and adviser mire that consume
the energy and money to move forward.

I have stated in previous articles that the only way to move forward in the
rural sector is to look back at our own past. We must redevelop and establish
co-ops to establish a competitive farming sector, and once established and
profitable, resist with all our might the inevitable pressure to have them go
public and be consumed by the large corporates.

The lead taken by European Union farmers to register areas and brands is a great
example of the marketing and brand development needed to value-add to livestock
and crops. Consistent quality, consistent price and consistent delivery is the
key to long-term success for the sector.

This cannot happen without producer involvement. Regional branding is an
important asset for producers, as is a co-op owned by them and profiting them.

The only ones who can make it happen are you the producers of SA, so start now
and make your own future!

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              769 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                            August 6, 2015 Thursday

Co-ops can match corporates

BYLINE: ROB ROBINSON

SECTION: STUD STOCK; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 583 words


THE federal government has just released its Agriculture White Paper with the
promise of $4 billion "to assist the farming sector and assist farmers in
becoming more competitive on the global stage".

I have read the press release three times and eagerly await the small print as
we all know, the devil is always in the detail.

If this government is sincere and I am sure it is, it must ensure that the funds
go to entrepreneurs, creative small farmers and ag businesses to create new
employment and truly stimulate the sector.

If previous grant money for SA industry is anything to go by and if the same
model is to apply forget it! The real people desperately requiring assistance,
the ones who employ the majority of workers and can improve our state, are
usually cut from the process at an early stage.

We are in urgent need of a new model to assist the ag sector not the same
regurgitated one of the previous 30 years which never has, nor ever will
succeed.

The usual model is for a producer, processor or wholesaler to go to the relevant
public servant, placed in charge of the lolly bag from Canberra. He, in turn,
will direct you to an approved consultant to help your business plan, and so on
it goes.

Twelve months after the release of the plan, the relevant minister will be
informed that 50 per cent of the funding is used and only a few applications
have succeeded. Desperate for a positive result and overwhelmed by the pressure
coming from hundreds of lobbyists in Canberra, they will open the lolly bag and
throw it at the big corporates, who have been waiting in the background.

Thus, several large corporations will finally be able to goldplate the urinals
in the executive washrooms, replace their tired (three-year-old) plant and
travel with their families and government trade advisers overseas to study new
techniques in keeping small business in line.

You think this is all a fantasy? Follow the promised money trail and see how it
eventuates. At the end, Canberra will chastise small business for its lethargy
and lack of innovation and develop more grant money from another white paper.

All jokes aside the federal government if it is serious needs to create a team
of public servants with integrity and a genuine desire to improve Australia for
the future. There are such creatures and many have great ideas. Give them the
power to bypass the old-model public servants and state governments and approve
the funding directly to qualified, experienced and genuine rural business
people. We must avoid at all cost the consultant and adviser mire that consume
the energy and money to move forward.

I have stated in previous articles that the only way to move forward in the
rural sector is to look back at our own past. We must redevelop and establish
co-ops to establish a competitive farming sector, and once established and
profitable, resist with all our might the inevitable pressure to have them go
public and be consumed by the large corporates.

The lead taken by European Union farmers to register areas and brands is a great
example of the marketing and brand development needed to value-add to livestock
and crops. Consistent quality, consistent price and consistent delivery is the
key to long-term success for the sector.

This cannot happen without producer involvement. Regional branding is an
important asset for producers, as is a co-op owned by them and profiting them.

The only ones who can make it happen are you the producers of SA, so start now
and make your own future!

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              770 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             January 7, 1985 Monday

New ways for the CBC

BYLINE: GAM

LENGTH: 584 words


The CBC has a unique role in Canadian broadcasting, but its skills are not
 unique. The question being raised increasingly is whether somebody else
 could do part of its job as well, or better, with public funding; and
 while the CBC may blanch at the thought, and while supporters of the CBC
 may be reluctant to cede an inch for fear of encouraging further budget
 cuts, two recent moves have brought the issue into sharper focus.

The first is fairly outlandish. A group of businessmen wants the
 Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission to consider
 turning the CBC's English-language television network over to the private
 sector, which would lead it up one of two roads: either it would become a
 network like any other, running mainly American programs, or it would
 continue to receive vast subsidies from the Government to provide regular
 Canadian programming, an essential element in the CBC's mandate. Difficult
 to see what Canadians would gain, and easy to see what they would lose -
 ownership.

More intriguing is the decision by Communications Minister Marcel Masse
 to alter the rules of the $254-million Broadcast Development Fund,
 administered by what was once the Canadian Film Development Corp. and is
 now Telefilm Canada. The fund, supported by a tax on cable-TV companies,
 was designed to provide up to one-third of the cost of independent
 productions of dramas, variety shows and children's shows, if a Canadian
 broadcaster guaranteed prime-time exposure for the shows. But the private
 broadcasters made sparing use of the fund, and the CBC, smarting from its
 recent budget cuts, has withdrawn spending commitments worth $9-million -
 a decision which has left several private producers stranded and fuming.

Mr. Masse will probably adjust the fund to offer a higher percentage of
 the cost of independent productions - perhaps two-thirds - to make
 independent producers less dependent on the networks. Quite apart from the
 boost it would give to Canadian television production, this would give
 independent producers the chance to show whether, given the resources,
 they can produce programs of superior quality more efficiently than the
 Mother Corp.

The results might prove instructive, even humbling, for CBC president
 Pierre Juneau, who last month made this remark: "Moving programs currently
 produced in the CBC to the private sector is not a solution. That might
 make a few producers happy, but it would not result in more programs -
 just more layoffs for CBC production personnel." If the "few producers"
 were more efficient - dare we say, innovative - it might indeed result in
 more, or less expensive, programs; in any case, the CBC might get a useful
 jolt from the emergence of serious competition.

But we sound two cautionary notes. Mr. Masse should resist any impulse
 to put prior restrictions on grants from the Broadcast Fund; one report
 stated that he would insist on the creation of five television series,
 three in English and two in French, a narrowing of focus which could rule
 out any number of superior proposals.

Second, the idea of encouraging outside producers is not to replace the
 CBC, but to complement it - to breathe new ideas and approaches into
 Canadian television, and to make wider use of this country's actors,
 directors, musicians and writers. The country needs a critical mass of
 talents to succeed in the broadcasting field; and the CBC, with its
 mandate to foster Canadian values and provide a forum for Canadian views
 and ideas, provides the core.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1985 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              771 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    The Wilson Daily Times (North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 13, 2009 Friday

County's farmers market gets grant for expansion

BYLINE: Stephanie Creech, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 686 words


Mar. 13--When the Wilson County Farmers Market opens for business the first
Saturday in May, vendors and shoppers should be able to enjoy a new, expanded
shelter.

The construction, which will be done by Carolina Structures, should start within
the next few weeks, according to Wilson County Cooperative Extension Agent Billy
Little. Little updated members of the Wilson County Farmers Market Association
on the project during the association's meeting Thursday night.

Little said the design work has been done, the permits secured and materials
ordered.

The association is paying for the shelter expansion with a $20,000 grant it
received from the Rural Advancement Foundation International, an organization
based in western North Carolina, via the North Carolina Tobacco Trust Fund.
Representatives from both organizations attended the meeting.

Jason Roehrig of RAFI said their organization is pleased it could be supportive
of the farmers market here. Jeff Jennings of the Tobacco Trust Fund Commission
said they work hard to put money back into communities, like Wilson, affected by
the national tobacco settlement.

The Wilson County Fair Board is spending an additional $4,000 to $5,000 to
replace the tin on the existing shelter so it will match the red tin roof that
will be on the new part of the shelter.

Dave Allgood, manager of the Wilson County Fairgrounds, said in tight times that
sounds like a lot of money. But he said they are excited about the expansion
because the first year of the market exceeded expectations. Allgood said he has
also received inquiries from different community groups interested in doing
something at the fairgrounds when the market is open. For example, some church
groups might hold fundraisers at the fairgrounds.

The shelter upgrades are needed because the number of vendors interested in
participating in the market has exceeded the available space. Little reminded
the group that outgrowing the shelter space in the first year is a nice problem
to have. He said the red roof should show up from U.S. 301 and serve as a good
marketing tool.

The Wilson Farmers Market opened in May of last year. It operated every Saturday
from 7:30 a.m. until noon until it closed Aug. 30. As many as 18 vendors sold
produce at the market during the first year, and interest grew as the season
progressed. The number of vendors varied each week.

Forms are currently available from the association for producers from Wilson,
Nash, Edgecombe and surrounding counties interested in signing up to sell their
goods at the market this year. All vendors have to go through a certification
process before they can sell at the market.

Little said they don't want to have any vacant spaces under the shelter. But at
the same time they don't want to have vendors under a tent if there is space
under the shelter.

Little said survey forms filled out by association members in December indicated
most producers wanted to push for opening the market the first of May even
though that still is a little early in the growing season.

On April 18, the association is sponsoring a trip to the farmer's market in
Carrboro. Participants on that trip will get to see that market and talk to
vendors there about how it operates.

In preparation for the market opening, Little also talked with producers about
the importance of food safety, especially given the outbreaks of food borne
illnesses in the past few years. But Little said concerns about food safety
could mean more people will visit the farmers market. He said most people he has
talked with also think the market will have more shoppers because shoppers are
looking for a good value and because money is tight.

creech@wilsontimes.com -- 265-7822

To see more of The Wilson Daily Times or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.wilsondaily.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090313-ZW-County-s-farmers-market-gets-grant-for-expansion-0313

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZW


                                 Copyright 2009


                              772 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 7, 2014 Thursday

Minnesota: Governor Mark Dayton proclaims Farm Family Recognition Day

LENGTH: 647  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Office of the Governor, The State of Minnesota has issued the following press
release:

Governor Mark Dayton has proclaimed today to be "Farm Family Recognition Day" to
honor the more than 66,000 family farms in Minnesota and their contributions to
communities statewide. The Governor's proclamation coincides with the University
of Minnesota Farm Family of the Year recognition ceremony, which is held
annually during Farmfest near Redwood Falls.

"Because of our innovative, hard-working, committed farm families, Minnesota is
the fifth largest producer of agricultural products in the nation," said
Department of Agriculture Commissioner Dave Frederickson. "All told, agriculture
generates an estimated $90 billion in economic activity in this state."

Minnesota's farmers and agricultural producers form the backbone of the state's
economy. In 2012, Minnesota farmers and ranchers marketed $13.2 billion in crop
products and $7.4 billion in livestock products. Minnesota farmers also are
credited with exporting about $8.2 billion in high-quality agricultural exports
to markets in the U.S. and around the globe. This economic success is
strengthening communities across the state, while also employing more than
340,000 Minnesotans.

Governor Dayton and the Department of Agriculture have worked to support
Minnesota's farmers and help them continue their success. Since taking office,
Governor Dayton has supported new investments for farmers and Minnesota's
agricultural economy. The initiatives have included the following:

Agriculture Growth, Research and Innovation Fund - The initiative helps
Minnesota farmers and business by providing grants, loans, and other forms of
financial assistance. This support allows producers to expand, resulting in more
jobs, and greater profits in the areas of livestock investment, value added
business and market development, and renewable energy development.
Agricultural Property Tax Relief - Growing farmland values have caused farm
property taxes to increase in recent years. In 2014, Governor Dayton and the
Legislature provided $16.9 million in direct property tax relief to Minnesota
farmers.

Biofuel Development - The biofuel mandate that went into effect on July 1 puts
Minnesota at the forefront of promoting cleaner, home-grown fuels, while also
taking another important step toward reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Not only
is switching to biodiesel a benefit for our environment, it is good for our
economy. Biofuels production contributes an estimated $6 billion annually to the
Minnesota economy.

Protecting Water Resources - Minnesota farmers also are leading the way in a
first of its kind voluntary program designed to accelerate adoption of on-farm
conservation practices that protect Minnesota's lakes and rivers. Producers who
implement and maintain farm management practices approved under the Minnesota
Agricultural Water Quality Certification Program are certified and in turn
assured that their operation meets the state's water quality goals and standards
for a period of ten years.

Farmer-Lender Mediation Extension - Governor Dayton and the Legislature extended
the Farmer-Lender Mediation program in 2013. The act ensures lenders work with
farmers to find payment solutions rather than resort to repossession and
foreclosure. This initiative is essential in supporting hardworking Minnesota
farmers.

Cultivating Pollinator Habitats - Minnesota's agricultural industry depends on
bees, butterflies, and other pollinators. These species play a critical role in
the life cycles of three-fourths of all plants. During the past decade,
Minnesota's pollinator populations have steeply declined. To ensure the vitality
of Minnesota's agricultural industry, Governor Dayton and the Legislature
invested initiatives to protect pollinators and restore their habitats.

For further information please visit: http://mn.gov/governor/

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              773 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                           September 26, 2005 Monday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

What the Sunday papers say;
CITY AND BUSINESS EDITED BY DAVID SHAND

SECTION: CITY; 67

LENGTH: 213  words


SUNDAY EXPRESS The UK Government has withheld grants worth millions of pounds
from Nanjing Auto, the Chinese company which bought MG Rover, because it
believes its plans are unviable.

Revenue & Customs will be able to pursue UK companies for billions of pounds in
lost VAT receipts pending a ruling by the European Court of Justice as early as
this week.

SUNDAY TIMES Kazakhstan's biggest copper producer, Kazakhmys, is set to announce
plans for a London stock market listing that would value it at up to GBP
2billion and make it the first company from the former Soviet Union to join the
main market.

SUNDAY TELEGRAPH Vanni Treves is preparing to step down as chairman of troubled
insurer Equitable Life at the end of 2006 as part of a plan to disband the
current board.

OBSERVER The Government is considering another wide-ranging investigation into
supermarkets, five years after the last probe was widely criticised as being
toothless.

THE BUSINESS German telecoms giant Deutsche Telekom is believed to be plotting
an GBP 18billion takeover of UK mobile phone group O2.

THE INDEPENDENT ON SUNDAY Former BBC director-general Lord Birt has been lined
up as the new chairman of Urenco, the GBP 6billion uranium producer which is
jointly owned by the British, German and Dutch governments.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2005 XPRESS - Al Nisr Media FZ LLC
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              774 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 31, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: McGovern Announces $64,000 to Support Western Mass. Farmers

LENGTH: 920  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of the MP Jim McGovern has issued the following news
release:



 As Congressman Jim McGovern (MA-02) starts the second day of his 6th annual
farm tour today, he announced that a $64,000 grant from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture will be provided to Community Involved in Sustaining Agriculture
(CISA) to help farmers and ranchers in the Connecticut River Valley of
Massachusetts to learn more about programs and support from the USDA Farm
Service Agency (FSA).





 "When farmers in Western Massachusetts succeed, our economy grows and our
community thrives. This grant is a smart investment that will help to keep our
local farmers connected with the USDA so they have access to the tools and
resources they need to grow," Congressman Jim McGovern said. "I am grateful to
have the USDA as a strong partner as we continue to support farmers across
Western Massachusetts."



 The funds, in the form of a cooperative agreement, were announced at a
producers' roundtable in Greenfield during a two-day farm tour organized by
Congressman Jim McGovern, a member of the House Agriculture Committee. He was
joined at the roundtable by Brad Pfaff, FSA Deputy Administrator for Farm
Programs, Washington, DC; Jonathan D. Niedzielski, FSA State Executive Director;
and Christine Clarke, Natural Resources Conservation Service State
Conservationist.



 "We're working to reach more farmers in Massachusetts who have not used or been
aware of opportunities provided by FSA programs," said Pfaff. "This cooperative
agreement with CISA will get the word out to a new generation of producers. Our
disaster assistance, income safety-net and lending programs can help farmers
succeed, especially when challenged by unforeseen downswings in the weather or
markets."



 "Twenty-eight percent of total sales by Massachusetts farmers are 'direct
market,' meaning straight from the farmer to the local consumer," said
Niedzielski. "Our producers are also very good at adding value to their products
at the farm, packaging and marketing their produce, which puts more money into
their pockets in direct sales. This agreement will help connect farmers with FSA
here in Massachusetts so they can get the help they need to grow their
operations." FSA, which solicited applications last fall, received more than 100
proposals that requested more than $9 million in funding. Nearly $2.5 million
will go to nonprofits, associations, universities and foundations that will
provide training and information on agricultural best practices, local
networking opportunities and more. A list of awardees can be found at
www.fsa.usda.gov/outreach.



 Today's announcement augments Obama Administration efforts to support new and
small farm operations in Massachusetts. Earlier this month, Agriculture
Secretary Tom Vilsack announced a new investment of $17.8 million for 37
projects across the country to help educate, mentor and enhance the
sustainability of the next generation of farmers.



 One of those is a three-year, $595,000 grant to CISA to reach about 600 new
farmers and ranchers with technical workshops and other assistance. CISA's goal
is to "double the amount of local food in the diets of Pioneer Valley residents
by 2035." That investment is made through USDA's Beginning Farmer and Rancher
Development Program (BFRDP). Since 2009, USDA has invested more than $126
million into projects targeting new and beginning farmers and ranchers through
BFRDP.



 Founded in 1993, CISA serves the primarily agricultural Connecticut River
Valley of Massachusetts. The region is home to the cities of Springfield,
Chicopee and Holyoke, the academic communities of Amherst and Northampton, rural
towns and suburban communities.



 Supporting direct market farmers is part of USDA's Know Your Farmer, Know Your
Food (KYF2) Initiative, which coordinates the Department's work to develop
strong local and regional food systems. Under the Obama Administration, USDA has
invested close to $1 billion in 40,000 local food-related projects on farms and
in communities across the country.  Access the KYF2 Compass to locate USDA
investments in your community.



 Since 2009, USDA has worked to strengthen and support American agriculture, an
industry that supports one in 11 American jobs, provides American consumers with
more than 80 percent of the food we consume, ensures that Americans spend less
of their paychecks at the grocery store than most people in other countries and
supports markets for homegrown renewable energy and materials. USDA has also
provided $5.6 billion of disaster relief to farmers and ranchers; expanded risk
management tools with products like to Whole Farm Revenue Protection; and helped
farm businesses grow with $36 billion in farm credit.



 USDA has engaged its resources to support a strong next generation of farmers
and ranchers by improving access to land and capital; building new markets and
market opportunities; extending new conservation opportunities; offering
appropriate risk management tools; and increasing our outreach, education and
technical support including 102,000 direct and guaranteed farm operating and
ownership loans. USDA has also provided more than 18,000 microloans totaling
over $406 million since the program began in January 2013. Nearly 89 percent of
microloans, or more than $363 million, were used by new, beginning and
underserved farmers to grow their farming operations.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              775 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                            July 20, 2016 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

Beer wars an odd battle for Wall to take on

BYLINE: Murray Mandryk, The Starphoenix

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 712 words


If you've noticed a gradual shift from east to west when it comes to the
supposed source of Saskatchewan government problems, it's more than your
imagination.

It appears never-ending gripes about the way the former Manitoba NDP government
conducted business - whether it was problems with hydro lines close to the
border or an unwillingness to participate in the New West Partnership - have
shifted to issues with the way NDP Alberta conducts its affairs.

The latest egregious act of Alberta Premier Rachel Notley is - horror upon
horror - her government's decision to increase taxes on beer sold in Alberta to
$1.25 a litre.

Yes, after decades of conservative-minded Alberta governments hammering
Saskatchewan retail businesses (the oil-rich province hasn't had a sales tax
since 1937), this province's economy is now in crisis because a new Alberta
liquor tax might slightly

impact Saskatchewan's craft beer industry?

Well, there was Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Minister Don McMorris, declaring
a beer fatwa Monday: "Alberta's new beer pricing and grant policy are a trade
issue that could hurt producers and consumers in both provinces," McMorris said.

The minister's news release went on to explain the Saskatchewan government has
already raised this offensive act with Notley's office and the matter is so
serious that Premier Brad Wall will take it up with Notley at the Conference of
Federations meeting in Whitehorse this week.

After all, what greater threat could there be to the federation than
interprovincial beer pricing?

What seems to have aggravated the Sask. Party government is that Alberta's new
beer taxation policy of $1.25 per litre is applied "regardless of company size,
location, or level of production."

"The proposed change will also see Alberta provide grants to small,
Alberta-based producers to support development of that province's industry," the
Sask. Party government's news release said. "This policy change is bad news, not
only for Alberta

beer drinkers, but also for all non-Alberta-based brewers that serve the Alberta
market," McMorris went on to say, adding it will significantly increase the
mark-up rate applied in Alberta to Great Western Brewing and other small
Saskatchewan producers. Well, exactly why the price Albertans pay for their
booze is McMorris's problem is a bit of a puzzler ... and more than a little
ironic.

For example, for years we abused Saskatchewan Scotch drinkers (I feel it's
important here to declare my biases and/or conflicts ... although I love beer,
too) have suffered the wrath of higher prices in this province because of
Saskatchewan's "ad valorem" taxation policy. This means levying of taxes or
duties as a proportion of the value of the product.

By contrast, Alberta has always levelled a per-bottle duty, meaning that an
expensive bottle of Scotch in Alberta would be taxed significantly less than it
is here. (In no small irony, it also has meant that Alberta beer was always
generally more expensive than it was in Saskatchewan - an unimportant issue to
the Sask. Party government until now.)

Of course, the Sask. Party government has framed the whole issue around NDP
Alberta protectionism that Wall says violates interprovincial trade agreements
because Alberta's own small brewers will continue to get subsidies from their
government that out-of-province local breweries don't get.

So let's get this straight: The Sask. Party government is vehemently opposed to
a government picking winners and losers by giving specific private companies
taxpayersubsidized advantages like it's now doing with Skipthe-Dishes?

Or does the Sask. Party government stand on principle on this as a trade issue
and argue no company should get special government advantage from taxpayers
under interprovincial trade agreements? If so, why is Wall not sending Notley
and every other premier in the country letters of complaint about subsidizing
their local film industries?

Or, after running a spring re-election campaign warning voters about the evils
of electing the NDP as was done in Alberta, is this a case of a conservative
government playing a little politics?

It is as suspicious as it is petty.

Mandryk is the political columnist for the Regina Leader-Post. !@COPYRIGHT=©
2016 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 The Star Phoenix
                              All Rights Reserved


                              776 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Sunday Times (Perth, Australia)

                             August 2, 2015 Sunday
                              SundayTimes2 Edition

RSPCA 'anti-farming'

BYLINE: JOHN FLINT

SECTION: Pg. 22

LENGTH: 490 words


THE RSPCA is now regarded by the state's primary producers as anti-farming,
claim peak groups in submissions to a parliamentary inquiry.

The WA Farmers Federation, the Pastoralists and Graziers Association of WA (PGA)
and the Commercial Egg Producers Association of WA accuse it of veering towards
animal activism.

The PGA even called for the Government to strip the -charity of the police-like
powers -afforded to its inspectors under the Animal Welfare Act.

"It is unsatisfactory for a non-government organisation to have access to such
unfettered powers," states the PGA. "Their statutory recognition under the
Animal Welfare Act 2002 should be removed." The Farmers Federation said there
were serious concerns within the farming community that the RSPCA has moved
beyond its charter and responsibilities.

It said there has been "a recent and alarming change of direction and
involvement in animal activist campaigns".

Much of their ire is aimed at the charity's opposition to the $1 billion live
export trade.

The federation also claimed "there is a significant level of distrust arising
from the attitude and behaviour of RSPCA WA inspectors ... a situation which is
not helped by the intrusion of inspectors taking a militant approach to an
animal's wellbeing or survival".

"For example, an inspector choosing to destroy an animal without proper
engagement with the farmer, in a situation where it may have been more
appropriate to nurse the animal back to health under the supervision of a vet."
The federation also accused the RSPCA of derailing attempts to develop national
animal welfare standards and guidelines for sheep and cattle.

The RSPCA made its own lengthy submission to the inquiry, which is examining the
organisation's funding from government, its objectives and use of its powers.

The charity argues the government gets value for money.

"RSPCA WA receives a specific purposes grant of $500,000 from the State
Government ... however, the actual expenditure on enforcement far exceeds that
amount; actual costs are currently in excess of $3 million, which does not
include the significant contribution of pro-bono legal work provided by law
firms and barristers, nor the costs of infrastructure; such as kennels, cat
facilities and vet clinics.

"Therefore, the grant moneys equate to approximately 16.2 per cent of the actual
inspectorate expenditure.

"Significantly, the grant moneys do not provide for the additional inspectorate
costs with respect to commercial livestock under the Act, which includes
salaries, vehicle and equipment costs, training and legal fees." It added:
"RSPCA WA's commitment to its objectives and its respect of community
expectations regarding its integrity demand high standards of regulation and
governance."The society is highly regulated internally, through rigorous
standards of governance, and externally, by a range of legislation governing its
operations, as well as all not-for-profit charities."

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: Sunday Times


                   Copyright 2015 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              777 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Journal (Newcastle, UK)

                              July 7, 2009 Tuesday

Cash Help Is Available For Pig Farmers With Innovative Ideas

BYLINE: Karen Dent

SECTION: A; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 497 words


PIG farmers with new ideas are being reminded there is money available to help
put entrepreneurial plans into practice.

The Innovation Fund, managed by levy payers organisation Bpex, has issued
thousands of pounds in grants since it was set up last year.

But there is still plenty of money in the pot to help producers, often in
partnership with other parts of the industry, to develop projects to boost
profitability and efficiency.

Bpex chairman Stewart Houston said: "We believe this is the best way to spread
new practices across the industry, helping people to look at things in a
different light. We want to promote innovation and there is still plenty of cash
available.

"The industry has been bogged down in the struggle to survive for too long. Now
things are a little easier and producers have more time to experiment with, more
efficient and perhaps more profitable ways to work with pigs, or to manage their
farms and we want to help them."

The type of projects eligible for support from the fund include ideas such as
new training methods, environmental compliance, health, equipment, transport or
feeding developments. Bpex is particularly keen to help finance any practical
innovations which could improve cost competitiveness and technical competence,
helping to rebuild pig producers' confidence to invest in the future.

Mr Houston said: "This pump priming is for anybody who has a good idea, but does
not have the cash to develop it. All they need to do is talk to their local Bpex
Knowledge Transfer (KT) manager and then we will decide whether or not the idea
has merit and should be taken forward. It is as simple as that and people can
apply for these funds at any time now."

Bpex judges the ideas and decide whether to offer funding based on how
innovative they are, their value for money and what impact they are likely to
have on the industry.

A number of new innovations have already won funding, including:

The creation of a portable weigh/draft system to make the process of weighing,
selecting and loading pigs more efficient and reduce stress and labour costs.

Evaluation of water intake in grower/finisher pigs as a measure of sub-clinical
disease and provide an early warning indicator of emerging disease.

Verispec DNA traceability   to demonstrate that full traceability from farm to
stud to plate is achievable and to develop opportunities for full farm-to-fork
traceability as a special selling point.

Adapting and piloting an on-farm labour recording system to determine efficiency
savings that can be gained through better allocation of paid  labour.

To investigate the effect of increasing artificial light in naturally lit sow
housing on seasonal infertility and demonstrate the benefits of investing in
this area.

Individuals wishing to apply for the funding should be Bpex levy payers and
groups making application must contain at least one Bpex levy payer.

This pump priming is for anybody who has a good idea, but does not have the cash
to develop it

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2009 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              778 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 3, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: Gillibrand Urges USDA and ARC To Fund The Center For Craft Food and
Beverage At Hartwick College In Oneonta

LENGTH: 745  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of the Senator Kirsten Gillibrand has issued the following
news release:



 U.S. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand today wrote to the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) and the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) urging them to
fund the Center for Craft Food and Beverage at Hartwick College located in
Oneonta, New York. The Senator wrote to USDA Secretary Thomas J. Vilsack and ARC
Federal Co-Chair Earl Gohl urging them to provide the federal funds necessary to
purchase additional analytical equipment for grain testing, research, and
processing specifically for farmers to cultivate value-added crops, including
malting barley and other practices important to the craft food and beverage
industry. The Center for Craft Food and Beverage aims to become a quality
testing site and technical assistance center for craft food and beverage
producers, focusing on locally-grown and locally-sourced material. Once the
funding is approved, the Center will use the federal funds to purchase a
laboratory scale micro-malting system.





 "The demand for New York barley and other small grains from craft brewers
continues to increase and testing labs like the Center at Hartwick College will
be vital to help farmers get their products to beverage producers," said Senator
Kirsten Gillibrand, the first New York Senator to serve on the Senate
Agriculture Committee in nearly 40 years. "Once the Center for Craft Food and
Beverage is expanded, growers and small businesses will have the additional
support they need to compete in the farm brewery and craft food and beverage
industry. The Center will help lower the cost of production, ensure the
consistent, high quality of New York grains, and help our producers build their
brands and compete in New York and beyond."





 Earlier this month, Senator Gillibrand announced that the U.S. Department of
Agriculture will be expanding conventional barley crop insurance to 13 new
counties this year and an additional 16 counties for crop year 2017.
Additionally, RMA will begin offering coverage for malting barley in four
counties beginning in 2017. Surrounding counties added to the conventional
barley crop insurance include Oneida 2016 and Chenango and Broome in 2017.
Otsego will be added to the malting barley expansion list in 2017.



 Gillibrand's letters to USDA Secretary, Thomas J. Vilsack and ARC Federal
Co-Chair Earl Gohl are included below.











 The Honorable Tom Vilsack



 Secretary of Agriculture



 United States Department of Agriculture



 1400 Independence Ave., S.W.

 Washington, DC 20250











 Dear Secretary Vilsack,







             I write in support of the application submitted by Hartwick College
for funding from the Rural Business Development Grant (RBDG) Program through the
United States Department of Agriculture. This funding will help Hartwick College
purchase additional analytical equipment to test and research the growth and
improvement of New York State farming, malting, and brewing industries.







             Hartwick College is located in Otsego County, which is a rural area
in upstate New York that is economically disadvantaged. In 2013, the Center for
Craft Food and Beverage at Hartwick College opened to help facilitate the growth
of the craft food and beverage products in upstate New York. The Center has a
specific focus on locally-grown and sourced material and as the demand for local
raw materials among craft brewers grows, testing labs like those at the Center
for Craft Food and Beverage will become a necessity to assist farmers in getting
their products to New York's craft beverage producers.







             The requested funding will be used to support Hartwick College's
Center for Craft Food and Beverage's purchase of more analytical equipment,
including a laboratory scale micro-malting system. The Center needs new
analytical equipment to continue to test and research the growth and improvement
of New York State's farming, malting, and craft brewing industries. This will
also help ensure that local producers have access to affordable and accurate
information about the value of their crops. By purchasing more analytical
equipment, the Center for Craft Food and Beverage will lower costs related to
the production of craft food and beverage, add value to craft food and beverage
products, and promote New York State products.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              779 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Ghanaian Chronicle (Accra)

                               December 04, 2013

Netherlands Supports Cocoa Industry - With a 7 Million Euro Grant

BYLINE: Bernice Bessey

LENGTH: 616 words


To boost cocoa production in the country, the Royal Netherlands Embassy, Ghana,
has signed a 7 million Euro grant for a four-year Cocoa Rehabilitation and
Intensification Programme (CRIP). The Dutch Ambassador to Ghana, H.E. Hans
Docter, indicated that the grant is expected to leverage an additional private
sector cocoa industry funding of 14 million Euros.

The project would be managed and coordinated by Solidaridad West Africa, with
cocoa sector partners and industries, including International Fertiliser
Development Corporation (IFDC), Armajaro, Cargill, ECOM, Barry Callebaut, ADM
and Continaf.

The Ambassador made it known at a press briefing in Accra, yesterday.

He said the support from the Netherlands was aimed at developing economic,
social and environmentally sustainable support for cocoa farmers in the main
cocoa producing regions of the country.

"It will provide the necessary technical support for farmers to rehabilitate old
farms and intensify existing cocoa systems. It will work with the Cocoa Research
Institute of Ghana and COCOBOD to boost availability of improved planting
materials for the farmers," he noted.

The programme, he explained, would target entrepreneurial farmers who really
want to develop their cocoa farms into sustainable and viable business
enterprises, adding, "CORIP will promote the establishment and operation of
cocoa Rural Service Centres (RSC) that will promote and upscale cocoa production
in a sustainable self-financing way. The RSCs will be privately run entities
that provide training, information, inputs and other technical support for
improved cocoa production."

According to him, the Netherlands is the largest importer of cocoa from West
Africa, and Ghana is the second largest producer of cocoa and the number one in
the world, with total beans sales averaging US$2 billion per annum, needs to be
supported.

"The programme is a good example of [the] current Dutch policy of combining
trade and development cooperation. The programme shows that public and private
interests can go hand in hand to add value, without the government having to
take on additional burden to increase export revenue, make production more
sustainable, and improve farmer's profits," he stated.

The Director of Solidaridad West Africa, Isaac Gyamfi, said the grant would
benefit 40,000 farmers in six cocoa producing regions of Ghana - Ashanti,
Eastern, Central, Brong Ahafo, Western North and Western South.

He noted that the cocoa sector is known to be facing numerous challenges such as
low productivity, low income for smallholder farmers, aging farmers, depleting
soils, poor labour conditions, environment challenges, including deforestation
and climate change.

He said Solidaridad believes in adopting sustainable production practices, and
that the sector would be a viable economic venture for current and future
smallholder cocoa farmers, while enhancing their standard of living.

The programme would, therefore, support cocoa farmers to implement best farming
and management practices and certification standards.

The project will also encourage producers and other cocoa supply chain actors to
implement good production and sourcing practices to achieve coca sustainability
to improve enabling environment for the production and trading of sustainable
cocoa, and to professionalise the production practices of cocoa producers.

He indicated that Solidaridad had made a great impact, such as enabling farmers
to become more efficient, and increase income by adopting methods and increasing
yield, and improving the quality of cocoa, by preventing and combating diseases.

And, also linking farmers to certified markets, and ensuring smart and
sustainable land use.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter


                     Copyright 2013 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              780 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         The Tribune (Seymour, Indiana)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 4, 2008 Thursday

Artisans asked to blaze new trail

BYLINE: January Wetzel, The Tribune, Seymour, Ind.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 551 words


Sep. 4--Jackson County Visitor Center will stage a meeting at 7 p.m. today to
discuss the Indiana Artisan Development Project.

Project manager Eric Freeman will attend the meeting to talk about how the
project will support and promote Jackson County artisans and handmade products
to tourists across the state, region and country.

Artisans and value-added producers are encouraged to attend the meeting to pick
up applications and guidelines for being included in the state's IADP database,
which organizers say will help:

Provide artisans, particularly those in rural areas, with access to
entrepreneurial support.

Provide grant funding for artisan business development, education and
networking.

Promote artisan trail development and retail opportunities.

Develop branding for Indiana-made goods.

And attract in- and out-of-state visitors to artisan sites and arts-concentrated
areas.

Applicants will be selected in a juried process.

In addition to the state project, a seven-county coalition from south central
and eastern Indiana, including Jackson County, is working to create an "artisan
trail" to connect consumers with locally made, hand-crafted and value-added
products.

Value-added products refer to raw products that are made or grown locally and
changed or enhanced into another product with a higher net worth, such as jams
and jellies, hot chili sauces, salsa, honey and maple syrup or such products as
cut flowers, dried flower arrangements, wreaths, baked goods, painted gourds,
dried herbs, soaps, rugs and candles.

Tina Stark, executive director of the visitor center, said the IADP as well as
the artisan trail will open doors for local artisans and producers to get the
word out about their work or products.

"It will unify artisans and value-added producers and give them opportunities
that are difficult to come by for small businesses, like marketing and other
skills they might need to promote their products," she said.

Stark said the IADP will provide logos and branding capabilities.

She would like to see a variety of art and products represent Jackson County.

"We want to reach a broad range of people," she said. "There are a lot that
could be eligible for the state site and the trail."

After putting so much work into a painting, sculpture or food product, Stark
said it's "often hard to find means of marketing."

"It falls by the wayside," she said. "People get in the mindset that we are just
a small rural county, but we have to think broader. Opportunities are out there,
especially when we can market as a group like this."

Stark also says that being involved with IADP and the artisan trail will bring
more people to Jackson County.

"It will bring visitors to rural areas, right to the artisan or value-added
producer," she said.

If you go

What: Meeting to discuss the Indiana Artisan Development Project

When: 7 p.m. today

Where: Jackson County Visitor Center, 100 N. Broadway, Seymour

To see more of The Tribune or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.tribtown.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, The Tribune, Seymour, Ind.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080904-TS-Artisans-asked-to-blaze-new-trail-0904

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TS


                           Copyright 2008 The Tribune


                              781 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Brattleboro Reformer (Vermont)

                              April 7, 2014 Monday

Spring is in the air

BYLINE: Rep. Carolyn Partridge

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 868 words


After what has seemed like an extremely cold winter, there was actually a hint
of spring in the air here in Montpelier. The sun shone and the thermometer crept
above freezing giving us all hope that warmer weather would soon return.

With the Budget Bill behind us, we continue to work on a number of important
pieces of legislation. One such bill is the Education Financing bill, H.889.
This is the bill in which we set the state property tax rates and other factors
such as base education funding.

The language in statute [32 VSA, Sec. 5402(a)] calls for a homestead property
tax rate of $1.10 per $100 of value and a non-residential property tax rate of
$1.59 per $100. Every year, we go through a process that includes an evaluation
by the Commissioner of Taxes, which takes into consideration several factors
including the statewide grand list, property tax adjustments (income
sensitivity), school spending, the equalized pupil count, base education amount
per pupil, the General Fund transfer, and other sources of income such as the
Lottery, Purchase and Use, and dedicated Sales and Use transfers. Based on this
assessment and other information, the Legislature makes a judgment as to what
the actual property tax rates and base education amount should be.

Historically, we have always been able to lower the rates from $1.10 and $1.59,
as is the case this year. For homestead property, the rate will be $.98 per $100
of value and for non-residential property it will be $1.515 per $100. This is an
increase of a few cents over last year's rates but in the case of homestead
property, slightly less than what was recommended by the Tax Commissioner
($.99), slightly more for non-residential property ($1.49). The base education
amount per pupil will be $9,382, which is an increase from last year's $9,151.
Base education is what we used to call the block grant that comes to schools for
each equalized pupil in attendance. That amount is, in some cases, augmented due
to factors such as poverty and educating students for whom English is a second
language.

One concern is the fact that H.889 contains language that will phase out Small
Schools grants starting in FY2019 for schools with fewer than 100 students or an
average grade size of 20 or fewer students unless they are deemed
"geographically necessary." These grants are extremely important to many schools
in Windham County. The provision for Small Schools grants was added to Act 60
shortly after it was enacted because it was recognized that a funding formula
based on per pupil spending was unfair to small schools, which did not have the
advantage of economy of scale. It is also acknowledged that in most cases small
schools do an excellent job of educating our students. In a study done at Ohio
University, the "achievement" gap related to performance for students in poverty
was found to be smaller in small schools. State Rep. George Cross, a retired
educator from Winooski, suspects this holds true for Vermont as well.

I would encourage anyone who wants the Small Schools grants to continue to
contact their Senators. This can be done by calling the State House toll free at
1-800-322-5616 and leaving a message with the Sergeant at Arms or by accessing
their contact information on the legislative website -www.leg.state.vt.us .

H.112, the bill that would require the labeling of food produced with genetic
engineering, was voted out of the Senate Judiciary Committee last week. It is
now in the Appropriations Committee and will presumably go to the Floor of the
Senate soon. The Senate has added a provision that would create the "Genetically
Engineered Food Labeling Special Fund." The Fund would be able to accept public
or private donations, gifts, bequests, or grants made to the state of Vermont
and would be used for several purposes. For instance, the money would be
available to the Attorney General to "pay costs or liabilities incurred in
implementation and administration, including rulemaking, for the labeling of
food produced from genetic engineering." If additional funds were raised, the
Secretary of Commerce and Community Development could use the money to help
manufacturers and retailers of food meet the labeling requirements of the
legislation. The fund could also accept money appropriated by the General
Assembly.

When H.112 passed the House in 2013, it stated that the bill would take effect
on the first of two dates: Either 18 months after two other states enacted
legislation with requirements substantially comparable to what we did or July 1,
2015. We allowed time so that producers would have the chance to use up their
packaging and/or potentially reformulate their products. The Senate's effective
date is July 1, 2016, which still allows time for producers to adjust, but does
not rely on passage in other states.

When the bill is completed in the Senate, the House Agriculture and Forest
Products Committee will review the changes and decide whether or not to concur
with the Senate. If we choose to not concur, our options are to concur with
further proposals of amendment or ask for a Committee of Conference.

Rep. Carolyn Partridge, D-Windham, is chairwoman of the House Agriculture and
Forest Committee.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              782 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Northern Miner (Australia)

                            January 25, 2013 Friday
                                  1 - Edition

AgForce pleased but Katter critical

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 534 words


AGFORCE has welcomed State Government's announcement of the creation of the
Queensland Cattle Industry Biosecurity Fund as a positive step towards promoting
biosecurity and managing diseases impacting on the beef sector.

Announced by Premier Campbell Newman and Minister for Agriculture John McVeigh,
the fund will include an initial $2 million grant and a loan of up to $3 million
to be matched dollar-for-dollar by cattle producers.

AgForce general president Ian Burnett said the fund would provide a basis upon
which assistance to producers, particularly those affected by Bovine Johne's
Disease (BJD), could commence.

``Producers across Queensland will suffer financial consequences as a result of
the quarantine measures State Government has had to put in place as part of its
obligation under the Stock Act to respond to notifiable diseases,'' Mr Burnett
said. ``It is right that these producers be assisted to help ease their
financial burden.''

But Katter's Australia Party Member for Mount Isa Rob Katter says the State
Government's compensation deal for producers affected by BJD is not the answer.

``The Queensland Government is still committed to its unrealistic and
unnecessary policy of quarantine and eradication of BJD and it's this policy
that is causing hardship for the producers,'' Mr Katter said.

He said hundreds of high-value bulls were being needlessly slaughtered
throughout Queensland because of the government's policy and the Agriculture
Minister needed to take a step back and look at what his Government's stance was
doing to Queensland's beef industry.

``It's threatening the State's entire beef industry and this financial package
is just a band aid for temporary relief,'' Mr Katter said.

He said the situation was aggravated by the State Government's closure of
biosecurity testing labs that had left the Brisbane lab unable to cope with the
volume of tests.

``After the closures, two scientists and three or four laboratory assistants
will remain to service the whole of the State,'' he said. ``This is a critical
loss of experience and expertise at a time when it is most needed.''

Mr Katter said if the Government is going to pursue its policy of quarantine,
testing and eradication, it must keep the biosecurity labs open so properties
currently affected by BJD will be tested within the timeframes laid down.

He said while there is no cure for Johne's disease; there is a vaccine which
helps to prevent the shedding of bacteria and this should be made available to
producers.

Mr Burnett said AgForce maintained its position to support eradication and the
protection of Queensland's BJD `Protected Zone' status.

``It is important we do all that we can to maintain this status to mitigate any
risk of damage to our clean image and market access and to uphold any economic
advantage we have.''

Mr Burnett said it was now important Government consult closely with the cattle
industry to develop a framework around which any levies may be built.

``We appreciate this initial funding and now implore Government to consult as
widely and as comprehensively as possible with stakeholders and to move forward
on delivering assistance to impacted producers as quickly as possible,'' he
said.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: MIN


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              783 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                           February 5, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

We're rich in fibre: To stay ahead of low-cost paper producers in South America,
China and Russia, Canada must create value-added products based on the unique
characteristics of our northern woods

BYLINE: SARAH DOUGHERTY, Freelance

SECTION: BUSINESS: PULP AND PAPER; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 713  words


The threat to the manufacturing sector from cheap goods coming out of China is
now familiar to Canadians.

But still flying under the radar is the challenge China poses to one of the
pillars of this country's economy - the pulp and paper industry.

One way to stay ahead of China and other low-cost producers is to make more
specialty paper and paperboard products, experts say.

"We've been competing head-to-head in standard products because it's been easy
for us," said David McDonald of the Pulp and Paper Research Institute of Canada,
or Paprican. "Now we are moving up against other parts of the world with cost
advantages."

Coming up with value-added products will take more basic and applied research,
McDonald said. That's why

Paprican is giving $1.5 million to professors and students at McGill University
to study wood pulp fibres and papermaking.

Paprican, based in Pointe Claire and Vancouver, is also making an in-kind
contribution in the form of its own research equipment and the time of its
scientists.

The Paprican grant is being matched by Science and Engineering Research Canada,
commonly known as NSERC, a federal government agency that supports research and
training.

The beneficiaries of the five-year, renewable funding are professors Theo van de
Ven and Derek Gray, both of the chemistry department at McGill University. The
money creates chairs in the department, paying the professors' salaries, and
helps to support master's and doctoral students and lab technicians.

Gray's work will focus on the properties and uses of cellulose, the molecule
that makes plants stand up and wood fibres strong.

Making the most of cellulose's qualities could lead, for example, to new
security features in paper, Gray said.

With a small-version papermaking machine in his McGill lab, van de Ven is
studying the so-called wet end of papermaking, the mucky soup of wood fibres and
chemicals that gets turned into paper.

"By better understanding how these additives (chemicals) function, we can adjust
them for strength, absorption and other properties," van de Ven said.

Van de Ven said the grant, his largest yet, would help him attract students
interested in paper and papermaking.

Exposing student-researchers to the pulp and paper industry is a key reason
Paprican is funding the McGill work, said McDonald, vice-president of research
and education at Paprican. "They are potential employees for the industry," he
said.

Funded by member pulp and paper companies, Paprican supports centres of research
at three Canadian universities - McGill, the University of British Columbia and
Ecole Polytechnique.

It also supports individual projects at other schools, according to McDonald.

The centre at McGill, a multidisciplinary teaching and research unit, dates to
1925 and was established here because of the historical presence of pulp and
paper companies.

The NSERC funding frees the professors from some teaching duties, mostly at the
undergraduate level, said Andre Isabelle, who heads the environmental and
natural resources sector at NSERC.

While promoting long-term, basic research is a key aim of the McGill funding,
NSERC also wants to boost the competitive position of Canada's pulp and paper
companies.

"We are moving from an old-paper to a new-paper economy, which has yet to be
defined," Isabelle said.

For Paprican, the practical applications of the McGill research will be crucial.

"The forestry sector as a whole in Canada has been struggling," McDonald said.
"The really important thing going forward is to create unique, value-added
products based on the unique characteristics of our fibre resources."

In Canada's northern climate, trees grow more slowly, resulting in fibres that
are finer than those found in more temperate regions, McDonald explained.

Finer fibres have strength and printability advantages, McDonald said. "We
haven't taken full advantage of those differences by differentiating ourselves,"
he said.

Until now, cheap energy and fibre supplies meant Canadian companies didn't have
the impetus to develop specialty products, McDonald said.

But all that is changing with the emergence of pulp and paper producers in South
America, China and Russia. "They can clearly beat us on cost," McDonald said.
"We have to beat them on functionality."

sarahdougherty@videotron.ca

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Color Photo: GORDON BECK, THE GAZETTE; Chemistry professors Theo van de Ven and
Derek Gray in a lab at McGill. The small papermaking machine behind them is a
tool in understanding how to take full advantage of the strong fibres in
Canada's cold climate trees.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              784 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  Prince Rupert Daily News (British Columbia)

                            December 17, 2007 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Meat plant part of $33m success story; Northern Development Trust Fund has
helped 100 northern projects

BYLINE: Leanne Ritchie, The Daily News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 459  words


Communities and ranchers in B.C.'s North will soon have a new facility to
process local meat, thanks to financing support from the Northern Development
Initiative Trust.

The funding, for Northwest Premium Meats Co-op in Telkwa, marks the 100th
project approved by the trust.

Economic Development Minister Colin Hansen and Northern Trust chair Bruce
Sutherland announced the funding at an event at the meat processing site near
Smithers last week.

The Northern Trust is providing a $433,000 loan guarantee to facilitate
financing by agricultural producers, investors and the Bulkley Valley Credit
Union for the $1.6-million project.

"Optimism is building as new opportunities for economic diversification are
emerging," said Hansen.

"Northern B.C. is poised to become a key logistical player in British Columbia's
Asia Pacific Initiative. As well as serving central Interior and Northwest
markets, Northwest Premium Meats has the potential for export development to
Asia with chilled container shipping through the Port of Prince Rupert."

"This project demonstrates the power of the regional trust model, which helps
communities build their own economic futures," added Sutherland. "The Northern
Trust is working with communities to diversify and grow the regional economy,
and with local ranchers to build this facility that will assist them to meet new
provincial meat regulations."

"The opening of this new plant will be very important to the region, ensuring
that meat produced throughout the Northwest is safe and meets health and
inspection standards," said Dennis MacKay, MLA for Bulkley Valley-Stikine.

"The plant will also ensure producers and meat retailers in the local community
have adequate capacity to support their needs."

The Telkwa facility will handle 3,000 animals per year starting in early 2008,
with chill coolers, meat processing and custom packaging for local restaurants,
retail outlets and consumers. The plant will create 13 jobs initially, with two
more expected in the next two years.

In the two years since the Northern Trust's inception, the board, assisted by a
small staff group, has committed more than $33 million in loan and grant funding
to economic diversification projects in central and northern B.C. with a total
value of $208 million.

Within the Skeena Queen Charlotte Regional District, Port Clements has accessed
a $7,500 grant for economic development capacity building, as have Masset and
Queen Charlotte.

The District of Port Edward took a loan/grant for community development worth
$350,000 (expecting to repay $195,000) and the Prince Rupert Regional Community
Foundation received a matching grant of $25,000.

However, the city of Prince Rupert has yet to apply for any projects related to
the North Development Trust.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Prince Rupert Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              785 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Press TV

                            March 14, 2015 Saturday

UK funds unhealthy food products: charity groups

LENGTH: 394  words


British government pays substantial subsidies to major 'junk food' producers
such as Nestle and PepsiCo to help them make snack and drinks that harm people's
health, charity groups say.

The Coronary Prevention Group and the World Obesity Federation released a Friday
report titled, Nutrient Profiling: Changing the food of Britain, and jointly
slammed the UK government's financial contributions to snack food and
confectionery companies, The Guardian reported Saturday.

"Government money should not be spent on initiatives that will produce unhealthy
snack foods and worsen the country's serious obesity and disease problems," the
charities said.

According to the report, Mondelez, which split from Kraft and owns the Cadbury's
brand, received nearly £638,000 in grant funds by Innovate UK - formerly known
as the Technology Strategy Board - from 2013 to 2015 to help the multinational
giant develop a process to distribute nuts and raisins more regularly in its
chocolate bars.

Additionally, Nestlé was given over £487,000 to invent "an energy-efficient
machine for making chocolate," while PepsiCo was awarded £356,000 "to help
develop new ways of drying potatoes and vegetables to make crisps," added the
report.

"Some of these grants are greater than the amounts spent by local health
services tackling overweight in adults and children," said Prof. Philip James,
chair of the Coronary Prevention Group's trustees.

"We have identified 200 opportunities for taking a grip on UK food supplies and
helping consumers, especially those on lower incomes, to make healthier
choices," added James, who is also honorary professor of nutrition at the London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

Meanwhile, other critics of government subsidies to major snack producers argue
that the nutritional value of food should be taken into consideration when
government distributes its funds. That includes funding of canteens in
government offices, which often offer high-sugar snacks and drinks.

According to the report, seven out of 10 middle-aged adults across Britain are
overweight and nearly 50 percent have high blood pressure.

If everybody ate the recommended five portions of fruit and vegetables a day,
for instance, it would save 42,200 deaths a year, according to Ofcom's impact
assessment of TV advertising of food and drink to children in 2006, the report
adds.

MFB/MKA

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Wire

JOURNAL-CODE: 701


                            Copyright 2015 Press TV
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              786 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 therecord.com

                            November 25, 2016 Friday

U.S. lumber group files petition against Canadian softwood producers

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 298 words


MONTREAL - The Canadian-U. S. softwood lumber dispute reignited Friday after the
U.S. Lumber Coalition said it formally petitioned the American government to
impose duties against Canadian softwood lumber producers.

The lobby group said it asked the U.S. Department of Commerce and the U.S.
International Trade Commission on Friday to restore the conditions of "fair
trade" for softwood lumber.

The coalition alleges that provincial governments, which own most of Canada's
vast timberlands, provide trees to Canadian producers at rates far below market
value, along with other subsidies.

As a result, the group says, Canadian lumber is being sold for less than fair
value in the United States.

Softwood producers in Canada have disputed the U.S. Lumber Coalition's
assertions.

Resolute Forest Products said producers in Quebec and Ontario pay market prices
and should have access to free trade with the United States. A different system
is used in Western Canada, which accounts for most of Canadian lumber exports to
the United States.

The B.C. Lumber Trade Council said Friday that independent NAFTA panels have
previously concluded that Canadian lumber was not subsidized and did not harm
the U.S. lumber industry.

The Canadian government anticipated Friday's filing. Alex Lawrence, a
spokesperson for International Trade Minister Chrystia Freeland, said Canada is
prepared for any situation, and the government will "vigorously defend" the
interests of Canadian workers and producers.

Still, he said the protectionist climate in the United States complicates any
trade negotiation, including this one.

Softwood lumber is excluded from NAFTA, and lumber producers in both countries
continually bicker over whether the access by Canadian companies to public
forests constitutes an illegal subsidy.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Metroland Media Group Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              787 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 ICC Information Group Ltd.
                         ICC Financial Analysis Reports
            ICC Information Limited is not an investment adviser and
          makes no warranties regarding merchantability or suitability
                     of material for a particular purpose.

                                  May 19, 2009

                            APPOINTED LIMITS LIMITED

                                 EALING STUDIOS
                                  EALING GREEN
                                     LONDON

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
REGISTRATION NO.: 05349246

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: February 1, 2005

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
DIRECTORS:

     ·    Stewart Edward Le Marechal, Film Producer
     ·    Alison Jane Morrow, Film Producer
     ·    Jonathan Persey, Film Producer


Go To ICC Directors
SECRETARY:

     ·    STEWART EDWARDLE MARECHAL


* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
INDUSTRY TYPE:
COMPANY TYPE:  Private Limited with share capital::Private Limited with share
capital::
COMPANY SIZE:  Dissolved company

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC:
92110 - Motion picture and video production

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: February 28, 2006
FISCAL YEAR END: February 28

LAST FILED ACCOUNTS:  February 28, 2006
ACCOUNTS LODGED DATE:  January 9, 2007
ANNUAL RETURN:  February 1, 2008
CREDIT LIMIT:  Z

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS
Date of Accounts                           28/02/200         -         -
                                                   6
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Tangible Assets                                    0         -         -
Intangible Assets                                  0         -         -
Total Fixed Assets                                 0         -         -
Stocks                                       564,000         -         -
Debtors                                       14,000         -         -
Cash                                         165,000         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Assets                       0         -         -
Other Current Assets                         165,000         -         -
Total Current Assets                         743,000         -         -
Fixed Assets                                       -         -         -
Intermediate Assets                                -         -         -
Due From Group, Non Current                        0         -         -
Due From Group, Current                            0         -         -
TOTAL ASSETS                                 743,000         -         -



LIABILITIES
Date of Accounts                           28/02/200         -         -
                                                   6
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Creditors                                    743,000         -         -
Bank Overdraft                                     0         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Liabilities                  0         -         -
Bank Loans - Current Portion                       -         -         -
Other Short Term Finance                           -         -         -
Due To Group, Current                              0         -         -
Due To Directors, Current                          0         -         -
Other Current Liabilities                          -         -         -
Short Term Loans                                   -         -         -
Long Term Loans                                    -         -         -
Long Term Bank Loan                                -         -         -
Other Long Term Finance                            -         -         -
Due To Group, Non Current                          0         -         -
Due To Directors, Non Current                      0         -         -
Other Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
Total Current Liabilities                    743,000         -         -
Total Long Term Liabilities                        0         -         -
TOTAL LIABILITIES                            743,000         -         -
Called Up Share Capital and Sundry                 0         -         -
Reserves
Profit & Loss Account Reserve                      0         -         -
Revaluation Reserve                                0         -         -
Shareholder Funds                                  0         -         -
Called Up Share Capital                            -         -         -
Sundry Reserves (Including Grants)                 -         -         -
Contingent Liabilities                             -         -         -
NET ASSETS                                         0         -         -


* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
Date of Accounts   28/02/200  -  -
                           6
                         GBP GB GB
                              P  P
Total Sales                -  -  -
Cost of Sales              -  -  -
Gross Profit               -  -  -
Operating Profit           -  -  -
Export                     -  -  -
Nontrading Income          -  -  -
Interest Payable           -  -  -
Pretax Profit              -  -  -
Taxation                   -  -  -
Profit After Tax           -  -  -
Dividends Payable          -  -  -
Retained Profits           -  -  -
Value Added                -  -  -
Capital Employed           0  -  -
Net Worth                  0  -  -
Working Capital            0  -  -
Emp. Renumeration          -  -  -
Dir. Renumeration          -  -  -
Audit Fees                 -  -  -
Non-audit Fees             -  -  -
Depreciation               -  -  -
Number of                  -  -  -
Employees

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *


INDUSTRY AVERAGES
Compared to 4,847 companies in the same industry
sector
(year ending 2006)
SIC Code:
92110 Motion picture and video production



INDUSTRY QUARTILES
                                                     Lower   Median    Upper
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                 -2.83    31.06   107.44
Pretax Profit / Total Assets (%)                    -12.32     0.00    33.33
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                            -4.13     3.01    29.48
Sales / Total Assets (%)                              0.00   106.60   305.14
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales) x      44.19     0.00     0.00
365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                  0.32     0.99     1.57
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)                  -        -        -
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees (GBP)  8,935.8 22,285.7 36,666.6
                                                         2        1        7
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                     7.09 43,214.2 160,333.
                                                                  9        3
Wages / Turnover (%)                                 42.56    24.34    11.89



CREDIT RATING
Year  0         Dissolved or dissolution action
=                                       pending
Year -1                                       -
=
Year -2                                       -
=
Year -3                                       -
=

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *
Date of Accounts                                    8/02/200 --
                                                           6
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                       - --
Pretax Profit / Assets (%)                                 - --
Pretax Profit / Shareholders Funds (%)                     - --
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                                  - --
Sales / Total Assets (%)                                   - --
Sales / Fixed Assets (%)                                   - --
Export / Sales (%)                                         - --
Working Capital / Sales (%)                                - --
Sales / Stocks                                             - --
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales ) x           - --
365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                    1.00 --
Quick Assets / Current Liabilities                      0.24 --
Total Debt / Net Worth (%)                                 - --
Shareholders Funds / Total Assets                       0.00 --
Long Term Debt / Net Worth (%)                             - --
Interest / Pre Interest Profit (%)                         - --
Current Liabilities / Stocks                            1.32 --
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees (GBP)          - --
Employee Remuneration / Sales (%)                          - --
Pretax Profit / Number Of Employees (GBP)                  - --
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                          - --
Capital Employed / Number Of Employees                     - --
Fixed Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)                   - --
Total Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)                   - --
Pretax Profit / Value Added (%)                            - --
Value Added / Sales (%)                                    - --
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)                    - --
Value Added / Employee Remuneration                        - --
Sales / Audit Fees                                         - --
Total Assets / Audit Fees                                  - --
Creditors / Debtors                                    53.07 --
Total Debt / Working Capital                               - --
Total Debt / Total Assets                                  - --

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
CURRENT SHARES OUTSTANDING: GBP 0

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: Grant Harrod

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2013


                              788 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                The Western Mail

                             June 18, 2015 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Give S4C safe funding deal, Osborne urged

BYLINE: Martin Shipton

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 452 words


INDEPENDENT TV producers in Wales are calling on George Osborne to provide S4C
with a secure funding deal for the future.

TAC (Teledwyr Annibynnol Cymru), the producers' trade body, also wants
assurances that the Welsh-language broadcaster should not be disadvantaged if
the BBC gets a raw financial deal when its charter is renewed at the end of next
year.

The organisation has sent an open letter to the Chancellor, as well as to
Culture Secretary John Whittingdale and Welsh Secretary Stephen Crabb.

The letter welcomes the continuity in the new government, which means those
ministers have a knowledge and understanding of the independent sector and of
S4C, and praises measures such as the creative industry tax breaks.

However, the letter goes on to state that the next step should be to establish a
long-term funding and governance arrangement for S4C.

Currently the funding for S4C is split between a £6.7m grant from the UK
government's Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) and £75m from the TV
licence fee.

As a result S4C is partly overseen by the BBC Trust, although it remains a
separate broadcaster with its own editorial policy and management.

TAC's policy manifesto, published earlier in the year, suggested S4C's funding
should rise by 10% and be linked to inflation.

The letter also asks that the BBC charter review be used to encourage the BBC to
commission more from Welsh producers for its UK network services, as part of
better representing all the nations and regions of the UK.

TAC chairman Iestyn Garlick said: "The government has already introduced some
positive measures for the creative industries. "The next step is for S4C, due to
its role as a driver for creativity and economic growth, as well as its cultural
importance, to have a long-term stable platform in terms of funding and
governance.

"Its viewing figures are healthy, particularly since S4C has been on iPlayer,
and S4C creates an economic value to the Welsh economy which is double the
amount it invests.

"For this to continue it's important that S4C's funding is set at a sustainable
level and that its governance is clearer. The outcome of charter review should
include a long-term future for S4C.

"In the short term any cuts the BBC has to make due to the licence fee being
frozen should not include S4C, as it is a separate broadcaster."

The letter also asks that the highend Welsh-language drama TV tax credit be
given a reduced threshold for minority-language productions, a step which could
attract extra investment into the Wales economy.

Until former Culture Secretary Jeremy Hunt ended the arrangement in 2010, S4C
was funded by an inflation-linked annual grant from DCMS.

Latterly, the grant was worth around £100m.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: George Osborne is being urged to ensure that S4C will not be
<Bdisadvantaged under any new charter for the BBC

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WWM


                    Copyright 2015 Western Mail and Echo Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              789 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                  Farming Life

                          September 27, 2014 Saturday

Irwin relishing new role as committee chairman

LENGTH: 899  words


Following a reshuffle of the DUP Northern Ireland Assembly Ministry and
Committee team, Newry & Armagh MLA William Irwin has been appointed the new
chairman of the Stormont Agriculture & Rural Development Committee.

Mr Irwin, himself a dairy farmer and a member of the Assembly since his election
in 2007, says he is delighted with the appointment and assures the industry he
will be a "friend of the farmer".

He stated: "I firstly want to pay tribute to outgoing chairman Paul Frew MLA who
did an excellent job as chairman of the ARD Committee. Paul was a pleasure to
work with and always had a listening ear for the wider farming and rural
community."

Speaking of his own promotion Mr Irwin said: "I am delighted to be appointed to
the role of chairman and given my lifelong roots in agriculture, I feel I bring
an extra dimension to the role. My experiences over many years running a dairy
farm have given me a firm understanding of the pressures on the diary sector and
beef sectors in particular. In my elected role, meeting countless producers
across the agri-food sector, I have an awareness of the concerns of the wider
industry and also the aspirations of the industry in aiming higher and moving
forward."

He added: "I can assure the farming community and the wider agri-food industry
that I will be championing the need for a fairer return for the primary producer
, who is currently being treated shabbily by the larger retailers and
processors. The current situation is not sustainable and producers need to see a
balance in the supply chain that more adequately recognises their vital
contribution in the supply of top quality product."

Referring to the current budget crisis Mr Irwin said, "As has been seen across
all sectors of government, departments are having to operate under severe
financial pressure with continuing budgetary restraints. It must be highlighted
that Sinn Fein's own financially damaging policy of refusing to move forward on
welfare reform, is costing Northern Ireland massively, with up to £1 billion in
losses to our block grant."

"Minister O'Neill, as a Sinn Fein Minister in the Executive, cannot on one hand
try and dodge the welfare reform issue, which is directly depleting the
available spend for departments and on the other hand, begin to implement
further cuts on agriculture as a result of her own party political stance. That
is totally hypocritical and untenable. I will ensure that the minister is held
to account should attempts be made by her to reduce frontline services,
especially in research and development, which actually assists the industry to
be more competitive and has real benefit."

He added: "On the wider European issues and CAP reform, I will continue to
represent the best interests of the farmer in the delivery of direct support. I
will also continue to support young farmers and farm families by lobbying for
less bureaucracy and calling for clarity on greening, partnerships and the
active farmer tests. It is also vital that future Rural Development schemes
represent value for money and are administered and tailored in such a way to add
value to our agricultural sector and enhance the rural economy. The Going for
Growth strategy is a vital framework for growing our agri-economy and it is
important that DARD gets fully behind the strategy and moves positively on its
implementation especially the business investment scheme."

Concluding Mr Irwin stated: "Given the huge influence Europe has on our industry
here in Northern Ireland, I will be ensuring that I maintain a very close link
with my MEP colleagues Diane Dodds. It is important to have a joined up approach
to effectively fight for our industry both here at home and in Europe. I am
relishing this new challenge and I look forward to my first meeting as chairman
of the committee, I am a farmer at heart and pledge to continue to be the voice
of the farmer."

DUP MEP Diane Dodds has expressed her confidence in the new NI Assembly
Agriculture and Rural Development Committee chair, DUP colleague William Irwin
to build on the good work of Paul Frew MLA in this role.

Mrs Dodds said: "William Irwin is known throughout the agriculture industry and
amongst the farming community as a man with a sound knowledge of the challenges
facing the sector, not least due to his own background in the family farm. As
MEP I have worked alongside William on many issues pertaining to agriculture in
recent years, and seen at first hand the wealth of experience and knowledge he
has.

"He is hugely respected and I know will work day and night as chair of the
committee, as an advocate for farmers, fishermen and in scrutinising the work of
the department."

I must also pay tribute to the outgoing Chairman, Paul Frew MLA. Paul came into
the role with a reputation of a very hard worker and indeed he lived up to that
reputation as Chair of the Committee.  I know Paul spent a lot of time working
hard for the industry and ensuring DARD were aware of the Committee view on
issues, but more importantly the views of those engaged on the ground, whether
that be in farming or fishing.

The DUP view agriculture and fisheries as vitally important sectors within the
Northern Ireland economy. The First Minister and my Party Leader has chosen to
change the names on the team sheet this week but our commitment and drive to
progress those industries in Northern Ireland remains the same."

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: INFL


                       Copyright 2014 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              790 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Daily Variety

                                 April 29, 2011

hunger for brit hits;
From "The King's Speech" to Harry Potter, "Pop Idol" to "The Office," the U.K.
crafts some of the world's most successful entertainment properties, many of
which wouldn't be possible on the scale they're produced without a global aud
hungry for the fruit of British imaginations. Below, heavy hitters from the
BritWeek Summit's "Movers and Shakers" panel, moderated by Variety executive
editor Steven Gaydos, share their thoughts on why international auds find Brit
fare so appealing and the reason foreign sales are essential to sustaining such
quality output.

SECTION: FEATURE; BRITWEEK/BAFTA FILM AND TV SUMMIT presented by VARIETY; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 711  words


LLOYD PHILLIPS

Producer, Kava Prods.

"The export market is vital for the British film industry for a simple reason:
the relatively small size of the audience in Britain dictates a certain level of
cost and budget, and when the director's vision or the subject matter requires
you to spend more, then you need those international markets. What makes British
films so appealing to the rest of the world is the high quality of the writing
and acting, and they do have a knack for coming up with very, very good stories
and memorable character studies. The ones that don't do so well abroad probably
start off by saying, 'The Americans will love this!' "

REBECCA KEAREY

Senior VP Intl. Marketing and Distribution, Fox Searchlight

Fox Searchlight has a long history of supporting Brit film and filmmakers, going
back to 1997's international hit "The Full Monty." "Britain has always been
great place to make movies because of all the fantastic talent - acting,
writing, directing, as well as very experienced crews and a good infrastructure.
Obviously it's ideal for period pieces because of all the stately homes, castles
and so on, and films like 'The King's Speech' just can't be done nearly so well
anywhere else," says Kearey. "We have an ongoing relationship with DNA, and we
just hired a development executive in the U.K. to develop British properties."

LYNETTE HOWELL

Producer, Silverwood Films

"The global market is a two-way street. Financially, it's essential for any
movie or TV project no matter what country is originates from. Most individual
markets are not enough to make a project financially viable on their own. The
more appeal the project has internationally, the higher the budgets can be;
therefore, the higher the production value. I also feel like in reverse, there
is so much talent that comes from the U.K. - writers, directors, actors and
producers that work in the Hollywood system. In order to keep British talent
making British movies, they need to be able to have the resources in the U.K. to
do so. British comedies have always traveled well - 'Shaun of the Dead,' 'The
Full Monty,' the Hugh Grant years of comedy."

STUART FORD

Founder and CEO, IM Global

"While people tend to associate the British film industry with smaller,
award-winning classy fare like 'The Queen' and 'The King's Speech,' don't forget
that they've also always done well with big-budget mega-franchises, stretching
from Bond to Harry Potter. They have the experience and resources to do a great
job," says Ford, who cut his teeth at Miramax ("Harvey was a huge fan of British
cinema"). Though IM Global also champions smaller, quirkier fare (an upcoming
film version of the hit Brit sitcom "The Inbetweeners" in partnership with
Channel 4), the company and partner Reliance are aggressively moving into bigger
budget projects, including "Dredd," a $40 million 3D sci-fi epic.

ALEX WALTON

President of Intl. Sales and Distribution, Exclusive Films

Referring to Daniel Radcliffe starrer "The Woman in Black," set for release from
the newly resurrected Hammer Films, Walton says, "It's a well-known U.K. play
and book, and the U.K. sale was pivotal in bringing the film to life. However,
it was crucial we then packaged it for global sales, and we co-produced with
Alliance." He adds that "Woman," a period piece set in the early 1900s, is
another example of what Brits do best: "The U.K.'s long been known for doing
great original and interesting stories, especially dramas, with great production
values and superb acting, which explains the global success of 'The King's
Speech,' 'Atonement' and shows like 'Downton Abbey.'"

LISA WILSON

President, Intl. Distribution GK Films

"I think the appeal of British product is very often cast-driven, rather than
subject matter-driven. Look at 'Top Gear': It's huge worldwide because of the
presenters and personalities, but the American version is horrific and doesn't
work on any level. There are certain British actors who are big stars
internationally. For instance, we have Colin Farrell and Keira Knightley in
'London Boulevard,' a gritty thriller due out here later this year. And we had
'Young Victoria,' a U.K. film that was nominated for three Oscars. When that
happens, it then has a big impact on the other foreign territories."

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2011 Reed Business Information, US, a division of Reed Elsevier Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              791 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              New Vision (Kampala)

                             May 20, 2010 Thursday

EU, Gates Foundation Boost Coffee Farmers

BYLINE: Godfrey Kimono

LENGTH: 420  words

DATELINE: Kampala


Over 35,000 small holder coffee farmers have received a grant of $6m (about
sh12.6b) to develop a coffee project that will improve their livelihoods.

The grant, provided through the Hanns R. Neumann Stiftung (HRNS) Foundation, is
from Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation ($4m) and the European Union ($2m), in a
partnership with the US Agency for International Development and the Danish
International Development Agency.

Dana Boggess, the agricultural development officer at the Gates Foundation, said
the project aimed at empowering coffee farmers raise income and become
economically self-reliant.

"The project will be the largest coffee project in Uganda and the largest
robusta producer in the world, after introducing the strong coffee-wilt
resistant variety," Bogges said.

She was speaking during the launch of the project at the Serena Kampala hotel on
Wednesday.

Bogges disclosed that the grant was part of the foundation's agricultural
development initiative to help small farmers in sub-Saharan Africa and South
Asia boost yields to increase their income.

"The foundation is working to strengthen the entire agricultural value-chain
from seeds, farm management to market access so that progress against hunger and
poverty can be overrun in a sustainable manner over a long term," Bogges said.

The project intends to strengthen the Coffee Farmers Alliance Uganda by
supporting coffee farmers develop their farm management skills, agricultural
practices and tools through comprehensive training.

Michael Opitz, the chairman board of directors of Stiftung Foundation, said the
organisation aimed at empowering the beneficiaries' ability to develop their
entrepreneurial skills by improving key elements in small-scale farmer
operations.

"We were motivated to apply for a grant from the Gates Foundation to develop
their concept and reach out to a larger number of farmers and their families in
further production areas of the country," Opitz said.

Stefan Cognigni, the general manager of the Stiftung Foundation, said the
project will be supported by the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) and
will last for four years.

It started last year in November and follows a success model realised in 2005 in
Mityana and Mubende which benefited 15,000 farmers.

Henry Ngabirano the managing director of UCDA, said Uganda earns $291 from
coffee exports with a total of 3.5 million bags being exported.

Uganda is ranked the fourth-best robusta coffee producing country in the world
and is the second largest coffee producer in Africa

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              792 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2017 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                              GlobalData - Events

                               February 27, 2017

                   Gunnison County Electric Association, Inc.

                             37250 West Highway 50
                              Gunnison 81230-0180
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * EVENTS * * * * * * * * * *


Agriculture Secretary Announces Projects in 42 States and Two Territories
Designed to Improve Farm and Rural Business Energy Efficiency

   Aug 15, 2013

   Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced funding for 631 projects
across the nation - including 45 in North Carolina - that will help agricultural
producers and rural small businesses reduce their energy consumption and costs,
use renewable energy technologies in their operations and/or conduct feasibility
studies for renewable energy projects.Grant and loan funding is made available
through the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Rural Energy for America
Program (REAP), which is authorized by the 2008 Farm Bill.With today's
announcement, USDA is making investments of more than $21 million in energy
projects nationwide. Despite budget uncertainties, USDA remains focused on
strengthening the rural economy. "As part of the Obama Administration's
'all-of-the-above' energy strategy, USDA continues to work with America's
farmers, ranchers and rural businesses to help them save energy and improve
their bottom line," Vilsack said. "This program and others like it would not be
available without a Food, Farm and Jobs Bill, and again I urge members of
Congress to pass a bill when they return to Washington next month." REAP helps
producers reduce energy costs and increase production efficiency. For example:
The Tate Family Farm in Climax, N.C., will use a $7,403 grant to install an
energy-efficient geothermal system. Yarbro Farms in Lawndale, N.C., was awarded
a $15,624 grant to make lighting, heating and insulation improvements to four
poultry houses. Butler Farms in Lillington, N.C., was selected to receive a
$16,250 grant to upgrade an anaerobic digester system to produce electricity
from the farm's waste stream.Farmers, ranchers, business owners and agriculture
producers in 41 other states, the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico will also receive funding. For example, Iron Mountain Nursery in
Stagecoach, Nev., will use a $12,476 grant to install a 7 kW solar photovoltaic
system to provide power for its farm and nursery. This project is expected to
generate 13,000 kW of energy annually. Finca Gonzalez, a fruit and vegetable
farmer in Lajas, Puerto Rico, will use a $20,000 grant to install a 23 kW
photovoltaic system to replace 97 percent of the farm's energy consumption.
Under the terms of REAP, up to 25 percent of an eligible energy production or
conservation project can be funded through a grant, and additional support can
be provided in the form of a loan. Since the start of the Obama Administration,
REAP has helped fund nearly 7,000 renewable energy and energy efficiency
projects nationwide. Today's announcement includes almost $300,000 in grants to
19 agricultural producers and rural businesses to conduct feasibility studies
for renewable energy systems. For example: The Gunnison County Electric
Association, Inc., in Gunnison, Colo., will receive a $6,739 grant to assess the
feasibility of installing a small hydropower generating plant at the Taylor
Reservoir Dam. If built, the plant would generate 4 megawatts of power. Salmon
River Electric Cooperative, Inc. in Challis, Idaho, will use a $23,759 grant to
determine the feasibility of building a 200 kilowatt gasification system to
create electricity out of waste biomass. Pioneer Energy, LLC in Hesperus, Colo.,
was selected to receive a $25,000 grant to help fund a feasibility study on
building a 99 megawatt wind farm near Lake Andes, S.D. View the list of
recipients for Rural Energy for America Program feasibility studies. REAP offers
financial assistance to farmers, ranchers and rural small businesses to purchase
and install renewable energy systems and make energy efficiency improvements.
These federal funds leverage other private funding sources for businesses. REAP
also helps the conservation of natural resources and the development of new
forms of energy that reduces America's dependence on fossil fuels and creates a
stronger rural economy. View the list of recipients for Rural Energy for America
Program grants and loans. Minnesota REAP recipients were previously announced.
President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way -
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities. USDA's
investments in rural communities support the rural way of life that stands as
the backbone of our American values. President Obama and Agriculture Secretary
Vilsack are committed to a smarter use of Federal resources to foster
sustainable economic prosperity and ensure the government is a strong partner
for businesses, entrepreneurs and working families in rural communities. USDA,
through its Rural Development mission area, has a portfolio of programs designed
to improve the economic stability of rural communities, businesses, residents,
farmers and ranchers and improve the quality of life in rural America. USDA has
made a concerted effort to deliver results for the American people, even as the
Department implements sequestration - the across-the-board budget reductions
mandated under terms of the Budget Control Act. USDA has already undertaken
historic efforts since 2009 to save more than $828 million in taxpayer funds
through targeted, common-sense budget reductions. These reductions have put USDA
in a better position to carry out its mission, while implementing sequester
budget reductions in a fair manner that causes as little disruption as possible.



USDA Announces Funding To Improve Rural Electric Service

   Oct 13, 2011

   The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) announced funding for rural
electric cooperative utilities to improve distribution systems and smart grid
technologies in 27 states, as part of the Obama administration's continued focus
on investments in infrastructure that create rural jobs.The announcement was
made on the secretary's behalf by Dallas Tonsager, agriculture under secretary
for rural development, during a speech to the National Rural Electric
Association regional meeting in Denver, where he also stressed the importance of
the American Jobs Act to spur job creation throughout the country.Tom Vilsack,
USDA's secretary, said, "This investment in the electric grid will help address
the growing need for electric service nationwide and spur job creation by
building out rural infrastructure," Vilsack said. "Smart grid technology can
help better manage power use, provide rate stability for businesses and create
the climate for job growth in rural America." Over $2.1 billion in loans are
provided by USDA's Rural Utilities Service, a Rural Development Agency, to help
rural electric utilities build and upgrade rural America's electric
infrastructure. These projects will fund over $40m in smart grid technologies
and will build or improve nearly 6,000 miles of line. Funding for distribution
cooperatives, which provide power to consumers, will benefit over 38,000 rural
businesses and residents. Included in the funding are three loans for Colorado
projects that will help keep electricity reliable and affordable for rural
communities. Gunnison County Electric Association will receive over $7m to build
or improve nearly 60 miles of lineover $1m of those funds will go to smart grid
technology. A loan of over $35m to Highline Electric Association will build or
improve over 280 miles of line and includes over $2m for smart grid technology.
Tri-State Generation and Transmission Association, Inc, owned by 44 distribution
cooperatives, will build or improve over 150 miles of transmission line, upgrade
substations and invest over $9m in smart grid technology with a total of $132m
in loan funds. In Virginia, a loan of $90m to Northern Virginia Electric
Cooperative will be used to build a 49.9 MW woody biomass generation facility.
The project is projected to cover approximately 6% of the cooperative's future
power needs for the years 2014 through 2030. In Georgia, a loan of almost $30m
to Amicalola Electric Membership Corporation will be used to build or improve
over 250 miles of transmission line. The loan amount includes $9,402,000 in
smart grid projects, which help utilities better manage electricity needs and
improve operational efficiencies. These investments also help rural utilities
improve their delivery and storage of renewable energy to generate electricity.
Funding is contingent upon the recipient meeting the terms of the loan
agreement.
* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Company Overview                        Events
Key Employees                           Key Facts
Locations and Subsidiaries              Major Products and Services
Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2017


                              793 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               India Energy News

                      January 11, 2013 Friday 6:30 AM EST

Edeniq: California Ethanol Producer Pacific Ethanol Stockton Partners with
Edeniq to Expand Production

LENGTH: 740  words


New Delhi, Jan. 11 -- Edeniq, a biomaterials and sustainable fuels company,
today announced that California ethanol producer, Pacific Ethanol, Stockton LLC
("Pacific Ethanol"), has entered into an agreement to install Edeniq technology
at the company's Stockton, California ethanol plant. Pacific Ethanol will
install Edeniq's proprietary Cellunators to boost ethanol yields, and will also
deploy Edeniq's patented OilPlus corn oil extraction process to increase corn
oil recovery.



Edeniq's Cellunator technology mills corn and other plant materials into
'right-sized' particles of feedstock that can be more efficiently converted into
the plant sugars needed to produce biofuels. Beginning this quarter, Edeniq will
install Cellunators at the Pacific Ethanol plant in Stockton, California. In
addition, Edeniq will deploy OilPlus technology at the Stockton plant. OilPlus
combines thermal, mechanical, and chemical treatments to improve the recovery of
corn oil, a valuable co-product that can be used for feed and other
bio-industrial products.

With four ethanol plants in the Western United States including California,
Oregon and Idaho, Pacific Ethanol's facilities have the combined ethanol
production capacity of 200 million gallons per year. The Stockton, California
plant was built in 2008 and has the capacity to produce 60 million gallons per
year. Edeniq's technology is expected to increase the facility's ethanol yields
by 2-4%.

"Edeniq's technology will allow us to increase efficiency and create additional
value for our customers," said Neil Koehler , CEO of Pacific Ethanol, Inc.
(NASDAQ: PEIX). "Our partnership with Edeniq improves our ability to compete in
the marketplace."

Edeniq currently has technology agreements with six ethanol producers across the
U.S., and Pacific Ethanol will be the company's second plant partner in
California. In addition, Edeniq owns and operates a demonstration-scale
production facility in Visalia, California, which is currently converting a
range of cellulosic feedstock into low-cost cellulosic sugars and cellulosic
ethanol.

In June, Edeniq received a $3.9 million grant from the California Energy
Commission as part of California's Alternative and Renewable Fuel and Vehicle
Technology Program. The grant was given to Edeniq to help fund further
developments and innovative enhancements to Edeniq's proprietary cellulosic
ethanol technology, enabling the low capital cost addition of cellulosic ethanol
production to corn-based ethanol plants in California.

"With Pacific Ethanol as a customer, we are continuing our commitment to unlock
the sugar conversion process and gain efficiencies each step of the way," said
Brian Thome , President and CEO of Edeniq. "This installation is just the
beginning of our work with Pacific Ethanol to scale sustainable fuels."

Edeniq was recently named as one of the top private clean technology companies
on Cleantech Group's 2012 Global Cleantech 100 and to Biofuel Digest's The 50
Hottest Companies in Bioenergy 2012-2013.

About Pacific Ethanol, Inc.

Pacific Ethanol, Inc. (NASDAQ: PEIX) is the leading marketer and producer of
low-carbon renewable fuels in the Western United States. Pacific Ethanol also
sells co-products, including wet distillers grain (WDG), a nutritional animal
feed. Serving integrated oil companies and gasoline marketers who blend ethanol
into gasoline, Pacific Ethanol provides transportation, storage and delivery of
ethanol through third-party service providers in the Western United States,
primarily in California, Arizona, Nevada, Utah, Oregon, Colorado, Idaho and
Washington. Pacific Ethanol has a 67% ownership interest in New PE Holdco LLC,
the owner of four ethanol production facilities. Pacific Ethanol operates and
manages the four ethanol production facilities, which have a combined annual
production capacity of 200 million gallons. The facilities in operation are
located in Boardman, Oregon, Burley, Idaho and Stockton, California, and one
idled facility is located in Madera, California. The facilities are near their
respective fuel and feed customers, offering significant timing, transportation
cost and logistical advantages. Pacific Ethanol's subsidiary, Kinergy Marketing
LLC, markets ethanol from Pacific Ethanol's managed plants and from other
third-party production facilities, and another subsidiary, Pacific Ag. Products,
LLC, markets WDG. For more information please visit www.pacificethanol.net.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2013 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              794 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 22, 2012 Sunday
                                National Edition

Reshooting J. R., This Time on Home Territory

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER KELLY.

ckelly@texasmonthly.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Texas ; TEXAS MONTHLY; Pg. 22A

LENGTH: 884 words


TNT's reboot of the classic television series ''Dallas'' has proved a boon on
many levels. The nearly forgotten stars of the original CBS show -- Larry
Hagman, Patrick Duffy and Linda Gray -- reprise their roles and have been given
a new lease on their careers.

TNT executives, meanwhile, are no doubt pleased with the show's ratings. Since
its premiere in mid-June, ''Dallas'' has averaged nearly seven million viewers
each week, making it one of the most popular scripted shows on basic cable.

Perhaps the biggest beneficiary, however, is the city of Dallas. In recent
months, the city has experienced a boost in civic pride and tourist activity. It
is also enjoying economic benefits that it never got from the original
''Dallas,'' which ran from 1978 to 1991 but was mostly shot in Los Angeles.

The first, 10-episode season of the new ''Dallas'' was filmed throughout North
Texas in 2011 and early 2012, injecting an estimated $28.8 million into the
local economy. On June 29, TNT announced that it had renewed the show for a
second, 15-episode season.

''We didn't want what happened with the first season of the original show to
happen again,'' said Janis Burklund, the head of the Dallas Film Commission.
''They did the first season here and then pretty much went back to Los
Angeles.''

Ms. Burklund began working to lure ''Dallas'' to its namesake city in 2010. Last
year she successfully lobbied the city to approve a $25,000 grant to the
production, as well as a $235,000 economic development grant to help finish a
privately owned production facility in south Dallas.

Texas has an incentive program for film and television productions, run through
the governor's office, and the first season of ''Dallas'' ultimately qualified
for a $2.1 million grant because it would pay $7.2 million in wages in Texas,
according to Josh Havens, a spokesman for the governor. But this program is not
considered as generous as those offered by neighboring states like Louisiana and
New Mexico, which is why Ms. Burklund felt her city needed to supplement the
state incentives if it hoped to secure the production.

Warner Horizon Television, the show's production company, ''was determined to go
with whoever had the best incentives,'' Ms. Burklund said. ''Luckily, the
producers saw the artistic value of being here.''

Ken Topolsky, one of the show's producers, said: ''The city of Dallas is trying
to make its place in the 21st century. It feels important and dramatic. We felt
we had to shoot here.''

In June, shortly after a number of City Council members attended a premiere of
the show at the Winspear Opera House, the Council unanimously approved another
package, granting the production $200,000 for each new season produced in
Dallas, up to $1.2 million over six seasons.

The new ''Dallas'' is also stimulating local tourism, especially at Southfork
Ranch in Parker. The ranch, a special event and conference center since 1991,
was the fictional homestead of the Ewings in the original show, and a number of
scenes from the new ''Dallas'' have been shot there, too. According to Janna
Timm, the regional director of sales and marketing for Southfork, the number of
visitors has tripled since the show has been on the air, with more than 400
people a day touring the premises on weekends. She also reported a flurry of
calls from people hoping to have weddings there.

''One woman already had her wedding planned for New York,'' Ms. Timm said. ''But
the day after the show premiered, she called and said she and her husband wanted
to have their wedding just like the Ewings. They wanted to have it here.''

Then there is the welcome ego boost that ''Dallas'' is giving local actors and
crew members, following a string of high-profile disappointments. In 2010, three
new network series set up shop in North Texas, bringing with them the promise of
new work opportunities. But ''Chase'' (on NBC), and ''The Good Guys'' and ''Lone
Star'' (both on Fox) received poor ratings and were quickly canceled.

''When they all hit at once, there was excitement -- auditions, crew interviews,
a big buzz,'' said Brett Brock, a Dallas-based actor who appeared in episodes of
both ''The Good Guys'' and ''Chase.'' ''It felt like a big wave was coming. Of
course it didn't play out that way.''

The popularity of ''Dallas,'' Mr. Brock added, has the local talent pool excited
again. He appeared in the first two episodes of the season, playing a henchman
of John Ross Ewing, J. R.'s son, played by Josh Henderson.

As for Dallas residents, no one seems to be complaining. Despite the show's
sometimes broad caricatures and reinforcement of longstanding stereotypes about
big oil and big hair, the new ''Dallas'' deftly pays heed to a city that has
always been proud of its own sheen. The show's opening credits feature brand-new
landmarks like the downtown Omni Hotel and the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge
alongside familiar ones like Reunion Tower.

The first few episodes alone set scenes at the American Airlines Center; the
Cedars Social, the trendy bar; and even on the 50-yard-line of Jerry Jones's
billion-dollar Cowboys Stadium.

''Everywhere I go, I'm hearing from people about how cool it is to see the city
on the show,'' Ms. Burklund said. ''And it looks great. When you watch the show,
you have to say, 'Wow, our city looks great.' ''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Larry Hagman, right, and Josh Henderson play father and son in
TNT's new version of ''Dallas.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY ZADE ROSENTHAL/TNT)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company


                              795 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                      May 8, 1986, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Corn farmers prepare to use same trade tool U.S. shakes at Canada

BYLINE: By Brenda Dalglish Canadian Press

SECTION: BUSINESS TODAY; Pg. E6

LENGTH: 518 words


   Until now, Canada has been as timid as the proverbial 98-pound weakling in
taking the offensive against U.S. allegations of unfair trading practices.

But it looks as if that's about to change.

Canada's 35,000 corn farmers are preparing to file the first request for a
countervail duty ever made against the United States and lawyers on both sides
of the border are urging Canadian companies to file more complaints.

U.S. companies have filed numerous trade complaints against Canadian exporters,
two of the most prominent being in the lumber and steel industries.

Unfair trading

Canada has filed a few dumping complaints - where companies claim their U.S.
competitors are selling in the Canadian market at prices lower than they charge
their customers at home - but it has filed almost no cases under the other three
main sections of legislation that exist in both Canadian and U.S. law to protect
against unfair trading practices.

"Corn is going to be the first one under the countervail section against the
U.S.," said Peter Clark, the international trade consultant who is handling the
case for the Ontario Corn Producers Association.

"So far we've identified 68 different subsidies that benefit both directly and
indirectly the U.S. corn producers," Clark said in a telephone interview from
Ottawa. "We're going to show that the Americans get whopping big subsidies."

For the last few years Canadian lumber producers have been fighting similar
allegations brought against them by U.S. lumber producers. They claim that
Canadian governments unfairly subsidize the industry in the way they assess the
value of harvested wood and therefore allow Canadian producers to sell at a
lower price than U.S. producers.

Canadian lumbermen argue that it is the weak Canadian dollar that gives them the
price advantage.

U.S. trade lawyer Gary Horlick, who has represented Canadian companies facing
trade sanctions in the United States, said it will take complaints like this one
by the Canadian corn producers to get Americans' attention.

"There is a belief in Congress that we are simon pure," Horlick said. "Until
Canada or the European Community brings a countervailing duty case against the
U.S., you're going to have an ever-expanding U.S. definition of subsidy because
there is a sense that no one is going to touch us."

Aren't aggressive

A trade lawyer in Toronto, Debra Steger, said Canada has the legislative
capability to bring the same kind of complaints that the United States has
brought against various Canadian companies "but I guess business here just isn't
as aggressive or as litigious as in the States."

Steger cited the other current countervail case, one in which Canadian beef
producers are complaining about subsidies received by beef producers in the
European Community, and said Canadian companies should pursue further cases.

"It would be an interesting negotiating ploy," she said.

The corn producers case is prompted by a major subsidy approved by the U.S.
government that will reduce American corn prices by about $1 (U.S.) a bushel.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1986 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              796 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  thespec.com

                              July 8, 2011 Friday
                                 First Edition

Living on the Fringe

BYLINE: Gary smith The Hamilton Spectator

SECTION: GO; Pg. GO16

LENGTH: 642  words


Luke Brown loves theatre, especially the unpredictable, outrageous kind you get
at a fringe. Think no-holds-barred.

"You never know what's coming next," he says. "That's because the shows aren't
vetted for subject matter, language, production values or even artistic merit."

That's the thing about a fringe. You pay your money and you take your chance.
You could be seeing something that will knock your socks off. Or you could be
watching a dud.

Brown, associate director of Theatre Aquarius, is producer of this year's
Hamilton Fringe.

"That means I'm the catch-all," he says with a laugh. "Anything that needs to be
done lands on my desk. That means hiring staff, writing grant applications,
maintaining budgets, all of it."

"What do I like about it? You never know what's coming next, that's what."

Brown grew up in Truro, N.S., fell in love with theatre and went into the
business.

"I never did the acting school thing. It was right from high school for me.
Mercifully for audiences, my acting career ended after six years.

"Why? Well I looked around and saw really talented actors out of work. I didn't
have their passion, or their interest. I wasn't challenged enough to make things
happen, I guess. It's a tough life. You have no control over anything. Mostly
you have a short rehearsal period and then a short run for the shows you're
lucky enough to get. After that, you're back looking for work."

"I acted at Charlottetown Festival and the Neptune Theatre. I tried moving into
directing and producing. I won a national search to assist a producer making
films. That led to some serious problems when financial discrepancies showed up.

"Off Broadway, I was involved with a show called Drum Struck. Another disaster.
People weren't being paid and law suits started piling up."

Brown quit theatre and went to work for Bell Canada in customer service.

"I was fired after six months."

Ron Ulrich took him on at Halifax and he painted scenery and acted as child
wrangler for a show or two.

"Ron brought me to Hamilton as associate director, and it's been a great way to
be involved with quality theatre."

When Aquarius decided to take Hamilton Fringe under its wing Brown became
involved with that too.

"We need a fringe in Hamilton." Brown says. "It gives artists a chance to
develop and show their work. They learn if the work they offer has a longer
life. For the public it means an event that's affordable. At $9 a ticket, a
Fringe show costs less than a movie."

Brown feels the fringe is a great neighbour for downtown restaurants and bars.

"It brings people to the core and they stick around after the shows. It has a
big party atmosphere and people talk about the shows, compare notes and decide
what to go see.

"For me it allows me to work with some great artists, as well as artists who are
just emerging. This year we have shows from as far away as South Korea,
Australia and Louisiana. We also have shows from right here in Hamilton."

Brown says the Fringe here has seen an upsurge since Aquarius partnered with the
event.

"There's a chance to be seen at a regional theatre, and because our dates follow
the Toronto Fringe, a number of shows do both cities.

"This year we have 28 shows and they're all at Theatre Aquarius or The Downtown
Arts Centre, so it's easy to get from one to the other."

Not all shows at a fringe work out to be masterpieces.

"The whole idea is artists can take chances and not have to answer to anyone.
One hundred per cent of ticket sales is returned to each production. Our costs
are covered by donations, sponsorships and government support.

"This is risk theatre. Come out and take a chance," Brown says.

Gary Smith has written on theatre and dance for The Hamilton Spectator for more
than 30 years.

Hamilton Fringe Festival

Where: Theatre Aquarius Dofasco Centre; Downtown Arts Centre

When: July 14-24

Tickets and Info: hamiltonfringe.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Luke Brown, the artistic producer of the Hamilton Fringe Festival. Ron
Albertson, The Hamilton Spectator

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2011 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              797 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             October 2, 2009 Friday

LONDONER'S DIARY

LENGTH: 1234 words


A COLLECTION WITH A VIEW FROM MERCHANT

IT'S A collection with a view. Merchant Ivory fans have a chance to own props,
memorabilia and a lifetime's collection of art when producer Ismail Merchant's
private collection goes on sale at Christie's next week. The producer, who died
four years ago, was an avid collector of art and antiques from Victorian
furniture to treasures from his native India.

On Monday Ismail's partner James Ivory will be in conversation with Helena
Bonham Carter at the auction house and the Londoner hears that Hugh Grant, who
appeared in Merchant Ivory's Oscar winning film The Remains of the Day, will
also be talking of his fond memories. Bonham Carter was a schoolgirl when she
played Lucy Honeychurch in A Room with a View. James Ivory says that when the
two met in 1961, Ismail claimed (showing his potential as a producer) to be a
"collector of people" [#x2039] but in truth he collected art, drawings,
tapestry, and shawls. Over the course of his career, too, he acquired an
increasingly vast collection of film props and posters. His private collection
at home in London, in Portman Square, and in Paris and New York often turned up
as props in films like Howard's End  and The Golden Bowl. Lots include a laurel
of leaves (estimate £300-£500) used by Uma Thurman when she played Charlotte
Verver in the Henry James adaptation The Golden Bowl. Merchant began to collect
in India in the 60s but in the 80s Portobello Road became his hunting ground for
Kashmir shawls.  His partner James Ivory says that he's been baffled by the
value of the collection because Ismail would rarely tell him how much his
treasures had cost.

WE WON'T DESELECT YOU, ALAN

IT'S been a bad year for Tory MP Alan Duncan who was sacked from the Shadow
Cabinet by David Cameron after he was secretly filmed making a gaffe about the
Westminster expenses scandal. Duncan famously let slip: "You have to live on
rations and are treated like ****."

Now we have really bad news for Mr Duncan. His constituency chairman in Rutland
and Melton Conservative Association, Michael Rook, has come to his defence, and
it's a mixed blessing.

"As your chairman, I have to take into account the enormous amount of work, and
the history of success Alan Duncan has had in his constituency over many years,
in balancing those contributions against the unguarded remarks he has made
recently, and unfunny television appearances," Rook writes to constituents in
Leicestershire.

"Alan has now suffered the indignity and punishment of demotion, and he will
have to work very hard over the next year to regain the respect he has lost in
the constituency."

This is all Duncan needs as he toddles off to the Tory conference next week.
Continues Rook. "Alan Duncan deserves the chance to shine in Government, and he
will be a stronger, better MP for all that has occurred. I have no intention of
asking the association to deselect him."

How very reassuring. The kiss of death in other words, Alan.

BOULTON SPAT COSTS HIM DEAR ADAM Boulton's on-air spat with Gordon Brown this
week may have cost him the chance to host a live TV debate between the three
party leaders. Bookies have now lengthened the odds of Boulton chairing such a
televised debate. Ladbrokes was offering 4/1 about the Sky News heavyweight
hosting the event before the Labour Party conference in Brighton. But the Prime
Minister's apparent displeasure with him may just have scuppered his hopes.

Spokesman Robin Hutchison said: "It's hard to believe that Sky, if they host the
debate, will be told who can and cannot be their chair. But you can't help but
feel that Boulton will not be Number Ten's first choice now, or indeed anyone at
News International."

Sir David Frost is the 2/1 favourite to present the programme, with David
Dimbleby backed in from 7/1 to 4/1. Don't even rule out Ant and Dec doing the
job who are priced at 500-1.

Poor old Boulton. As husband of Tony Blair's former aide Anji Hunter, he was on
the inside track at the last election under the previous leadership.

GOSLING'S DESIGNS ON HIS FORMER PARTNER INTERIOR decorator Tim Gosling thanked
his old business partner David Linley for his OEinspiration and friendship over
20 years' at the launch of Gosling, a coffee table book by Stephen Calloway, at
The Ritz last night. As well he might because, when he left Linley to set up his
own company four years ago, Gosling took some of Linley's best clients with him,
notably the Goring Hotel. David Linley and Jeremy Goring were at The Ritz to
hear his tributes. Elaine Page, Helen Worth, David Furnish, Theo and Louise
Fennell were there. Mrs Fennell was wearing a heart shaped necklace with her
name in diamonds in his handwriting, but Theo doesn't wear jewellery. "I once
went to have my ear pierced but the man in front started screaming so I lost my
nerve."

Former BP boss Lord Browne, whose furniture features in the book, said he
thought Gordon Brown was getting very tired. He didn't see the interview with
Adam Boulton when the PM hurried out but thought it a bit like John Nott who
walked out of an interview with Robin Day during the Falklands War. "Tony had a
light touch, he would never have done that," said Browne.

Browne was very close to Blair and later employed his pa Anji Hunter, Mrs Adam
Boulton, at BP Would Gordon have been any better if he had the job first, and
Blair had picked up the pieces?

"I don't think a Brown administration would have lasted very long," he said.

BEHIND EVERY MODEL IS A GREAT HAIRDRESSER

PROOF that James Brown is the hottest crimper in town. Kate Moss (above left)
and Lily Allen (above right) were among the guests at a fancy dress 40th
birthday bash thrown for Brown at Home House in Portman Square. Brown has been
in charge of the Moss locks since she was just 15 years and has probably done as
much as anyone to keep his client in the public eye. Other guests included David
Walliams, Sadie Frost, Saffron Aldridge, and Cleo Rocos.

THERE was a close encounter of the canine kind at the opening of the Gail Berry
vintage emporium in Parson's Green. Angie, the first Mrs George Best, brought
along her large German Shepherd, Alfie, while Mati, the third Mrs Marco Pierre
White, was accompanied by Pluto Fuface Pumpernickel Clifford, a young whippet,
appropriately sporting a diamante collar. When I asked Mati what she would do if
her slight whippet got eaten by the larger dog, she said "Well, that's how it is
in life."

LORD Archer noted on his blog that he was not alone in dropping off during
Breakfast at Tiffany's as I mentioned yesterday. The novelist pleaded a long day
of public speaking and writing for feeling so tired. However, I was wrong to
infer from his comments that the man who also appeared to have fallen asleep
next to him was none other than Telegraph theatre critic Charles Spencer who
gave the show four stars. Archer didn't name the guilty party and far from
appearing to fall asleep Spencer couldn't keep his eyes off the ravishing star
of the show Anna Friel as his review made clear. My apologies to both.

IT was a tale of two Eds at Shoreditch House last night, where novelist Edna
O'Brien hosted a birthday dinner for uber agent Ed Victor's 70th birthday.
Guests from Ed's wife Carol to Nigella Lawson and novelist and critic Andrew
O'Hagan concluded that two Eds are better than one. Mother love dictated the
choice of venue --Shoreditch house was designed by O'Brien's son Sasha Gebler.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright  2009    Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              798 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                  Daily Mirror

                            November 23, 2012 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

On The Pulse

BYLINE: NIALL REDMOND

SECTION: THE BEAT;FEATURES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 422 words


With Christmas lights already twinkling brightly on the high streets, it's going
to be a case of watching the few bob you have for the next few weeks in lieu of
a big splurge.

So, with that in mind, let's find you a value for money night out this weekend.

Tonight, Electric Ballroom's second event in the Lost Society Basement (South
William St, Dublin) presents Darius Syrossian.

Darius's talent is undeniable, with a host of amazing productions on the likes
of Hot Creations and Area Remote.

The exotically named producer moved to the UK 14 years ago and, now based in
Leeds, Darius has had a great 2012 with DJ MAG nominating him for 'Best Of
British Breakthrough Producer Award.'

Darius has dedicated more than 15 years to legendary UK vinyl record shops
Global Beat and Crash Records, and his style is Deep House to Detroit Tech.
Support from Electric Ballroom DJs (Joe Connolly, Chris Power, Brian Taaffe) and
Check Mate.

Tonight is his first trip to Dublin so show him some support if it sounds like
your thing. Admission is (EURO)10 on the door.

There are also rumours (ahem) of an after party with the Mutiny boys on their
boat to keep the fun going til 8am.

I know these rumours are true because myself (ahem), Graham Short, the Electric
Ballroom DJs and a "mystery guest" are keeping the party going down at Spencer
Dock til sunrise. Tickets ((EURO)10) and info will be available at the main
event in Lost.

Musically this week, House legend Grant Nelson drops a depth charge in the form
of Twelve on his Swing City label.

Taking you on a bumpy bassline journey, that initially is all change at the
breakdown, with a reminiscent sounding 80s tapestry of keys, the whole track
takes off with warm pads over a joyous vocal snippet - a record only Grant could
make.

Showing once again why Grant Nelson is someone who pioneers a sound in House
music, this is most certainly essential this weekend for your playlist or sets.

Grab it here http://tinyurl. com/ comwdqs Also Muzikfabrik have done a great job
of remixing the new Paradise 45 cover version of MAW - To Be In Love. Nalaya
effortlessly sings the classic, while Muzikfabrik bring to it a massive bouncing
big system bassline with really lush keys and a sweet breakdown.

Grab it on the new Conkrete label right here http://tinyurl.com/belc7xs

Niall Redmond: http://www.facebook.com/niallredmond - listen to the podcast of
The Digital Groove on RTE Pulse www.rte.ie/radioplayer (search keyords "Digital
Groove") Check out exclusive mixes only at
http://www.mixcloud.com/thedigitalgroove

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2012 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              799 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             Kidderminster Shuttle

                              July 13, 2012 Friday

Shropshire dairy farmers lobby Parliament over milk prices

SECTION: BUSINESS (KS NEWS BUSINESS)

LENGTH: 386 words


DAIRY farmers from Shropshire joined an NFU lobby of Parliament to raise
awareness of the impact of latest price cuts proposed by dairy processors on
dairy farmers.

Farmers from the Ludlow constituency met Conservative MP Philip Dunne to express
their concerns for the viability of local dairy producers, many of whom are
faced with price cuts of four pence per litre.

Mr Dunne said: "Maintaining a viable dairy industry is vital for consumers in
this country and the rural economy in Shropshire.

"I expressed my support for Shropshire dairy farmers although explained that
while the Government could not determine pricing, we could and are taking steps
to improve transparency to help dairy farmers in negotiations with milk
processors and supermarkets.

"I was also pleased to confirm that the Government is targeting some further
investment to help dairy producers improve competitiveness and productivity."

Farms Minister James Paice MP confirmed to the NFU delegates a series of steps
the Government is taking. They include:

Providing up to £5 million in additional funds under the Rural Economy Grant
scheme for high-quality projects from the dairy industry, which can help
producers to increase their competitiveness and added value to boost their
market returns. The scheme will launch in the autumn, which will give farmers
time to develop bids.

Working closely with industry to drive forward the agreement of a voluntary code
of practice between dairy farmers and purchasers to establish improved
contractual terms and conditions, including greater price transparency.

Introducing the Grocery Code Adjudicator in this Parliamentary session, to
ensure that large retailers treat suppliers fairly by upholding the Groceries
Supply Code of Practice.

Enabling farmers to establish Producer Organisations in accordance with the EU
Dairy Package, which this Government supported. As well as giving farmers
greater power to negotiate contracts (including price) it is said to be a
crucial means by which they can come together to improve their market
orientation, efficiency, competitiveness, profitability and therefore long-term
sustainability.

Implementing the recommendations of a thorough audit of needless red tape and
bureaucracy in farming through the McDonald Review. This came back with more
than 200 recommendations.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              800 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Brattleboro Reformer (Vermont)

                              June 14, 2010 Monday

4 Vt companies earn federal ag grants

SECTION: NEWS; Breaking

LENGTH: 116 words


MONTPELIER (AP) - Four Vermont agricultural producers have been chosen for
federal USDA grants to help them pursue new marketing opportunities for their
products.

Artesano Mead in Groton will use its nearly $50,000 grant to increase production
of its meads made out of Vermont honey and fruit.

In East Montpelier, the Screamin' Ridge Farm plans to use its $31,000 grant
toward the purchase of a local restaurant or commercial kitchen to process its
organic produce and expand distribution of its value-added products of soups,
marinara sauces and pesto.

Cellars Carbon Labeling Company in Greensboro and Champlain Orchards in Shoreham
are also receiving grants to increase the value of their products.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2010 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              801 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                             March 2, 2013 Saturday

11 state Farmer Producer Organisations to gain from budget

SECTION: PUNE

LENGTH: 335 words


PUNE: The proposal of investing matching equity up to Rs 10 lakh in Farmer
Producer Organisation (FPO), announced in the budget speech, will benefit 11
such organizations in the state. An outlay of Rs 50 crore has been made for
this. A credit guarantee fund will also be created in the Small Farmers' Agri
Business Corporation with an initial corpus of Rs 100 crore.

The farmer producer organizations are associations or private companies of
farmers that produce foodgrains and vegetables and also take care of processing,
transportation, value addition, nurturing, distribution and marketing.

Divakar Hegde, assistant general manager of city-based National Agriculture Bank
for Rural Development's region office, said, "The idea is to upgrade skills of
farmers from just producers of foodgrains to product makers. Nabard has received
55 concept notes so far, of which detailed project reports of 18 proposals have
been submitted. The bank has sanctioned Rs 11 crore to 10 projects so that have
started working." These groups will now get government equity, which will
benefit them in terms of finance and social security, he added.

Sinnar (Nashik district) based FPO is into soybean procurement and processing,
while Ambejogai (Beed district) based FPO is into various trades. These groups
are supported by non-governmental organizations and private companies in terms
of skill development, marketing skills, educating and training farmers for
processing and selling their produce. Tapola Agri Producing Company is into
tourism and will also benefit from the government's equity grant, he said.

A senior officer from state agriculture department said, "Farmers produce
foodgrains and vegetable but do not earn enough to repay loans or reinvest in
agriculture. The FPO will prompt farmers to go that extra mile and teach them
how to process their produce, add value and earn more. The business deals will
be done by the company which will support the farmer in case of any losses.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              802 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Farmers Weekly

                                January 8, 2010

BYLINE: Nick Fone

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 474 words


BUSINESS

Keep a close eye on profit margins

By Nick Fone

Jonathan Page

Figures from EBLEX show most beef producers were making net losses of up to £120
a head on average in 2009.

Eblex 2009 business pointers net margin performance (£) *

Enterprise Type Average Top Third Difference

Cattle

Lowland suckler herds -90.97 30.91 121.88

Less Favoured Area suckler herds -119.87 -12.92 106.95

Combined reared/finisher herds -47.14 97.45 144.59

Extensive cattle finishing -63.39 170.57 233.96

Intensive cattle finishing 92.73 201.20 108.47

Sheep

Lowland breeding flocks -4.72 24.30 29.02

Less Favoured Area breeding flocks -4.81 13.83 18.64

Store lamb finishing 6.16 21.30 15.14

Early lambing flocks 5.57 28.32 22.75

* Margin/head after fixed costs but before non-cash costs (unpaid family labour,
rental value of owned land and interest on working capital) for English costed
herds and flocks in the year to March 2009.

Natural England offers more cash for energy crop producers

Farmers venturing into energy cropping this year are now eligible for half-rate
grant funding from a scheme administered by Natural England.

The Energy Crops Scheme (ECS) provides grants to landowners for the
establishment of biomass crops such as miscanthus grass and short rotation
coppice, primarily willow. From 1 January 2010 the rate of funding available has
increased from 40% to 50%.

Payments will be made to cover half the cost of cultivation, ground preparation,
rhizome/rootstock supply and planting. The main provisos are that a minimum of
3ha (7.4 acres) of biomass cropping is established and that this must be
retained for at least five years.

Most importantly, the crop must be used to produce electrical power and/or heat.
But those farmers growing the crop solely for rhizome multiplication - often the
most profitable option - will not be eligible for grant aid.

The higher rate of funding will also be available to farmers that made grant
applications in 2009, but haven't yet started getting the crop established, as
long as no costs have been incurred.

With the government's targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, Natural
England is keen to encourage the planting of biomass energy crops for use as a
substitute for fossil fuels in power stations, combined heat and power (CHP)
units and biomass heat boilers.

This will come as good news to the developing energy cropping sector which
suffered a major setback when the industry's biggest player, Bical, went into
administration in November last year. A new company, Renewable Energy Crops, has
since taken on Bical's existing supply contracts and growers.

New growers are urged to get their grant application forms in as soon as
possible to allow for processing before the spring planting season begins.

Tim Scrivener

Funds avaliable from Natural England's energy crop grants have been increased.

FarmersWeekly ? 8 january 2010

22

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2010 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              803 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The Frontier Star

                           October 26, 2011 Wednesday

MFN status will spur Indian tea exports to Pakistan

SECTION: Vol. 16 No. 297

LENGTH: 559  words


Reeling under the onslaught of fierce competition from Kenya and Sri Lanka,
Indian tea planters are waiting for Pakistan to grant most favoured nation (MFN)
status to boost exports across the border.

"We are keenly waiting for Pakistan to grant the MFN status to boost exports
across the Wagah border as our tea will have a price advantage over competitors
with zero import tariff and lower overheads," said state-run Tea Board executive
director R. Ambalavanan told IANS here.

Pakistani Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar declared in Islamabad Oct 13 that
her country had in principle decided to grant MFN status to India, which had
bestowed this on its once arch rival in 2010.

Though Indian exports to Pakistan more than doubled to 18.9 million kg in 2010
from 7.5 million kg in 2009 and to 10.6 million kg in the first six months
(Jan-June) of 2011 from 9.5 million kg in the same period in 2010, a substantial
quantity of the beverage is unofficially shipped or smuggled into the
neighbourhood through third countries (Dubai and Afghanistan).

"The MFN status will immensely benefit growers as well as exporters by avoiding
middlemen and availing of the 10 percent tariff exemption Pakistan levies on tea
imports. Shipments through the Wagah border will also reduce logistics costs,"
the official said.

As the third largest importer after Russia/CIS, Britain and the US in 2010,
Pakistan buys more tea from Kenya and Sri Lanka than from India, which is the
second largest producer and consumer after China of the aromatic beverage.

China, however, produces (1,475 million kg in 2010) and consumes green tea,
while India (966 million kg) and other leading producers like Kenya (399 million
kg), Sri Lanka (331 million kg) and Vietnam (157 million kg) grow
crush-tear-curl (CTC) tea and orthodox tea.

In spite of the unit price declining to Rs.63 per kg from Rs.89 per kg, Indian
exports to Pakistan nearly doubled to Rs.120 crore in 2010 from Rs.67 crore in
2009. Similarly, in the first six months of 2011, export realization from
Pakistan was Rs.68 crore as against Rs.63 crore in same period of 2010 despite
lower unit price value.

"Though India has accorded MFN status to Pakistan, non-tariff barriers continue,
affecting bilateral trade between the two countries. Unless these are resolved,
merely granting the status will not benefit us much in terms of trade or
volumes," a tea exporter said on the margins of the planters' annual conference
that concluded here Sunday.

Catering to a large domestic market with growing consumption, the quantity for
exports is limited, though Indian teas are qualitatively competitive in
international auctions.

"Unlike our fierce competitors (Kenya, Sri Lanka and Vietnam), which export
nearly 90 percent of their production, about 80-85 percent of what we produce is
consumed domestically leaving less for exports in value terms despite the huge
potential for our tea in traditional and emerging markets," Ambalavanan
asserted.

Of the 960 million kg produced in 2010 as against 979 million kg in 2009, India
exported only 193 million kg last year compared to 198 million kg in 2009.
Likewise, in the first eight months (Jan-Aug) of 2011, of the 619 million kg
produced, only 109 million kg was exported, which is 12 percent lower than in
the same period of 2010 at 124 million kg out of 585 million kg produced.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Frontier Star
                              All Rights Reserved


                              804 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                             The Hollywood Reporter

                            October 22, 2007 Monday

news digest

BYLINE: null

LENGTH: 538  words


Edlund tapped for ASC award

Visual effects veteran Richard Edlund will receive the American Society of
Cinematographers Presidents Award. Edlund has earned four Oscars for his visual
effects work on "Star Wars," "The Empire Strikes Back," "Raiders of the Lost
Ark" and "Return of the Jedi" as well as six additional nominations. He also has
earned three Scientific and Engineering Awards. The award will be presented Jan.
26 at the 22nd annual ASC Outstanding Achievement Awards at Hollywood &
Highland.

Sands honored with top CAS nod

Dennis Sands will receive the Cinema Audio Society's highest accolade, the CAS
Career Achievement Award. His career as a music scoring mixer and a sound
rerecording mixer encompasses nearly 200 films, hundreds of episodic TV shows
and numerous albums. The award will be presented Feb. 16 at the 44th CAS Awards
at the Millennium Biltmore in Los Angeles.

Weller/Grossman, RTL expecting

Weller/Grossman Prods. has inked a co-production deal with RTL for a reality
series featuring Scottish psychic Derek Ogilvie, a self-professed expert in
communicating telepathically with babies and young children. Ogilvie, the author
of "The Baby Mind Reader," previously appeared in a British series of the same
name. The new series launches in the fall on RTL 4 in the Netherlands with a
15-episode order. Weller/Grossman is talking to networks stateside about a U.S.
version of the show.

ADG adds five to Hall of Fame

The Art Directors Guild will induct five production designers into its Hall of
Fame on Feb. 16 at the group's 12th annual Excellence in Production Design
Awards in Beverly Hills. The honors are given only posthumously. The new
inductees are Edward Carfagno, Stephen Grimes, Dale Hennesy, James Trittipo and
Lyle Wheeler.

Diversity Awards to fete Ortega

Kenny Ortega, who most recently directed "High School Musical 2," will be
honored as best director, comedy/musical at the 15th annual Diversity Awards,
set for Nov. 18 at Universal Studios' Globe Theatre. Other honorees include
Brittany Snow and Elijah Kelley, both from "Hairspray," who will be recognized
as rising stars, and as well as Jon Heder, Idris Elba and Monique.

Caulfield's 'Blues' earns Sloan grant

Monique Caulfield, who is producing the feature "Basmati Blues," is the
recipient of Film Independent's inaugural Sloan Producers Grant and will receive
a $25,000 development grant and admission to FIND's 2007 Producers Lab. Funded
by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the grant was announced Sunday at FIND's
Filmmaker Forum at the DGA in Los Angeles. Honorable mentions went to Gretchen
Somerfeld and David Baxter's "Face Value" and Minh Nguyen-Vo and Julien Favre's
"Point of Reference."

Thomas to depart Buena Vista Prods.

Gwynne Thomas will exit her post as executive vp programming and development at
Buena Vista Prods. at the end of the month. "With Buena Vista's increased
concentration on alternative development, Gwynne has chosen to pursue
opportunities that focus on first-run and cable development, in addition to
alternative programming," Disney-ABC Television Group president of daytime Brian
Frons said. He said Thomas was key in the development and sale of such projects
as "Run for Money" and "The Fashionista Diaries."

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Print

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                    Copyright 2007 VNU Business Media, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              805 of 998 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                           September 30, 2008 Tuesday
                                National Edition

DHX Media deal opens doors for Entertainment 1; Gets Tsx Listing

BYLINE: Grant Surridge, Financial Post

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. FP2

LENGTH: 389  words


Entertainment One Ltd. capped a year-long buying spree by agreeing to a reverse
takeover of DHX Media Ltd. yesterday, securing a back-door listing on the
Toronto Stock Exchange in the process. Already Canada's largest wholesaler of
DVDs and music, Entertainment One has been acquiring production companies to
lock up lucrative content-distribution rights.

The integration of Halifaxbased children's entertainment producer DHX would
provide Entertainment One an instant home in Canadian equity markets.

"This deal certainly takes a lot of the risk of an IPO out of the equation,"
Entertainment One chief executive Darren Throop said yesterday.

DHX went public in 2006 at an offer price of $2.35, and the stock has struggled
to regain those heights.

While primarily a producer of children's entertainment, its catalogue includes
adult fare such as This Hour Has 22 Minutes.

"The stock price was so low, of course it created an opportunity for other
companies," said Halifax-based analyst Beste Alpargun of Citadel Securities.

The marriage solves a problem for DHX, which lacked distribution channels on
which to show its programming. "This is obviously an opportunity," Ms. Alpargun
said. "Your library may be valuable, but you can't get that value if you can't
reach the masses."

Mr. Throop and Michael Donovan, chief executive of DHX, first talked merger at
the beginning of this year.

The deal values DHX at $1.59 per share and is worth $68-million. The new company
will be called Entertainment One, with Mr. Throop as chief executive.

The merged company will have combined earnings of $56-million this year on
revenue of $665-million.

Senior executives with DHX are slated to stay on with the new company in the
television division.

Existing DHX shareholders would own between 17% and 21% of the merged entity.

The DHX catalogue gives Entertainment One the fourth-largest library of
children's programming outside of major Hollywood studios. Two other Canadian
companies, Cookie Jar Group and Corus Entertainment Inc.'s Nelvana round out the
top four.

Entertainment One will focus on pushing the newly acquired shows across its
distribution network, with particular emphasis on the DVD market. "Our focus on
the near term is going to be integration," Mr. Throop said. "We'll just be
putting our heads down here for awhile."

gsurridge@nationalpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Black & White
Photo: Cbc Files; While primarily a producer of children's entertainment, DHX's
portfolio also includes adult offerings such as This Hour has 22 Minutes. A link
with Entertainment One will raise its distribution channels. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2008 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              806 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday

Logo row over levy payers' cash

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 402 words


The Tenant Farmers' Association has told the newly formed Agricultural and
Horticultural Development Board  that it should not be using levy payers' money
to fund the Red Tractor logo.

The TFA's national chairman, Greg Bliss, said: "The TFA has always been sceptic
of the value of the Red Tractor and the various assurance schemes to which the
Red Tractor logo applies.

"A major irritation of my members is the number and frequency of farm
inspections carried out throughout the year, often at the most inopportune
times.

"Assurance schemes, birthed in the 1990s, have certainly added to this burden,
but were originally launched on the premise that a farmer meeting assurance
standards would be able to command a higher price in the market place in
comparison to those who did not meet assurance standards. We have always been
unconvinced by this argument.

"There is no evidence of a producer premium for farm-assured produce."

Instead, the TFA believes that the Agricultural and Horticultural Development
Board should be providing grant aid to producers whether individually,
co-operatively or in farmer-controlled businesses, to assist them in the
development of their own brands and brand image which they can own, support and
develop themselves.

Part of this strategy could involve working with the English Food and Farming
Partnerships to assist in the development of co-operative and collaborative
thinking among levy payers in this area.

Mr Biss said: "While the Red Tractor logo may appear on £7.5 billion worth of
produce, the TFA does not believe that farmers have seen much of the benefit of
this.  The Red Tractor logo is not owned in the same way as a brand is owned.
Producer-owned brands allow for improvements in the value of market share to be
passed to the producers themselves in a way the Red Tractor logo will never do.

"As shoppers develop individual brand awareness and increasingly demand specific
brands within retail stores, retailers in turn will have to do market-driven
deals with brand owners to meet that demand.

"Retailers like the Red Tractor because it homogenises the products on their
shelves, enabling them to obtain maximum benefit from the shopper by sourcing at
the lowest price. While we see the importance of the Agricultural and
Horticultural Development Board in investing in quality assurance and brand
awareness, it should not be in a single marque  or within a single scheme."

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 83


                 Copyright 2008 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              807 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 Ottawa Citizen

                     August 4, 2004 Wednesday Final Edition

Mad cow bailout cash cow for meat packers

SOURCE: The Edmonton Journal

BYLINE: James Baxter and Jason Markusoff

SECTION: News; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 415 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON

EDMONTON - Confusion, panic and pressure from other provinces led Alberta
Premier Ralph Klein's government to pay "too much" to bail out Alberta's beef
producers in 2003, the province's auditor general said yesterday.

Auditor General Fred Dunn absolved the Alberta government of charges that it had
wasted as much as $400 million through a series of flawed bail-out measures, but
said the industry could probably have been kept afloat for less.

The companies reaped nearly $200 million in windfall profits in 2003, and
Alberta's agriculture minister admitted the program was probably flawed from the
outset.

"It's not that the cow-calf producers lost, it's that the program cost too
much," Mr. Dunn said. He said most cow-calf producers and feedlots are still in
business partly because

the market was kept solvent through government subsidies. While suggesting the
same goals could likely have been achieved for less, he said: "I think Alberta
taxpayers received value for money."

The report found the three largest packers had been able to increase their
profits by 281 per cent, or an estimated $197.4 million, as a result of the
flaws in the hastily crafted Canada Alberta BSE Recovery Program.

About 90 per cent of all cattle are processed by three large companies: Lakeside
Packers, a division of U.S. giant Tyson Foods; Cargill Ltd., another U.S.
multinational; and Canadian-owned XL Foods Inc.

Mr. Dunn said the federal-provincial program was severely flawed because the cap
on the amount the governments would pay was time-limited, and only paid out once
the animal had been slaughtered. This caused a flood of animals placed for sale,
prompting the raw cattle price -- which is paid by the packing companies -- to
drop by more than 60 per cent.

He said the flaws caused the program costs to balloon, since the amount of
government aid available was linked to the price received for the cattle.

Alberta Agriculture Minister Shirley McClellan admitted she feared the program
was flawed from the beginning but added she had done her best to keep the
deadlines and caps secret. She told reporters yesterday that she had ardently
disagreed with federal bailout proposals but she couldn't refuse a massive cash
injection when the industry was "on its knees.

"I didn't like it, but we didn't have a lot of choice," Ms. McClellan said.

Meat packers said the market anomalies did allow them to benefit, but suggested
the profit upturn was only temporary.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Business

               Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              808 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                               September 16, 2001

BUSINESS: OTHERS

SECTION: BUSINESS: OTHERS, Pg.8

LENGTH: 1335 words


There are hundreds of successful food producers in the Westcountry but the
industry has a great deal of room for growth. Paul Unger sampled its delights

Hungry for success

Foot and mouth has putmoney back on the menu

Foods stalls at Devon County Show saw record crowds but will we be buying
locally in a year's time?

Of all the buzzwords and stock phrases heard in business these days, "added
value" is vying for the top spot as king of jargon.

Adding value to something is, after all, what all forms of business should be
about, is it not?

In its jargon form, added value refers to the concept of building extra quality,
services, functions or volume into your product but at a disproportionately
large return on the time and money taken for the improvement.

Evolving the raw material produced by a farm into a glossy, packaged consumer
product fit to pluck from a supermarket shelf, or take home from a morning at
the farmers market, is an exercise in adding value.

And there is a strong school of thought among those involved in trying to help
the Westcountry's food producers, farmers and retailers that the emergence from
foot and mouth is causing more consumers to think about buying locally produced
goods.

This way consumers can support the economy and producers have the best possible
opportunity to (re)build markets and test their new, added-value products.

Ian Hutchcroft of Devon Food Links (DFL), part of Devon County Council,
describes the local food industry as a pyramid made up of three broad categories
of food producers. At the bottom of the pyramid are the abundance of farmers who
produce the raw, commodity food such as crops and meat.

In the middle are the specialist food makers, who may or may not be farmers but
make a consumer product and have added value to the raw material. Specialist
food makers often source other ingredients and services locally and employ more
people than a basic farm.

At the top of the pyramid are the large Unigate and Heinz type manufacturers who
do not necessarily source locally but nevertheless have a large impact on the
local economy, employing hundreds of people and generating millions of pounds in
wages and contracting.

Mr Hutchcroft adds: "It is the bottom of the pyramid that DFL is working with to
help them access the local market, to take that first step away from simply
being a commodity producer to becoming a food maker offering a product to
consumers.

"Typically, we start at the very simple level of helping farms package their
goods and take them to a farmer's market."

In two-and-a -half years DFL says it has helped 550 farm businesses with grants
and advice. In employment terms, DFL calculates that 585 more jobs have been
created through its work than if the farms had remained simply as "ordinary"
businesses. This equates to roughly one new job per farm adding value, but all
are by definition in the early years of this new stage of business and many more
jobs may be generated in the future.

Mr Hutchcroft adds: "We can say that there is a new sector now of the local
economy and it is growing fast, although it is still small.

"The current crisis has helped generate a lot of sympathy from local consumers
who have been very good in observing footpath closures and are now turning to
local food when they shop," says Mr Hutchcroft.

"The foot and mouth crisis definitely will have a good impact on people and at
Devon County Show businesses sold more than they would normally have done."

DFL runs 18 farmers' markets in Devon, usually on a monthly basis with around 20
exhibitors at each. Where possible, local groups will be formed to organised the
markets. DFL is aware that control of the industry has to rest with the private
sector if it is to succeed.

"Farmers' markets are a small part of the solution but there is a limit to how
much food you can move to a market. It's up to producers to look at supplying
all our food needs through new markets such as the public sector, schools,
hospitals and other large catering operations," explains Mr Hutchcroft.

"There is probably a limit to the market locally but we are a long way from it
and really just starting to be successful in accessing it.

"Now that we have got quite a few businesses involved in DFL we can look at how
they help each other. Perhaps they should move towards sharing distribution, or
joint home delivery; maybe we will see local food centres where shoppers can go
to buy a range of foods as you can at a county show."

Clearly, Mr Hutchcroft recognises that in the shifting sands of regeneration
policy, DFL will not be around forever. In fact, most of its budget has been
spent and it currently has bids in for more funds.

Its initial funding of just GBP 700,000 for DFL was split into two areas. The
first section was GBP 400,000 for training, advice, and other support services,
raised from the European Union's Objective 5b programme, along with UK central
Government money, and matched by other sources such as the South West
Development Agency and councils.

The second stream was for handing out grants, amounting to GBP 300,000 from
Objective 5b and matched by the recipient firms themselves.

There are new bids in for further aid from Objective Two and the English Rural
Development Programme, which would be for farms in Plymouth, Torbay, North
Devon, West Devon, Torridge, and South Hams.

All over the Westcountry there are organisations and companies working to boost
the food industry. The South Hams Food and Drink Association has recently
produced an impressive guide to the region's specialised food producers and
there are numerous Cornish firms and stores which aggressively promote the
Cornishness of their products.

One body which has received a large amount of backing recently is Taste of the
West (TOTW), the much-heralded marketing agency which covers the wider South
West and has more than 230 members.

When the Government recently announced a GBP 3m package to promote British food
in this country and abroad post-foot and mouth, TOTW was handed GBP 250,000 of
the overall budget.

TOTW is involved in promoting the bigger, more profitable firms than assisted by
DFL. It works with firms that already have added-value products and are looking
instead to grow their markets.

Diane Lethridge, TOTW chief executive, said: "As firms grow at this stage there
are no short cuts. They need quality assurance managers, they need to know what
supermarket buyers want and how they operate.

"We spend a lot of time arranging seminars and training just to educate people.
But for people who have vision and if they have got a good product, something
different, they can make it."

Since it was established ten years ago, TOTW has become a successful generator
of economic development in the region's food and drink manufacturing industry.

A lot of TOTW's funding is for specific projects which means that its eight
staff, all project officers, get tied up in writing plans for the next project
rather than pressing on with working directly with businesses day in, day out.
Its core annual budget is only around GBP 40,000, also from a similar range of
sources to DFL.

Ms Lethridge does not feel its achievements are recognised at the right level:

"As an organisation we get funding for marketing but not enough for developing
the food industry as an economic force.

"For instance, a lot of supermarkets are saying they will source locally and
know there is a swell of interest in local produce at the moment but it won't
last forever.

"If more funding could be spent on taking time to knock on doors and introduce
buyers and producers to each other we could do even more to develop the food
industry."

The success of the post-foot and mouth local food campaigns will ultimately
decide the long term state of the food and drink industry in the Westcountry.

As shoppers, hoteliers, restaurateurs, canteen managers, we must all think
before we buy and spend wisely, for all our sakes. n

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

                      Copyright 2001 Western Morning News


                              809 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                              July 29, 2011 Friday

seed producer seeks global recognItIon after quality certification

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 616 words


Achara Pongvutitham

The Nation

Continued rises in prices for farm goods have led the country's top producer of
high-quality seed, Chia Tai, to seek certification as an international seed
producer with guaranteed quality, and to enter commercial horticultural cropping
for the first time.

The company says it sees great export opportunities in both ventures.

Chia Tai will seek certification of its seed production by the International
Seed Testing Association (Ista). This will not only mean that the company's
seeds are guaranteed to be of high quality, but also that Chia Tai will have the
authority to grant similar international certification to other seed producers
in Thailand.

Chia Tai has also decided that its demonstration farms - one of 600 rai (96
hectares) at Kanchanaburi and another of 20 rai in Nakhon Ratchasima - will be
developed for commercial horticultural cropping, focusing on fruit.

The moves have been prompted in part by the company's belief that climatic
changes around the world will require food crops with resistance to extremes of
weather. As well, the supply chain for farming operations should be upgraded to
ensure food safety and long-term sustainability.

Chia Tai's chief operations officer Manus Chiaravanond said demand and prices
were both trending upwards in the plant-seeds business, and this would carry
over into next year. However, the market is demanding more innovation and
higher-quality seeds that have resistance to insect attack and plant viruses.

He said the commercial-farming venture would be the first time the company had
grown fruit crops on land that was previously used for demonstration farming.
However, the farms will be developed as models, so that farmers can learn more
about creating value from their production.

Late last year, Chia Tai employed a seed expert from the Netherlands to transfer
knowledge and train its staff on advanced plant-breeding technologies. This will
help to have the firm's seed production certified by Ista.

Manus said the success of its plans would make Chia Tai an integrated seed
manufacturer. It hopes to increase its share of the domestic seed market from 30
per cent to 50 per cent within the next few years. The total value of Thailand's
seed market reached Bt1.5 billion last year.

Meanwhile, the value of Thailand's seed exports averages Bt3 billion per year.
Of this, vegetable seed, contract seed and field-crop seeds have an equal value
of about Bt1 billion each. Chia Tai is responsible for about 45 per cent of the
country's vegetable-seed exports.

Manus said Thailand should step forward in developing its seed-production
business because its technology was more advanced than that in Indonesia,
Vietnam or the Philippines.

"There is an interesting opportunity, because China's growing economy will see
the Chinese consuming more food. Although the country has a big seed-breeding
business, the increasing purchasing power of Chinese people will create food
shortages in the future," he said.

The company has established seed-breeding plants at Guangxi and Kunming in China
as well as in India, Vietnam, Burma and Indonesia.

The fruit crops it plans to produce on its farms will be mainly watermelon and
other melons, Sida tomatoes and varieties of chilli. Production will focus on
both the domestic and export markets. To ensure high-quality production, the
company plans to continue spending 13 per cent of its total seed sales - which
amount to US 45 million (Bt1.33 billion) per year - on research and development.

Manus, 56, has been in the seed-production business for 30 years and has
travelled the world seeking the best-quality seeds and latest technologies to
develop his company's production.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 Nation Multimedia Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              810 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2017 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                              GlobalData - Events

                                January 20, 2017

                    Salmon River Electric Cooperative, Inc.

                             1140 East Main Avenue
                                 Challis 83226
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * EVENTS * * * * * * * * * *


Agriculture Secretary Announces Projects in 42 States and Two Territories
Designed to Improve Farm and Rural Business Energy Efficiency

   Aug 15, 2013

   Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced funding for 631 projects
across the nation - including 45 in North Carolina - that will help agricultural
producers and rural small businesses reduce their energy consumption and costs,
use renewable energy technologies in their operations and/or conduct feasibility
studies for renewable energy projects.Grant and loan funding is made available
through the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Rural Energy for America
Program (REAP), which is authorized by the 2008 Farm Bill.With today's
announcement, USDA is making investments of more than $21 million in energy
projects nationwide. Despite budget uncertainties, USDA remains focused on
strengthening the rural economy. "As part of the Obama Administration's
'all-of-the-above' energy strategy, USDA continues to work with America's
farmers, ranchers and rural businesses to help them save energy and improve
their bottom line," Vilsack said. "This program and others like it would not be
available without a Food, Farm and Jobs Bill, and again I urge members of
Congress to pass a bill when they return to Washington next month." REAP helps
producers reduce energy costs and increase production efficiency. For example:
The Tate Family Farm in Climax, N.C., will use a $7,403 grant to install an
energy-efficient geothermal system. Yarbro Farms in Lawndale, N.C., was awarded
a $15,624 grant to make lighting, heating and insulation improvements to four
poultry houses. Butler Farms in Lillington, N.C., was selected to receive a
$16,250 grant to upgrade an anaerobic digester system to produce electricity
from the farm's waste stream.Farmers, ranchers, business owners and agriculture
producers in 41 other states, the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico will also receive funding. For example, Iron Mountain Nursery in
Stagecoach, Nev., will use a $12,476 grant to install a 7 kW solar photovoltaic
system to provide power for its farm and nursery. This project is expected to
generate 13,000 kW of energy annually. Finca Gonzalez, a fruit and vegetable
farmer in Lajas, Puerto Rico, will use a $20,000 grant to install a 23 kW
photovoltaic system to replace 97 percent of the farm's energy consumption.
Under the terms of REAP, up to 25 percent of an eligible energy production or
conservation project can be funded through a grant, and additional support can
be provided in the form of a loan. Since the start of the Obama Administration,
REAP has helped fund nearly 7,000 renewable energy and energy efficiency
projects nationwide. Today's announcement includes almost $300,000 in grants to
19 agricultural producers and rural businesses to conduct feasibility studies
for renewable energy systems. For example: The Gunnison County Electric
Association, Inc., in Gunnison, Colo., will receive a $6,739 grant to assess the
feasibility of installing a small hydropower generating plant at the Taylor
Reservoir Dam. If built, the plant would generate 4 megawatts of power. Salmon
River Electric Cooperative, Inc. in Challis, Idaho, will use a $23,759 grant to
determine the feasibility of building a 200 kilowatt gasification system to
create electricity out of waste biomass. Pioneer Energy, LLC in Hesperus, Colo.,
was selected to receive a $25,000 grant to help fund a feasibility study on
building a 99 megawatt wind farm near Lake Andes, S.D. View the list of
recipients for Rural Energy for America Program feasibility studies. REAP offers
financial assistance to farmers, ranchers and rural small businesses to purchase
and install renewable energy systems and make energy efficiency improvements.
These federal funds leverage other private funding sources for businesses. REAP
also helps the conservation of natural resources and the development of new
forms of energy that reduces America's dependence on fossil fuels and creates a
stronger rural economy. View the list of recipients for Rural Energy for America
Program grants and loans. Minnesota REAP recipients were previously announced.
President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way -
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities. USDA's
investments in rural communities support the rural way of life that stands as
the backbone of our American values. President Obama and Agriculture Secretary
Vilsack are committed to a smarter use of Federal resources to foster
sustainable economic prosperity and ensure the government is a strong partner
for businesses, entrepreneurs and working families in rural communities. USDA,
through its Rural Development mission area, has a portfolio of programs designed
to improve the economic stability of rural communities, businesses, residents,
farmers and ranchers and improve the quality of life in rural America. USDA has
made a concerted effort to deliver results for the American people, even as the
Department implements sequestration - the across-the-board budget reductions
mandated under terms of the Budget Control Act. USDA has already undertaken
historic efforts since 2009 to save more than $828 million in taxpayer funds
through targeted, common-sense budget reductions. These reductions have put USDA
in a better position to carry out its mission, while implementing sequester
budget reductions in a fair manner that causes as little disruption as possible.

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Company Overview                        Events
Key Operational Employees               Key Employees
Key Facts                               Major Products and Services
Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2017


                              811 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             Ukrainian News Agency

                          February 3, 2017 6:30 AM EST

Cabinet to Endorse Order Of Distribution Of State Subsidies to Farmers
Envisaging Equal Monthly Payments

LENGTH: 293  words


The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine intends to endorse an order of distribution
of state subsidies to producers of farm products, which among others will
envisage equal monthly payments of state subsidies and will limit poultry
farming by 50%, as such norms are not reflected in any document.

Agrarian Policy and Food Minister Taras Kutovyi announced this during his
meeting with journalists, Ukrainian News Agency reports.

"The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine will be working on this resolution to
include all restrictions that were articulated during debates in the Rada
session hall but have not been reflected in documents. There will be
distribution of subsidies by equal monthly, the limit of 50% on the poultry
farming. These restrictions have not found their reflection in any document,
there are no voted decisions. This will be an order of use to be endorsed by a
resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers," said the minister.

Minister Kutovyi said the document would be very important, as the distribution
of state subsidies to producers of farm products is currently performed by the
Finance Ministry.

The minister said the document would be endorsed by the government at one of
near sittings of the Cabinet of Ministers.

As for UAH 550 million foreseen for supporting the agricultural machine
building, another document is being drafted to regulate the use of the funding.

As Ukrainian News Agency earlier reported, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine has
endorsed an order of distribution of budget subsidies to farm producers, which
is introduced in place of special regime on value-added tax. Now the annual
value of subsidies shall be no lower than 1% of farm produce and the norm is
fixed for five years.

The norm is reflected in the Budget Code of Ukraine.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


        Copyright 2017 Ukrainian News Agency, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              812 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Oklahoman

                             October 7, 2005 Friday
                                  City Edition

Let's invest in rural future

BYLINE: Chuck Hassebrook

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 498 words


The choices that Congress will soon make about how to cut $3 billion from the
federal farm and rural budget come down to an age old choice -- protect the
common good of the many or cater to the vested interests of the powerful few.

If the rich and powerful prevail, small-town residents, family farmers and
ultimately all Americans with a stake in protecting our land and water will pay
the price.

Sen. Chuck Grassley and a bipartisan team of farm state co-sponsors have a
better approach -- save money by capping farm payments to mega farms. Reducing
subsidies that mega farms use to drive smaller operations out of business is the
most effective thing Congress could do to strengthen family farms.

The stakes are high in Oklahoma. Farm and ranch communities are suffering from
falling incomes and population loss, a direct result of the federal government
over investing in mega farms and under investing in policies that strengthen
rural America.

If we want these communities to die and control of the land to concentrate in a
few hands, we should continue current policy. If we want these communities to
thrive, however, we must change policy.

We must invest in family farm revitalization. The U.S. Department of
Agriculture's Value Added Producer Grants Program has helped family farmers and
ranchers develop new cooperatives and processing operations to reach new high
value markets, such as for natural beef. It has helped build new ethanol plants
and other producer-owned initiatives. But it's lost 60 percent of its funding
and will lose more if Congress again protects mega farm subsidies.

We must also invest in protecting soil and water. The most innovative feature of
the last farm bill, the Conservation Security Program, pays farmers based on how
intensively they manage their farm to protect the environment.

It is essential to the farmers and ranchers who have done the most to protect
the environment. The program has lost more than a third of its funding -- so
that it is now available only in selected watersheds instead of to all
conservation minded farmers and ranchers. It will again go on the chopping block
if Congress protects mega farms.

Finally, we must lay the groundwork for major investments in rural
entrepreneurship in the next farm bill. Most new jobs in the nation's most rural
agricultural counties come from very small businesses. But Congress invests
little in entrepreneurship.

A nationwide rural small-business development program was slashed from the last
farm bill because of its $15 million annual price tag -- the cost of subsidies
to five mega farms. Opportunity can flourish in rural America with a major
investment in small entrepreneurship in the next farm bill, but it has to be a
priority.

If we always do what we've always done, we'll always get what we've always got.
It's time to set a new direction. It time for citizens who care about their
communities to demand it.

Hassebrook is executive director of the Center for Rural Affairs in Lyons, Neb.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: OPINION

GRAPHIC: Chuck Hassebrook

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2005 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              813 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday
                                  City Edition

JUST FOR TEENS;
Libraries to sponsor first tech week for young adults

BYLINE: Staff Reports

SECTION: BUSINESS; TECH BYTES; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 352 words


Participation in library programs for kids under 18 has been rising steadily
over the past decade, from 35.5 million in 1993 to more than 54 million in 2004,
according to the American Library Association.

As part of an effort to serve the nation's nearly 42 million teens, the Young
Adult Library Services Association, the fastest growing division of the American
Library Association, has launched the first Teen Tech Week, March 4-10, with the
theme "Get Connected @ your library."

Teen use of electronic and Web resources has increased dramatically in recent
years. According to a 2005 study by Harris Interactive, 86 percent of youth ages
8 to 18 have a computer in their home, and 74 percent have Internet access.

For more information, go to  www.ala.org/teentechweek.

IN OTHER NEWS

Ag loans available for marketing ideas  Agriculture producers and producer
groups that are interested in diversifying their production with nontraditional
crops, adding value to crops through processing or marketing, or who are
pursuing marketing cooperative ventures, have until April 1 to complete
applications for grants and interest-free loans, officials said Monday. The
Oklahoma Agricultural Enhancement and Diversification program, administered by
the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food, and Forestry, has $168,000
available, Marketing Director Rick Maloney said.

Applications are available online at  www.oda.state.ok.us or by calling Jason
Harvey at 522-5563.

Inventors invited to meeting today  Oklahoma inventors who want to know the
process for protecting and advancing their ideas should attend the  meeting this
evening of the Oklahoma City Chapter of the Oklahoma Inventors Congress,
officials said.

The meeting will begin at 6 p.m. at OK Station BBQ, 4331 NW 50. For more
information about the meeting, contact Alan Beaty at 664-6768.

Disc technology continues to advance  Cushing-based Doug Carson & Associates
Inc. (DCA) continues to advance its disc technology through partnerships. The
new partnership enables all Singulus Mastering's products to use DiscTag
components, DCA said in a news release.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2007 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              814 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                           October 21, 2004 Thursday

Galena studies luring food processing plant; Project could develop a 'Galena'
brand

BYLINE: JOHN EVERLY

SECTION: Tristate; Pg. a3

LENGTH: 288 words

DATELINE: GALENA, Ill.


Someday, shoppers may be able to buy genuine "grown in Jo Daviess County, made
in Galena" food items in local shops.

The city of Galena hopes to partner with other groups to bring a food processing
plant to town. The plant could process locally grown produce into various
packaged food items.

First, though, local leaders must determine if such a facility has a reasonable
chance of success. The city will pursue a U.S. Department of Agriculture value
-added agriculture grant to pay for a feasibility study.

"What we want to do is get an industry feasibility study done because sometimes
enthusiasm can cloud reality," said Galena Economic Development Director Cindy
Pepple.

Pepple said if the study shows support for such a processing facility, a second
grant of up to $500,000 could be available to develop or attract a facility.

"This is a matter of connecting the agriculture community with the business
community," she said.

The project could possibly develop a "Galena" brand, allowing local producers to
capitalize on the area's popularity as a tourism destination by selling directly
to the 1.5 million people who visit the city annually, Pepple said.

"We would certainly have a leg up on the retail outlet end of it and name
recognition," she said. "It's a great opportunity to connect our farmers with
our visitor base."

Pepple said she expects to begin work on the project this week with the Jo
Daviess County Farm Bureau and University of Illinois Extension. They will
identify local producers and what those producers want to bring to the market.

Currently, there is no time line on developing the facility, Pepple said. The
City Council gave the project its blessing at its Oct. 11 meeting.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Mugt - Cindy Pepple

                  Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                              815 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                           October 27, 2011 Thursday

Pakistan: MFN status will spur Indian tea exports to Pakistan

LENGTH: 594 words

DATELINE: COONOOR


COONOOR, Oct. 27 -- Reeling under the onslaught of fierce competition from Kenya
and Sri Lanka, Indian tea planters are waiting for Pakistan to grant most
favoured nation (MFN) status to boost exports across the border.

"We are keenly waiting for Pakistan to grant the MFN status to boost exports
across the Wagah border as our tea will have a price advantage over competitors
with zero import tariff and lower overheads," said state-run Tea Board executive
director R. Ambalavanan told IANS here.

Pakistani Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar declared in Islamabad Oct 13 that
her country had in principle decided to grant MFN status to India, which had
bestowed this on its once arch rival in 2010.

Though Indian exports to Pakistan more than doubled to 18.9 million kg in 2010
from 7.5 million kg in 2009 and to 10.6 million kg in the first six months
(Jan-June) of 2011 from 9.5 million kg in the same period in 2010, a substantial
quantity of the beverage is unofficially shipped or smuggled into the
neighbourhood through third countries (Dubai and Afghanistan).

"The MFN status will immensely benefit growers as well as exporters by avoiding
middlemen and availing of the 10 percent tariff exemption Pakistan levies on tea
imports. Shipments through the Wagah border will also reduce logistics costs,"
the official said.

As the third largest importer after Russia/CIS, Britain and the US in 2010,
Pakistan buys more tea from Kenya and Sri Lanka than from India, which is the
second largest producer and consumer after China of the aromatic beverage.

China, however, produces (1,475 million kg in 2010) and consumes green tea,
while India (966 million kg) and other leading producers like Kenya (399 million
kg), Sri Lanka (331 million kg) and Vietnam (157 million kg) grow
crush-tear-curl (CTC) tea and orthodox tea.

In spite of the unit price declining to Rs.63 per kg from Rs.89 per kg, Indian
exports to Pakistan nearly doubled to Rs.120 crore in 2010 from Rs.67 crore in
2009. Similarly, in the first six months of 2011, export realization from
Pakistan was Rs.68 crore as against Rs.63 crore in same period of 2010 despite
lower unit price value.

"Though India has accorded MFN status to Pakistan, non-tariff barriers continue,
affecting bilateral trade between the two countries. Unless these are resolved,
merely granting the status will not benefit us much in terms of trade or
volumes," a tea exporter said on the margins of the planters' annual conference
that concluded here Sunday.

Catering to a large domestic market with growing consumption, the quantity for
exports is limited, though Indian teas are qualitatively competitive in
international auctions.

"Unlike our fierce competitors (Kenya, Sri Lanka and Vietnam), which export
nearly 90 percent of their production, about 80-85 percent of what we produce is
consumed domestically leaving less for exports in value terms despite the huge
potential for our tea in traditional and emerging markets," Ambalavanan
asserted.

Of the 960 million kg produced in 2010 as against 979 million kg in 2009, India
exported only 193 million kg last year compared to 198 million kg in 2009.
Likewise, in the first eight months (Jan-Aug) of 2011, of the 619 million kg
produced, only 109 million kg was exported, which is 12 percent lower than in
the same period of 2010 at 124 million kg out of 585 million kg produced
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              816 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      The Financial Post (Toronto, Canada)

                     March 14, 1989, Tuesday, DAILY EDITION

Producers too dependent on grants, tax relief

BYLINE: Frank Dabbs

SECTION: SECTION 2, INVESTMENT AND FINANCE; Pg. 26, OIL PATCH

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: Calgary,Alta.


  I have been taken to task by the Small Explorers & Producers Association of
Canada, say its members, for having failed to understand their position on the
issue of creating commercial incentives through the royalty, tax and grant
systems.

In this column Feb. 28, writing on the reform of Alberta's royalty system, I
once again revealed my skepticism about what I fear is an unhealthy dependence
of the most-junior and emerging independent companies on grants and tax
advantages as a permanent mechanism of growth.

I plead guilty to having a very jaundiced view about the reliance of Canadian
resource investors and producers on the tax and grant ''entitlements'' to create
commercial economics for financing deals.

SEPAC's members and I see the world very differently but we do agree on several
points. One is that the future of tax relief and drilling grants ranks, with
environmental regulation and worker safety, at the top of the 1989 political
agenda for the oil patch.


ROLE OF GOVERNMENT

There's a watershed federal budget in the making and, in Alberta, an election to
be followed by the announcement of one of the biggest annual deficits in the
province's history.

Today and Thursday, I'm going to have a closer look at what SEPAC is saying, why
I don't entirely agree and how this whole thing has an impact on Canadian
investors - and taxpayers.

A great deal of the entrepreneurial ginger has been sucked out of oil and gas
exploration and production in recent years.

In part, this is the natural result of a prolonged period of poor business
conditions. However, I also blame the expanded role of governments in creating
often artificial fiscal regimes that undermine business initiative.

Sometimes governments have erred in milking too much from the revenue stream.
Sometimes they have erred in being too generous. This is especially the case in
dispensations to oil and gas investors who often have been able to kill the
fatted calf at the long-term expense of the very companies in which they were
buying equity.

Yet I agree with my critics of the past few days with one underlying premise.
There can be very little argument that in Canada and the U.S., future energy
security will depend upon developing oil and gas deposits that are economically
marginal by present world standards, with present and anticipated prices.

This creates a vexing problem for governments, which must find fiscal regimes
for the successful development of oil and natural gas reserves and productive
capacity.

At the very least, government has a responsibility to ensure some degree of
stability in the energy sector, so there's an ongoing infrastructure to develop
Canadian resources.

At the same time, these same governments are wrestling with the much bigger
problem - the legacy of years of deficit financing.

Pushed to the limit of fiscal sanity and beyond by a staggering burden of debt,
provincial and federal finance ministers and their cabinet colleagues must
allocate a shrinking resource base to political constituents who have become
rather spoiled by years of programs, grants, tax relief, gifts, emoluments and
handouts.

It is unthinkable that, in the tough choices Michael Wilson must make, that the
Canadian Exploration and Development Incentive Program grants would come ahead
of the maximum possible preservation of health care, post-secondary education
and care for the elderly.

But there are certain fundamental elements of the tax relationship between oil
explorers and the government that seem to me to be cast in stone.

The longstanding Canadian Exploration Expenditure and Canadian Development
Expenditure tax write-offs, for example, ought to be held sacrosanct. The CEEs
and CDEs have, from time to time, been attacked by thinkers at Finance and the
Treasury Board - so they are vulnerable to any wide-sweeping fiscal reform.

For the record, tampering with these two tax mechanisms would be at least as
damaging to oil and gas explorations and development in Canada as federal
wellhead revenue taxation.

These two income tax shelters level the playing field for operators in Canada
against those in other areas of the world where the basic costs of exploration
and development are cheaper.

NO ONE THANKS TURNER

They have arguably been the basis for the creation of a healthy oil and gas
sector that has returned hundreds of billions of dollars in royalties, corporate
taxes and value-added input to the economy.

And the decision by then-Finance Minister John Turner in the mid-1970s to extend
this tax relief to oil and gas investors with principal income from other
sources (such as the practice of law or the manufacturing business) triggered
the vitality of today's Canadian-owned independent oil and gas sector.

Oddly, no one thanks Turner for that contribution to Canadian life; from a
Western Canadian point of view, it was a singular accomplishment.

It was simply overshadowed by the state of war that existed between the oil and
gas sector and then-Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau.


Parenthetically, part of the hidden Western Canadian agenda in the ongoing
battle for grants and tax relief is the persistent feeling that the region is
still entitled to war reparations for the damages of the National Energy Program
and other acts of hostility by the Trudeau administration.

However, back to the present.

Last year, the independent Energy Options report, prepared for then-Energy
Minister Marcel Masse, concluded that governments should not commit public funds
to major oil and natural gas development projects just to ensure security of
energy supply.

The comment was made with the megaprojects in mind. It is equally applicable to
the elaborate grant and tax schemes conducted for conventional oil and gas
drilling and development. As it happens, the conventional inputs have cost
federal and provincial treasuries far more cash and foregone income than will
ever be required to float the megaprojects.

However, the respected and distinguished authors of Energy Options were plain
wrong - politically and economically - on this one recommendation.

No politician would be able to survive the consequences of allowing this
energy-rich nation to become vulnerable for any aspect of its energy on foreign
suppliers in the tough global economy of the 1990s and 21st century.

And it is a particular form of folly to allow Canada, which enjoys the
possibilities of energy self-reliance, to lose that competitive edge in the
dog-eat-dog international marketplace of the future.

What frustrates SEPAC most is the apparent contradiction between the federal and
provincinal governments' commitments to play a major role in financing
megaprojects, and the growing reluctance for treasuries to co-fund conventional
exploration and development.

This anger by the smaller companies stems in part from the perennial range war
on this continent between the major integrated oil companies and the independent
producers.

It also plays on nationalism - the megaprojects are dominated by
foreign-controlled multinationals; the emerging companies are Canadian.

I'll pick up the story here in Thursday's Post.




LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: COLUMN

                       Copyright 1989 Financial Post Ltd.


                              817 of 998 DOCUMENTS



          NewsMail and Rural Weekly (Wide Bay, Bundaberg, Queensland)

                            August 19, 2010 Thursday

Feed Efficiency test station open day

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 528  words


THE nation's newest feed efficiency testing station will host a field day for
Queensland and Northern New South Wales' beef producers next month. Interested
farmers can hear about the centre's development, better understand how data is
recorded and why feed efficiency is important, learn about the links with DNA
testing, and importantly, tour the facility.

A first for the Blonde d'Aquitaine breed, Rathdowney Blondes owner Matthew
Arkinstall has established the Feed Efficiency Testing Station in conjunction
with local feedlotter Warren Drynan of Glenapp Pastoral Company (Bung Bung
Brahman Stud).

The station was established with a grant from Landcare Australia and Woolworths
under the Sustainable farming grants program.

The station can cater for three pens of cattle, with about 10-15 head (each of
the same sex) in each pen. There are 21 bulls on feed in the current test.

Working within a 20 gram accuracy, the computer system records feed bin weights
and NLIS tags continuously and logs the data to file for later processing.
Specialised software installed on the computer interacts with each scale and
purpose built NLIS reader.Daily data records are then analysed to determine the
daily consumption of each animal.

Each pen generates about 350,000 records per day, which is eventually reduced to
one individual feeding record per animal, per day.

The computer system runs off an uninterruptible power supply, which enables data
recording for up to 16 hours without mains power connection.

The feed trial consists of a minimum 21 day introductory period, followed by a
minimum 70 day test. The cattle are weighed weekly during the test and this
data, along with the daily individual feed test records, needs to be submitted
to allow for Net Feed Efficiency (NFE) data calculations and possible Breedplan
processing.

Feed efficiency is highly heritable so EBVs can be calculated for animals that
have been tested based on their own performance .

The data is collated and forwarded for further analysis by AGBU and ABRI.

Mr Arkinstall said "They will look at the data, and combine that with known
pedigrees, management groups and other available information in order to produce
estimated breeding values (EBVs) for feed efficiency.

"This will ultimately mean a producer will be able to select a bull that is more
efficient than his contemporaries, one that puts more of its energy into growth
and produces less waste such as methane.

"Over its lifetime the sire will have the ability to leave feed efficient
progeny that cost the producer less to run, and be more profitable. "

There are nine Blonde d'Aquitaine bulls and 12 Brahman and mixed breed bulls
being tested in the first trial.

For more information, visit www.rathdowneyblondes.com.au and click on feed
efficiency project.

Field day

Where: "Glenapp", 966 Running Creek Road, Rathdowney (located approx Â½ hour
south of Beaudesert, 1hr south of Brisbane. 9.66 km form Rathdowney.

When: Thursday September 16, 9.30 to 12.30

RSVP: Matthew Arkinstall on 5544 1591 or 0429 618 147, or email
matthew@rathdowney blondes.com.au

Website: www.rathdowney blondes.com.au

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GRW


                    Copyright 2010 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              818 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                            Turan Information Agency

                            December 12, 2016 Monday

Ministry of Agriculture to Provide Grants to Farmers

LENGTH: 174  words


Baku / 12.12.16 / Turan: The Ministry of Agriculture will provide grants to
agribusiness in the framework of the project "Strengthening the competitiveness
of agriculture." The goal is promoting a "value chain" in principle "from field
to kitchen," the Ministry's press service said.

Grants will be provided to address the problems in any part of the chain, which
brings together producers, processors and buyers.

The process of forming the value chain started 6 months ago: an information
campaign was carried out and help was provided to draft. Total selected were 20
projects in various fields of agriculture. The maximum amount of a grant was $
500 thousand.

The loan agreement on the financing of the project "Strengthening the
competitiveness of agriculture" was signed between the Azerbaijani government
and the World Bank in June 2014. It is implemented by the State Service of
Agricultural Projects and Loan Management at the Ministry of Agriculture. Over
the past 12 months, 51 businesses received loans totaling 11 million manat.
------08D

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1362


                        Copyright 2016 Turan News Agency
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              819 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hard Times for TV Documentaries;
Lack of Money Limits Smaller Serious Films

BYLINE:  By EDWARD WONG

SECTION: Section E; Column 2; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2100 words


On paper, Steven Okazaki was a filmmaker who should not have been scrounging for
money.

In the 1980's he produced five public television documentaries with grants from
the federal government and nonprofit foundations. Millions saw his works.
Critics praised him. He won an Oscar and a Peabody Award in 1991.

Then came the mid-1990's, when Congress slashed money for the arts and private
foundations tightened their belts. Mr. Okazaki found himself writing more and
more grant proposals to bring in the same amount of money he had been getting a
decade before.

"For some reason, the starving filmmaker is supposed to go on an even worse
diet," said Mr. Okazaki of Berkeley, Calif. "It's really nearly impossible to
mount an ambitious documentary on public funds. I haven't done it since 1992."

Mr. Okazaki made two recent films with financing from a Japanese television
network. His last documentary, "Black Tar Heroin," about young drug addicts in
San Francisco, received most of its $600,000 budget from HBO. It was also shot
on digital video, which is much cheaper than film but produces lower-quality
images.

Mr. Okazaki's dozens of futile grant applications in the nonprofit arena and the
resulting shift in how he makes films is emblematic of a sea change in the
American documentary landscape over the last five years. Millions of viewers
have been drawn to lavish multipart series on public television, like those made
by Bill Moyers and like Ken Burns's 19-hour "Jazz" starting on Monday (9 P.M. on
Channel 13 in New York). But at the same time many longtime documentary
filmmakers say things have only gotten tougher for them. They and dozens of arts
officials, scholars and foundation officers said in interviews that the
filmmakers have been facing a crisis in financing from nonprofit sources that
has had a profound effect on what kind of documentaries are made, how they are
made and where filmmakers go for money.

Even Mr. Burns, arguably the most successful documentary filmmaker of his
generation, said, "What you realize is a lot of good films haven't been made and
won't be made because of the circumstances of funding."

Both young filmmakers and seasoned producers like Mr. Okazaki say they have
found it harder to crack public television. More and more, they are turning away
from grant applications and toward cheaper digital technology and backing from
corporations, cable outlets and foreign networks. But little of this money has
gone to the sort of solid single-episode films about quirky, controversial or
important but less-than-sexy topics that distinguished the documentary field in
past decades -- what some call the golden age of cinema verite and historical
film-making.

"The plethora of new channels and of all the new media has not necessarily made
it easier to showcase the array of perspectives in this democratic nation," said
Pat Aufderheide, a professor of communication at American University in
Washington who studies documentaries and public interest policy. "I think public
television documentaries carry authority and raise interesting questions. They
create a public memory."

Although Congress has authorized more money for some arts agencies for next
year, it is uncertain how much of it might go to documentaries or, with a change
in administration, whether increases will continue. Unlike feature films,
mainstream documentaries have long relied on government and foundation money, in
part because the journalistic nature of the films has made corporate financing
less likely and in part because the traditional outlet for many of the works was
the Public Broadcasting Service's television network.

But government support for such documentaries suffered during the mid-1990's.
The Corporation for Public Broadcasting, the major source of money for public
television programming, lost nearly $100 million of the total appropriations
between 1995 and 1997. The budget during that time averaged $273 million a year,
then dropped to a low of $250 million in 1998 and 1999, although Congress
recently increased the corporation's appropriation to $350 million. But how much
of this money will support documentaries is unclear. Meanwhile, documentary
financing from foundations like the Ford Foundation and the John D. and
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation has stayed flat.

Despite the cuts, PBS executives say they are committed to showing independent
films through the series "P.O.V." and elsewhere on the national schedule.

"There's no doubt that cuts to arts agencies that receive government funding
have a trickle-down effect on public television and its producers," John Wilson,
senior vice president of programming services at PBS, said. "But even 10 years
ago a lot of independent film producers would have reported that there's not
enough funding."

Many talented producers, though, have turned more to cable channels. In 1998,
A&E broadcast "The Farm," an Academy Award-nominated film about a Louisiana
prison. Bravo has been showing a series of films made by Errol Morris, the
producer of "The Thin Blue Line." And many filmmakers have praised Sheila
Nevins, an HBO executive, for financing provocative documentaries like "Long
Night's Journey into Day," about South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.

But most documentaries on cable are formulaic, ranging from textbook history to
celebrity profiles, Ms. Aufderheide said. And because those are produced for a
fraction of the cost of national PBS projects, she said, they lack a comparable
level of scholarship, archival-film and videotape research and aesthetic polish.
Cable documentaries also tend to be more commercial.

"I think our subscriber base is different than the public television audience,"
Ms. Nevins said. "For a paid television service, people are paying for
high-voltage, unexpurgated original programming."

Producers of offbeat documentaries traditionally found more support from public
sources. For example, B. J. Bullert, a Seattle-based producer, said that several
cable networks rejected her proposed film on Earl Robinson, an American composer
and Communist. But she got money from the National Endowment for the Arts and
KCTS, the Seattle public television station.

"The mission of public television was and still is to bring in alternative
voices or voices that are underheard," said Ms. Bullert, who also wrote "Public
Television: Politics and the Battle Over Documentary Film" (Rutgers University
Press, 1997.)

But the agencies that backed this kind of film found their budgets cut after the
1994 elections, when a Republican-controlled Congress acted on a belief that tax
money should not support works that could offend many people. Conservative
legislators pointed to Marlon Riggs's "Tongues Untied," a 1991 documentary about
gay black men with stylized love scenes that received a $5,000 grant from the
N.E.A. and was shown on PBS.

Congress slashed money to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, the N.E.A.
and the National Endowment for the Humanities. The "media arts" budgets of the
two endowments are still down markedly from the early 90's. N.E.A. money for
documentaries, which often attracts other grant money to a film, is about half
of the $2.6 million that was allocated in 1994.

These days the arts endowment receives about 100 applications a year for film
projects, about a fifth of what it received before 1995, said Laura Welsh,
acting director of media arts at the agency. Congress required the N.E.A. to
eliminate many categories of filmmaking grants, including regional grants of up
to $10,000 that subsidized development of promising documentaries. The acclaimed
"Hoop Dreams" and "Roger and Me" both received such grants.

As for the N.E.H., its budget for media projects plummeted to a low of $4
million in 1996, down from $11 million the previous year. It has inched up to
about $6 million.

The effects are obvious in what is broadcast. In 1994 public television showed
41 new films running 71 hours that received help from the humanities endowment.
But in 1999 PBS broadcast only 9 new endowment-backed films for a total of 23
hours, said Nancy Rogers, director of the endowment's public programs division.

At the same time, most major foundations have not increased their production
grants, choosing instead to finance other foundation projects or digital media
centers.

An increase in corporate money has filled some of the breach.

"Corporate sponsorship was something that public television as a system began to
pursue with a bit more organization and clarity," said Mr. Wilson, the PBS
executive. "Along with international sales and production partnerships, this
helped us to break the flat funding cycle."

Four years ago four of the largest PBS stations formed the PBS Sponsorship Group
to coordinate corporate fund-raising efforts. The group has raised $170 million,
with about half of that going mostly to flagship or well-publicized documentary
series. Before the group was formed, the stations would approach potential
sponsors separately to seek money for their projects.

Corporations that underwrite a series are rewarded with a brief spot at the
start or end of each show.

Some filmmakers question whether this financing will lead to self-censorship
because controversial subjects rarely draw corporate money. Producers at the PBS
series "Frontline," for example, say the show, which specializes in
investigative documentaries, has tried and failed to get corporate underwriting.

"There is a trust that people have with PBS and the programs that appear on
PBS," said Orlando Bagwell, who said he recognized the issue as a concern even
though his 1998 PBS series "Africans in America" received 40 percent of its $7.2
million budget from two corporate sponsors -- Bankers Trust and McDonald's -- as
well as the Fannie Mae Foundation. "If there's a sense that the documentaries
are swayed by a commercial interest, then that trust might be violated."

But Mr. Wilson said PBS had never rejected an idea for fear that it would not
appeal to corporations.

Still, corporate sponsorship has clearly contributed to one big change in PBS
documentaries. It has become much more difficult to raise money for single films
than for multipart series. Since Mr. Burns's "Civil War" series in 1990, PBS has
found it much easier to get corporate financing for an "event" series because of
the potential audience draw. In 1999 General Motors agreed to pay 30 percent of
the budgets of Mr. Burns's projects for a decade.

"Because public television has been moving toward this sort of larger, long
series of documentaries, which has become quite pricey, it sort of narrowed the
field," said Alyce Myatt, a program officer at the MacArthur Foundation. "What
that means is the number of smaller films has dropped."

The search for alternative sources of money has taken some producers to foreign
television stations and production companies. Margaret Drain, executive producer
of "American Experience," a PBS history series, said she often finds herself
flying to Europe to get money for shows about domestic topics. But the subjects
have to appeal to an overseas audience.

Some filmmakers are looking to digital technology. These days, a digital video
camera and desktop editing system can cost less than $10,000. At the last
Sundance Film Festival, 6 of the 16 documentaries in competition were shot
digitally.

"With the technology today, it's easy to self-finance these things," said
Bennett Miller, the 33-year-old producer of "The Cruise," a 1998 festival hit
about an eccentric New York tour guide that was shot digitally and shown in
theaters and on Cinemax. "I've never written a grant proposal, and I don't ever
plan on writing a grant proposal," he said.

But Mr. Miller's documentary did not have film stock's lush production values,
which many producers still favor. And he belongs to the generation of filmmakers
who came after the cuts in public money. When many veteran producers talk about
the old days, they speak with a palpable sense of nostalgia. Jon Else, 56, a
producer on landmark series like "Eyes on the Prize" and "Cadillac Desert," both
of which received millions in public and foundation money, said that despite his
resume, he received nearly 130 grant-application rejections for his last film,
"Sing Faster," about opera stagehands.

"I represent a generation who came of age during the golden years of cinema
verite and historical documentary," Mr. Else said. "It pains me that so many of
those people are so dispirited because of the difficulty of raising money. Those
of us who haven't given up are looking for ways of going around that now."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Steven Okazaki, left, received most of the money for his most
recent film, "Black Tar Heroin," above, from HBO. Jon Else, below, said nearly
130 of his grant applications were rejected when he was trying to raise money
for his latest film, "Sing Faster," below left. (Patricia Arian);(Thor Swift for
The New York Times);(Museum of Modern Art);(Bonnie Cohen)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              820 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                           December 11, 1990, Tuesday

COMMODITY BRIEFS

BYLINE: From Wire and Staff Reports

SECTION: COMMODITIES, Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 158 words

DATELINE:  WASHINGTON


RISE SEEN IN US DUTY

ON CANADIAN PORK

The current U.S. countervailing duty on Canadian fresh, chilled and frozen pork
could rise in the future because of a new way of calculating that duty, the
National Pork Producers Council said Monday.

Last Friday, the U.S. Commerce Department upheld its 1989 decision to impose a
duty on Canadian pork. The decision also changed the duty rate calculation so
that it is based on the value of products instead of their we ight.

While NPPC said this would have an impact on the duty rate, it did not provide
any specific estimates of potential increases.

However, the current deposit rate for the U.S. duty will be reduced, at least
temporarily, to 3 cents a pound from 3.6 cents. This is occurring because
Commerce has removed two programs from the list of countervailing subsidy
programs.

Meanwhile, a GATT debate is expected sometime this week on the U.S. duty on
Canadian pork products.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

EDITOR-NOTE: COMMODITY BRIEFS

                  Copyright 1990 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              821 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2017 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                              GlobalData - Events

                               February 21, 2017

                                Sioux Pharm Inc

                               121 19th Street SW
                               Sioux Center 51250
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * EVENTS * * * * * * * * * *


USDA Announces Funding To Produce Renewable Energy For Rural Communities And
Reduce Energy Costs For Small Businesses And Farms In Eight States

   Oct 26, 2011

   The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is funding anaerobic digester
projects in eight states to encourage renewable energy production, reduce energy
costs and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and farm-based pollution.Tom Vilsack,
secretary of USDA, said, "Through the efforts of the Obama Administration, the
Rural Energy for America Program has helped rural small businesses, farmers and
ranchers across the nation. Since its creation this program has assisted almost
9,600 small businesses, farmers and ranchers and created or saved an estimated
15,000 jobs. It also provides producers with new opportunities to diversify
revenue and make American agriculture and rural small business more
competitive."Funding for the biodigesters is provided through the USDA Rural
Energy for America Program (REAP) and has created or saved an estimated 13.4
billion kWh of electricity and reduced almost 14.5 million metric tons of
greenhouse gas emissions. One of the biodigesters announced will be constructed
on Heller Farms near Alma Center in Jackson county, Wisconsin. It is expected to
produce 3.3 million kW hours of renewable energy each year, enough to power 400
average Wisconsin homes per year. Digesters will also be constructed in
Pennsylvania, Idaho, Iowa, Florida, Oregon, Ohio, and Vermont. The announcement
is in concert with an agreement signed by USDA in December, 2009. During climate
change talks in Copenhagen, Denmark, the USDA signed a historic agreement to
help US dairy producers cut greenhouse gas emissions. The agreement between USDA
and the Innovation Center for U.S. Dairy calls for the parties to work to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions from dairy farms by 25% by 2020. In fiscal year 2011,
USDA, through the REAP program, provided nearly $21m in assistance for
biodigesters, and leveraged over $110m in project development. Through its Value
-Added Producer Grant program, USDA provides planning grants of up to $100,000
and working capital grants of up to $300,000 to be used for establishment of a
biodigester. Additionally, the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
offers financial and technical assistance through the Environmental Quality
Incentives (EQIP) program. REAP anaerobic digester funds announced included
grants and loans to the following: Organic Matters, Inc. Bartow, Florida.
$201,498 grant AgPower Jerome, LLC Lincoln Colorado., Idaho $500,000 grant New
Energy Two, LLC Middleton, Idaho $500,000 grant New Energy Three LLC Middleton,
Idaho $500,000 grant Sioux Pharm Inc. Sioux Center, Iowa $263,250 loan, $263,250
grant Mill Creek Digester, LLC West Unity, Ohio $600,000 loan, $499,924 grant
Belmont County Bioenergy, LLC Independence, Ohio $750,000 loan, $500,000 grant
Lime Lakes Energy, LLC Norton, Ohio $1.5m loan, $500,000 grant Wooster Renewable
Energy, LLC Wooster, Ohio $750,000 loan, $500,000 grant Ringler Energy, LLC
Cardington, Ohio $3,238,750 loan, $500,000 grant Haviland Energy, LLC Paulding
Colorado, Ohio $600,000 loan, $500,000 grant Farm Power Misty Meadow, LLC
Tillamook, Oregon, $1m loan, $500,000 grant Farm Power Tillamook, LLC Tillamook,
Oregon, $2.65m loan, $100,000 grant Hard Earned Acres, Inc. Shippensburg,
Pennsylvania, $331,709 grant Reinford-Frymoyer Farm, LLC Mifflintown,
Pennsylvania, $337,224 grant Arlen Benner Mount Joy, Pennsylvania,. $500,000
grant Jay Clifford Sensenig Lancanster county, Pennsylvania. $309,733 grant
Riverview Farm Franklin, Vermont, $429,703 loan, $214,851 grant Heller Farms
(Cow Poo, LLC) Alma Center, Wisconsin, $1,321,187 loan, $500,000 grant Funding
of each award is contingent upon the recipient meeting the conditions of the
grant or loan agreement. Grants can finance up to 25% of a project's cost, not
to exceed $500,000 for renewable energy systems, $250,000 for energy efficiency.

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Company Overview                        Events
Key Employees                           Key Facts
Major Products and Services             Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2017


                              822 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                This Day (Lagos)

                                October 23, 2014

Digitilisation - NBC Earmarks N200 Billion Intervention Fund for Broadcasters

BYLINE: Adebiyi Adedapo

LENGTH: 383 words

DATELINE: Abuja


As the June 2015 deadline for the switch over from analogue to digital
broadcasting draws nearer, the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC) has
announced the sum of N200 billion as intervention fund to assist broadcast
stations. Chairman of the NBC governing board, Prof. Herbert Onye Orji disclosed
this on Tuesday in Abuja, during the opening ceremony of the 10th Biennial
Africa Broadcasters exhibition (AFRICAST 2014) organised by the commission.

Orji stated that preparation towards making the fund available had reached an
advance stage, noting that the commission would technically study how the fund
would be managed.

"We are on the second stage of preparation towards establishing the fund, which
is to technically study how to manage the fund," he said.

He also disclosed that the NBC would hire a world class consulting firm to
collaborate with its development partners abroad on modalities to raise the
fund.

The fund according to Orji would be disbursed in form of revolving loan to
content producers for capacity building.

"It will provide grants in capacity building in form of soft loans to
television, radio, cable and other producers, distributors and other acquirers
of contents," he added.

Also speaking, the Director General of NBC, Mr. Emeke Mba said the digitisation
was an evolutionary process, which would keep changing overtime with newer
technology. Mba explained that the hiccups noticed in the digitisation pilot
scheme in Jos, would be examined with other stakeholders attending the 3-days
programme.

"In this digitisation, the consumer is the king, and if you want to rule the
kingdom, you must put together framework that enables various stakeholders
take-up different parts of the value chain," he said.

Meanwhile, the federal government has pledged its support towards a successful
transition from analogue to digital broadcasting. Secretary to the Government of
the Federation (SGF) Anyim Pius Anyim, who was represented at the event by the
Senior Special Adviser to President Goodluck Jonathan on Research and
Documentation, Mr. Ferdinand Agu , said the government was aware of the
challenges, thereby expressed maximum support to the operators.

"The government is aware of the challenges, we would not allow digitisation to
cut-off any aspect of the population," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              823 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Peterborough Evening Telegraph

                                 March 15, 2005

CONFERENCE: Food and drink to meet the consumer trends and preference

LENGTH: 1021 words


PEOPLE are becoming more and more health conscious about the food they eat,
where it has come from, what has been added to it and how
environmentally-friendly the growth process was. This week business editor SARAH
GUNTHARDT takes a closer look at what's lined up for the 2005 East of England
food and drink conference which will be held at the East of England Showground,
Peterborough, next month.

THE food and drink sector is the biggest manufacturing industry in the East of
England with more than 4,000 food and farming-related businesses in the region.

FoodconfEast is the only regional conference for this important sector, so it's
no surprise that the theme for this year's East of England Food and Drink
industry conference is consumer preferences and trends.

The conference is being held at the East of England Showground on Tuesday, April
12, and provides a forum and networking opportunity for owners, directors and
senior managers representing the region's large and small food and drink
producers, processors and manufacturers.

Sir Don Curry - the Government's farming and food policy advisor - told the 180
delegates who attended the last conference, 18 months ago, that the industry
needed to be very aware of consumer demands. The strong message was to promote
healthy living and diet awareness and encourage good eating habits, particularly
among the young.

It is this key theme that will be developed in 2005 with an emphasis on the need
to find out what consumers value, what are they willing to pay a premium for and
what new opportunities there are for local food producers.

Addressing a healthy way of eating

WITH Government advice on diet playing such a key part in this, one of the main
papers will be delivered by Prof Christiani Jeya Henry, Head of Food Sciences
and Nutrition at Oxford Brookes University.

Prof Christiani will look at current views and future directions on the role of
low GI diets, explaining the concept of the glycaemic index, what it could mean
in terms of general health and well being and how early pioneering work is
already taking place.

Prof Henry said: "What we have failed to do in the last 25 years in the UK is to
really change eating habits. One fresh new approach is the GI index - which is
appropriate for all ages. This is not a diet, it is a healthy way of eating.

"This approach has been transferred to the supermarket shelves. Over the last
nine months we have been conducting labelling trials of 300 product lines in
Tesco stores. These labels simply say low GI or medium GI as appropriate.

"With locally produced fruit, vegetables and meat products playing such a key
role in this region, it really has the potential to lead the way."

Exploiting the food service sector

This region also needs to make the most of public procurement of food from local
and regional sources. The food service sector is often seen as the poor relation
to the retail sector but for many local producers it could be the way forward.

There is a very significant agri-food industry in this region. The highly
productive soils give a comparative advantage in the production of high value
horticultural and arable crops. There are at least 450 sites locally where food
or supplies or services for the food processing industry are manufactured or
provided.

John Giles, divisional director for the Strategic Consulting Division at Promar
International, said: "Local producers must understand the complexity of the
foodservice market and work out where they fit in. Some will not be able to
supply this market, but for others finding the right opportunity is important.

"The food service sector has traditionally been very fragmented but a degree of
consolidation is now taking place. There is a need to understand and co-operate
with others in the supply chain. With a more dedicated approach, we can link in
with Government proposals.

"Food service is not the easy option. Customer needs vary tremendously, from
small independent hotels and restaurants to large chains. Local producers can
offer quality produce, particularly local meat and vegetables, at the right
price, and we want to explore those opportunities further."

The East of England Showground is a prime example of local sourcing. It sources
wherever possible from the Eastern region. The chefs are charged with the
policy"if it is grown in the UK, it is bought from the UK".

This in itself has re-introduced seasonality into the menus and created great
interest in the provenance of the food at the Showground.

The full list of speakers includes:

? Professor David Hughes of Wye College, recognised as the food industry leader
on consumer trends

? Professor Christiani Jeya Henry, Head of Food Sciences and Nutrition at Oxford
Brookes University.

? They will be supported by representatives from the service industry and local
food producers including:

? Peter Hazzard, former managing director of Sodexho, an expert on the food
service industry.

? John Murphy, chairman and founder of St Peter's Brewery, based in South
Elmham, near Bungay in Suffolk.

? Duncan Swift, partner and head of food and agribusiness recovery and Ian Carr,
regional recovery partner, Grant Thornton LLP.

? John Giles, Divisional Director of the Strategic Consulting Division at Promar
International which operates across the full agri food value chain.

? Bill Marlow of Marlow Wade consulting offering marketing advice to food and
rural businesses facing significant decisions.

? Kip Winter-Cox, sector marketing manager, Geest plc.


The event is sponsored by the Food Industry Network, a group of leading
organisations in the region with special expertise in the food industry
including Bidwells, Chamberlain, EEDA, East of England, FoodEast, Grant
Thornton, NatWest, Tastes of Anglia, Taylor Vinters Solicitors and UK Trade and
Investment.

To find out more or book a place, click on www.foodconfeast.com, or ring
Michelle Atkinson or Louise Border at Taylor Vinters on 01223 423444. The cost
per delegate is £75.00 (£88.12 incl VAT).


LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2005

LANGUAGE: English

                           © 2005 Johnston Press Plc


                              824 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                           September 26, 2004 Sunday

Land values soar in Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa; Low interest rates are seen as
factor

BYLINE: JOHN EVERLY

SECTION: Agriculture; Pg. b4

LENGTH: 717 words


Land values in Iowa, Illinois and Wisconsin increased dramatically in the past
year.

From Jan. 1, 2003, to Jan. 1, 2004, Iowa cropland averaged $2,320 per acre, up a
whopping 9.4 percent from a year earlier, according to the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's National Agricultural Statistics Services. The average cash rent
was $126 per acre, up $4.

Illinois cropland averaged $2,700 per acre, up 8 percent. Cash rent averaged
$126, up $3 from last year.

Wisconsin cropland values averaged $2,350 per acre, a 6.8 percent increase, with
rents averaging $70.

These are statewide averages, however, and we have heard reports of much higher
values in the tri-state area. Throw in some buildings, and you're talking real
money.

"The average farm real estate value for Illinois in 2004 was $2,610 per acre,
the highest on record," said Dale Lattz, University of Illinois Extension farm
management specialist. "This includes the value of all land and buildings."

Low interest rates, low returns on alternative investments and continued use of
farmland for development are driving the rise in value, Lattz said. "These
factors seem to have a bigger influence on farmland values than the actual
earnings from farmland," he said.

Farmers said that finding good, affordable land is a challenge. The 2002 Census
of Agriculture showed, for example, that Jo Daviess County in Illinois lost 10
percent of its farmland from 1997 to 2002. The attrition rate was almost as
dramatic in Dubuque County, where land devoted to farming decreased 8 percent in
five years. In Grant County in Wisconsin, farmland declined 2 percent during
that time.

*

The Coalition to Support Iowa's Farmers recently unveiled a new service to help
Iowa livestock farmers navigate the complex web of regulations.

Strategic Technical Environmental Education Resource is a guide based at
www.supportiowasfarmers.org. The guide includes an overview of rules and
regulations covering livestock farming. The site also includes a variety of farm
management tools, resources and contacts for farm families, including
third-party experts and consultants.

*

Iowa rules for manure management plans have changed.

The Iowa Department of Natural Resources announced recently that the phosphorus
index, or "P" index, will be phased in during the next four years. Producers who
have not submitted an original manure management plan to the department by Oct.
25 will need to incorporate the P index into their plan.

A number of rule changes became effective Aug. 25, including additional
requirements for nitrogen-based manure application and for record keeping. The
rule change regarding nitrogen-based manure application means that producers
will no longer be able to apply nitrogen at 1.5 times the nitrogen rate when
soil tests indicate that low or very low soil phosphorus or potassium are
present.

If a plan has already been developed for fall 2004 using the 1.5 times rate,
those rates can be used for fall manure application, ag officials said.

The Department of Natural Resources wants more paperwork, too. Under the revised
rules, producers must keep records of several new items used to calculate the
manure rate and include:

* Optimum yield for the planned crop.

* Types of nitrogen credits and amounts.

* Remaining crop nitrogen needed.

* Nitrogen content and first year nitrogen availability of the manure.

* Maximum allowable manure application rate.

Producers also must record the phosphorus content of the manure. If
phosphorus-based rates are used, records must indicate the crop rotation that
the rate is based on and the phosphorus removal of that rotation.

And to satisfy the updated rules, keep a copy of the soil test lab results of
the fields in the plan.

Also effective Aug. 25, producers must keep their current manure management plan
within 30 miles of the production site. Producers should retain old application
records, as rules will go into effect Aug. 25, 2006, requiring them to keep five
years of records on file instead of three.

For details, go to www.iowadnr.com and click "Animal Feeding Operations."

Everly, a Telegraph Herald reporter, was farm director of Dubuque radio station
KDTH for nearly 10 years. His e-mail address is jeverly@wcinet.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                              825 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Hobart Mercury (Australia)

                             March 4, 2008 Tuesday
                                  1 - Edition

QUICK NEWS

LENGTH: 325 words


Electricity cut

NEARLY 10,000 Aurora customers lost power for up to five hours on Sunday when a
substation at Avoca failed. Those affected were in the Fingal Valley, Ross,
Tunbridge, Four Mile Creek and Douglas River.

Compo demand

WORKERS' compensation laws must be changed to remove the 30 per cent rule, says
the Australian Lawyers Alliance. The rule means a Tasmanian worker cannot sue
for compo if injured at work unless they have at least 30 per cent whole body
impairment. Unions want to change the law, often called the harshest in
Australia.

Learning funds

THIRTY Tasmanian community groups which support adult and community learning
have received more than $65,000 in State Government funding under the 2008 Adult
and Community Education grants program. Education Minister David Bartlett said
the program raised awareness of the value of lifelong learning.

Photo challenge

A NEW farm photographic competition run by the Department of Primary Industries
and Water highlights the impact of the drought on primary producers and the
importance of agriculture to young people. It has divisions for primary
producers, all residents, and Tasmanian schools (upper primary and secondary
students). Entries close on April 20. Go to www.dpiw.tas.gov.au and
www.farmpoint.

tas.gov.au or phone 1300 368 550.

Emergency help

LOCAL emergency organisations have been invited to apply for a share of $4
million funding through the Australian Government's National Emergency Volunteer
Support Fund. The funding helps develop recruitment, retention and training
initiatives. Applications close on March 7. Details www.ema.gov.au/community

engagement.

Exchange advice

INTERNATIONAL Exchange Programs is to hold a free information session on
overseas working holidays. Australia's largest non-profit work and travel
organisation says it has new, flexible program options. The Hobart session will
be on March 5 at Harrington's 102 Hotel, Harrington St. Details on
www.iep.org.au.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MER


                   Copyright 2008 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              826 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                           The Daily Yomiuri (Tokyo)

                            March 20, 2004 Saturday

Australian wines need reappraisal

BYLINE: Sandra Shoji Special to The Daily Yomiuri

SOURCE: Yomiuri

SECTION: Pg. 18

LENGTH: 604 words


The success of Australia's wine producers has been their ability to adapt to the
changing tastes of wine lovers. But recently, this adaptability has been put in
peril by large companies that have bought out smaller ones, causing a
homogenization in the wine industry. Many Australians now believe it is time to
rethink their game plan.

At FoodEx Japan 2004, Asia's huge food and beverage exhibition in Chiba, I
started chatting with amiable Paul van der Lee, South Australia's Wine Export
Manager.

Asking him what he had learned over four days of pouring wine for visitors, he
remarked that he had seen more women than men visiting the wine stands. "They
not only taste, but ask questions, and they like to make their own choices," he
said. "Australia has been a major force in the democratization of wine in the
past 20 years, as its values are egalitarian."

Still, van der Lee finds a clash of traditional versus modern values in wine,
with the guardians of tradition tending to be elite, wealthy males who have the
time to learn about wine. "However, not everyone wants wine to be a religion as
the gatekeepers do."

In the 1980s, Australia's wine producers "went to England with the strategy of
just putting a glass of Australian wine into people's hands. Australians are
also great story tellers, so we also sent our most gregarious winemakers."

Today, van der Lee is worried about the dominance of large wine companies driven
by short-term commercial returns, which he fears has led to a drop in quality.
"We have consumers believing that they can trade down, completely buying on
price, and still enjoy wine."

Van der Lee says wine has a strong future because of its innate health benefits
and its suitability to healthier meals with fresh ingredients.

"Japanese women seem to have adopted wine as their beverage of choice. It isn't
just fuel for the body, but a social occasion."

In this fast food world, van der Lee declares wine an "anticonvenience."

"It takes time to open the bottle, pour it into a nice glass. The pleasure is
experiencing wine's unique places and small wineries. The future is making your
own personal wine discoveries."

Star Picks: Grant Burge Frontignac, 03, (1,400 yen) La Cave de Vin Belier, Kobe.
Tel: 078-393-2777. At Grant Burge's winery in the Barossa Valley of South
Australia, his ancient Frontignac grapes were destined to be replaced with
grapes more popular for export.

However, importer Richard Cohen, the owner of Village Cellars, persuaded Burge
to produce just one more vintage, as it suited Japanese cuisine. Burge made
Cohen promise to buy most of the wine. The wine sold out in a few weeks, and
Burge still grows Frontignac grapes.

This pale lemon wine is as perky as a basket of spring flowers mixed with lemons
and kiwi. A few more months of age will add a honeyed roundness.

Grant Burge 10-year Tawny Port (3,675 yen) Village Cellars, Toyama. Tel. (0120)
106-876, wine@village-cellars.co.jp

In the 1960s, fortified wines that wouldn't wilt in the heat made up 78 percent
of Australian wine. With the drive to drier wines, Australian's "stickies" are
their secret treasures.

Burge uses Grenache, Mataro (Mourvedre) and Barossa's signature grape, Shiraz.
Tawny Ports are matured entirely in wooden barrels. As the wine evaporates,
younger wine is added. The aging wine loses color, turning a golden, toffee
brown with delicious flavors of walnuts, raisins, honey and cinnamon.

This wine always wins hands down at blind tastings. Fantastic with pear cake,
creme brulee, or for those who like savories such as nuts and salty cheese.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2004 The Yomiuri Shimbun


                              827 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                               May 5, 2014 Monday

Washington: USDA Announces Funding to Spur Local and Regional Economic Growth in
America's Rural Communities

LENGTH: 684  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Agriculture, The Government of USA has issued the following
news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced the availability of funding to
promote long-term economic growth and community vitality in rural areas. With
the announcement, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) invites applications
for funding through three community and economic development programs
administered by USDA Rural Development.

"USDA is committed to helping rural communities access the resources they need
to implement strategies that will invigorate the economy, reduce poverty and
enhance the quality of life in our small towns and rural areas for years to
come," Vilsack said.

The announcement includes $30.6 million in zero-interest loans and $9.2 million
in grants to establish revolving loan funds that finance business and economic
development activities in rural areas. Applications for these funds will be
accepted through the Rural Economic Development Loan and Grant (REDLG) Program.
Rural utilities that are eligible for USDA financing under the Rural
Electrification Act and have the capacity to serve as intermediary lenders may
apply to USDA Rural Development to administer the funds locally for the benefit
of specifically identified projects. These intermediaries re-lend REDLG funds at
zero percent to assist with business startup and expansion, business technical
assistance and job training, and community facilities projects that support
economic development. Applications are accepted on an ongoing basis through USDA
Rural Development State Offices and are evaluated for funding consideration
monthly.

Through the Rural Business Opportunity Grant (RBOG) Program, USDA Rural
Development is accepting competitive grant applications to improve economic
conditions in designated Rural Economic Area Partnership Zones and for members
of Native American tribes in rural areas. Government entities, nonprofit
corporations, institutions of higher education, rural cooperatives and Native
American tribes may apply for grants of up to $100,000. Funding may be used to
support business incubators, feasibility studies and business plans, long-term
strategic business planning, leadership and entrepreneurial training, and other
related efforts. Just over $1.3 million is reserved for projects benefiting
Native American communities. Another $919,820 is reserved for projects with
Rural Economic Area Partnerships.

In addition, USDA announces the availability of two grants from funds
appropriated for the Rural Business Enterprise Grant (RBEG) program: a $500,000
grant for rural transportation projects and a $250,000 grant for Federally
Recognized Native American Tribes. Funds may be used to provide technical
assistance and training to help rural communities improve passenger
transportation services or facilities.

These USDA programs provide key support needed to create rural jobs and promote
local and regional economic growth. For instance, the non-profit Ecotrust
estimates that RBEG and RBOG funding for its FoodHub website is allowing it to
connect more than 2,100 farmers, ranchers, fishermen, dairies and specialty
producers to more buyers, distributors and industry suppliers. Between 2010 and
2012, the service reported helping producers in Oregon, Washington, Idaho,
Montana, Alaska and California increase full-time employment by 23 percent and
part-time employment by 38 percent.

Application deadlines and details for all three programs will be available May 2
when the funding notices are published in the Federal Register.

President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way -
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities. USDA's
investments in rural communities support the rural way of life that stands as
the backbone of our American values.

For more information please visit: http://www.usda.gov

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              828 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 15, 2014 Monday

Nevada: Secretary Vilsack Highlights Innovative Conservation Efforts during
Midwest Farm Visit

LENGTH: 1035  words

DATELINE: Carson City


The State of Nevada has issued the following news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced today the award of $15.7 million in
Conservation Innovation Grants (CIGs) to 47 organizations that will help develop
and demonstrate cutting-edge ideas to accelerate innovation in private lands
conservation. The Secretary made the announcement while visiting a farm in
Illinois.

"These grants promote creativity and problem-solving efforts that benefit
farmers and ranchers and protect our natural resources," Vilsack said. "They're
critical in sparking new ideas and techniques for conservation on America's
private lands and improving the environment."

The grants announced today are funded through the Environmental Quality
Incentives Program. Grantees must work with producers and forestland owners to
develop and demonstrate the new technologies and approaches. At least 50 percent
of the total cost of CIG projects must come from non-federal matching funds,
including cash and in-kind contributions provided by the grant recipient.

Vilsack made the announcement while visiting a corn and soybean farm owned by
David and Tamara Erickson and their sons, Nicholas and Bradley. The Ericksons
have a five-year Conservation Stewardship Program contract with USDA's Natural
Resources Conservation Service and have also received technical assistance from
NRCS. The Secretary saw soil conservation practices including "no till" and
grassed waterways to reduce runoff. He viewed soil cores which demonstrate the
benefits of efforts to improve soil health.

The National Corn Growers Association and the National Association of
Conservation Districts, both involved with conservation activities in Illinois,
are receiving grant awards to demonstrate the use of best management practices
such as conservation tillage, cover crops and advanced nutrient management to
address soil health concerns. Almost half of the grants announced today support
the agency's priority of getting more conservation on the ground by improving
the health of our nation's soils. The National Corn Growers Association will
receive almost $1 million to promote soil management practices aimed at
improving productivity, profitability and environmental outcomes in seven
states. The National Association of Conservation Districts will receive $750,000
to fund a project to significantly increase the number of farmed acres
nationwide (including Illinois) that are successfully managed for soil health.

Other organizations, tribes and academic institutions will receive funding for
conservation projects. For example, the University of California will receive
almost $229,000 for the second phase of a project to support using native bees
to supplement crop pollination. Montana State University will receive $50,000 to
study ways to improve sage grouse chick and brood survival. The University of
Missouri will receive almost $368,000 to work on an energy recovery system that
field tests show could reduce energy consumption in poultry houses by 40-50
percent. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will receive almost
$382,000 to continue to develop procedures to improve soil health and increase
the acreage being managed with conservation tillage practices. In Arizona, the
Navajo Nation will receive over $28,000 for mule deer conservation efforts, and
the First Nations Development Institute will receive almost $69,000 to develop a
conservation planning process, led by Navajo livestock producers on the Navajo
Reservation.

Seven of the approved grants support conservation technologies and approaches to
help farmers and ranchers who historically have not had equal access to
agricultural programs because of race or ethnicity, or who have limited
resources, or who are beginning farmers and ranchers.

A full list of recipients is available here:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/financial/cig/.

Entities in the following States were selected for awards: Ala., Alaska, Ariz.,
Ark., Calif., Colo., Fla., Ga., Hawaii, Idaho, Ill., Ind., Iowa, Kan., La.,
Minn., Miss., Mont., Mo., N.C., N.D., Neb., N.Y., Ohio, Okla., Ore., Penn.,
S.C., Tenn., Texas, Utah, Va., Vt., W.Va., Wash., Wis., and also the District of
Columbia.

Soil health is the foundation and future of sustainable agriculture, enabling
producers to fare better against drought and other climatic extremes while
increasing production. They have greater water holding capacity, increase water
infiltration, reduce soil erosion, decrease soil compaction, improve crop
productivity, and improve our natural resource condition.

NRCS has offered this grant program since 2004, investing in ways to demonstrate
and transfer efficient and environmentally friendly farming and ranching. In the
past years, the grants have helped develop trading markets for water quality and
have shown how farmers and ranchers may use fertilizer, water and energy more
efficiently. Since 2009 through this year's funding, 323 projects were or are
slated to be awarded for a total $126 million investment in novel conservation.

To enhance the value and adoption of previous CIG results, a new search tool is
available on the website for past awarded projects.

For more on this grant program, visit USDA's Conservation Innovation Grants
webpage.

The announcement of today's funding was made possible by the 2014 Farm Bill. The
Farm Bill builds on historic economic gains in rural America over the past five
years, while achieving meaningful reform and billions of dollars in savings for
taxpayers. Since enactment, USDA has made significant progress to implement each
provision of this critical legislation, including providing disaster relief to
farmers and ranchers; strengthening risk management tools; expanding access to
rural credit; funding critical research; establishing innovative public-private
conservation partnerships; developing new markets for rural-made products; and
investing in infrastructure, housing and community facilities to help improve
the quality of life in rural America. For more information, visit
www.usda.gov/farmbill.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              829 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 15, 2014 Monday

Nevada: Secretary Vilsack Highlights Innovative Conservation Efforts during
Midwest Farm Visit

LENGTH: 1035  words

DATELINE: Carson City


The State of Nevada has issued the following news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced today the award of $15.7 million in
Conservation Innovation Grants (CIGs) to 47 organizations that will help develop
and demonstrate cutting-edge ideas to accelerate innovation in private lands
conservation. The Secretary made the announcement while visiting a farm in
Illinois.

"These grants promote creativity and problem-solving efforts that benefit
farmers and ranchers and protect our natural resources," Vilsack said. "They're
critical in sparking new ideas and techniques for conservation on America's
private lands and improving the environment."

The grants announced today are funded through the Environmental Quality
Incentives Program. Grantees must work with producers and forestland owners to
develop and demonstrate the new technologies and approaches. At least 50 percent
of the total cost of CIG projects must come from non-federal matching funds,
including cash and in-kind contributions provided by the grant recipient.

Vilsack made the announcement while visiting a corn and soybean farm owned by
David and Tamara Erickson and their sons, Nicholas and Bradley. The Ericksons
have a five-year Conservation Stewardship Program contract with USDA's Natural
Resources Conservation Service and have also received technical assistance from
NRCS. The Secretary saw soil conservation practices including "no till" and
grassed waterways to reduce runoff. He viewed soil cores which demonstrate the
benefits of efforts to improve soil health.

The National Corn Growers Association and the National Association of
Conservation Districts, both involved with conservation activities in Illinois,
are receiving grant awards to demonstrate the use of best management practices
such as conservation tillage, cover crops and advanced nutrient management to
address soil health concerns. Almost half of the grants announced today support
the agency's priority of getting more conservation on the ground by improving
the health of our nation's soils. The National Corn Growers Association will
receive almost $1 million to promote soil management practices aimed at
improving productivity, profitability and environmental outcomes in seven
states. The National Association of Conservation Districts will receive $750,000
to fund a project to significantly increase the number of farmed acres
nationwide (including Illinois) that are successfully managed for soil health.

Other organizations, tribes and academic institutions will receive funding for
conservation projects. For example, the University of California will receive
almost $229,000 for the second phase of a project to support using native bees
to supplement crop pollination. Montana State University will receive $50,000 to
study ways to improve sage grouse chick and brood survival. The University of
Missouri will receive almost $368,000 to work on an energy recovery system that
field tests show could reduce energy consumption in poultry houses by 40-50
percent. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will receive almost
$382,000 to continue to develop procedures to improve soil health and increase
the acreage being managed with conservation tillage practices. In Arizona, the
Navajo Nation will receive over $28,000 for mule deer conservation efforts, and
the First Nations Development Institute will receive almost $69,000 to develop a
conservation planning process, led by Navajo livestock producers on the Navajo
Reservation.

Seven of the approved grants support conservation technologies and approaches to
help farmers and ranchers who historically have not had equal access to
agricultural programs because of race or ethnicity, or who have limited
resources, or who are beginning farmers and ranchers.

A full list of recipients is available here:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/financial/cig/.

Entities in the following States were selected for awards: Ala., Alaska, Ariz.,
Ark., Calif., Colo., Fla., Ga., Hawaii, Idaho, Ill., Ind., Iowa, Kan., La.,
Minn., Miss., Mont., Mo., N.C., N.D., Neb., N.Y., Ohio, Okla., Ore., Penn.,
S.C., Tenn., Texas, Utah, Va., Vt., W.Va., Wash., Wis., and also the District of
Columbia.

Soil health is the foundation and future of sustainable agriculture, enabling
producers to fare better against drought and other climatic extremes while
increasing production. They have greater water holding capacity, increase water
infiltration, reduce soil erosion, decrease soil compaction, improve crop
productivity, and improve our natural resource condition.

NRCS has offered this grant program since 2004, investing in ways to demonstrate
and transfer efficient and environmentally friendly farming and ranching. In the
past years, the grants have helped develop trading markets for water quality and
have shown how farmers and ranchers may use fertilizer, water and energy more
efficiently. Since 2009 through this year's funding, 323 projects were or are
slated to be awarded for a total $126 million investment in novel conservation.

To enhance the value and adoption of previous CIG results, a new search tool is
available on the website for past awarded projects.

For more on this grant program, visit USDA's Conservation Innovation Grants
webpage.

The announcement of today's funding was made possible by the 2014 Farm Bill. The
Farm Bill builds on historic economic gains in rural America over the past five
years, while achieving meaningful reform and billions of dollars in savings for
taxpayers. Since enactment, USDA has made significant progress to implement each
provision of this critical legislation, including providing disaster relief to
farmers and ranchers; strengthening risk management tools; expanding access to
rural credit; funding critical research; establishing innovative public-private
conservation partnerships; developing new markets for rural-made products; and
investing in infrastructure, housing and community facilities to help improve
the quality of life in rural America. For more information, visit
www.usda.gov/farmbill.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              830 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Chapel Hill Herald (Durham, N.C.)

                           February 1, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Final EDITION

Sweet winnings

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 593  words


CHAPEL HILL ? The owners of the Chapel Hill Creamery, a dairy farm where the
milk of about 30 Jersey cows is used to make up to seven different cheeses sold
locally, want to see their farm mature.

The farm's owners said Monday that they got a grant to help them do just that.
The $180,000 federal grant from the U.S. Department of Agriculture will supply
working capital to help the farm meet its goals.

Federal and state officials descended on the farm on Monday, which is located
outside of Chapel Hill in Orange County, to announce that grant and nine others
for agricultural businesses around the state.

Dallas Tonsager, Under Secretary for Rural Development for the U.S. Department
of Agriculture, announced grants totaling $1.33 million for businesses in the
state while on a visit to the farm.

Officials stood outside the building where the farm's cheeses are made, near a
cow was contemplatively chewing its cud.

"A lot is going on to get the economy moving in America, and a lot goes on in
rural America," Tonsager said, adding that he believes agriculture "has done
pretty well making a difference for the whole economy."

The grants came through the department's Value-Added Producer Grant program,
which has provided more than $200 million to businesses in the last 10 years,
Tonsager said. Value-added products are products grown by a farmer that are
changed to increase their value, such as cheese, or

See Creamery/Page 3

tomatoes that are grown and turned into salsa.

Many of the businesses in North Carolina that were announced on Monday as grant
recipients also received support from a state program, the N.C. Value-Added
Cost-Sharing Program, said Brittany Whitmire, program coordinator.

Whitmire said the N.C. Value-Added Cost Sharing program has helped businesses
prepare applications for the grant program to try to increase North Carolina's
share of the federal program's grant recipients nationwide.

Whitmire said the Chapel Hill Creamery received a grant of $23,500 from the
state program in 2010 to help complete a feasibility study, and also received
funding to help pay the cost of new equipment needed for making Camembert
cheese.

Tonsager and other officials toured the plant where mozzarella, Camembert and
other cheeses are made, peeked into the room where cheese is aged, and tasted a
few of the dairy farm's finished products.

"I think it's an unusual, rich flavor," said Bruce T. Pleasant, director of
business and cooperative programs for the U.S.D.A.'s rural development
department in Raleigh, after tasting a piece of the farm's Calvender cheese.

At the N.C. State Fair last year, the creamery won the "Best in Show" as well as
a gold medal for the Calvander, a cheese that "bites back" with a nutty as well
as sweet flavor, said farm co-owner Portia McKnight. The cheese is modeled after
Asiago cheeses.

The dairy farm sells its cheeses at the Durham and Carrboro farmers' markets, to
restaurants, and in stores such as Weaver Street Market in Hillsborough and in
Whole Foods locations in the state, and elsewhere.

McKnight said she as well as the farm's other co-owner, Florence Hawley, are
looking to develop their business to ensure its viability in the long-term.

They're expanding their marketing efforts, improve their bookkeeping, streamline
their product line and increase production of certain cheeses, and improve their
food safety program.

"We would like to see Chapel Hill Creamery continue after we're ready to stop
milking cows, and making cheese," she said. "In order to do that, this business
needs a little more maturity."

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 The Durham Herald Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              831 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             April 18, 2014 Friday

Oklahoma Wheat Research Foundation gives $1.1M gift to Okla. State University to
help grow next generation of wheat seeds

BYLINE: Brian Brus

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 393  words


Oklahoma State University's wheat genetics improvement program received a $1.1
million gift this week from the nonprofit Oklahoma Wheat Research Foundation.

Brett Carver, a genetics professor who leads OSU's wheat improvement group, said
he considers the donation - made possible by other industry producers across the
state - an investment in Oklahoma's ag economy. Data suggests that the return on
university research can be as much as eight times the original input, he said.
The state's annual winter wheat harvest in recent years has produced a total
value of about $550 million.

"This sort of research is not always easily fundable through the traditional
competitive grant model," Carver said. "The 10-year process yields a product
that doesn't necessarily answer a specific question - a wheat variety. "

The university is responsible for a large percentage of wheat grown in Oklahoma
and nearby regions. Each year it's typical for a variety with a name such as
Gallagher, Iba or Duster to enter the market from OSU leasing deals through
Oklahoma Genetics Inc. The latest seed variety, Double Stop CL-Plus, was bred
with a trait that provides resistance to a particular herbicide, which means it
is more likely to thrive in fields that are treated for ryegrass.

"There's no doubt that the next variety will come from research funded by this
gift," Carver said.

Oklahoma Wheat Commission Executive Director Mike Schulte said OSU does a great
job of improving local producers' market position. And given recent years of
drought, particularly in the western part of the state, farmers need all the
help they can get, he said. The latest research is focused on heat- and
drought-hardy varieties.

"There's no doubt that producers have a lot to contend with right now," Schulte
said. "Our producers are supporting this program as much as they are able to.
It's great for them to get behind this research and recognize that the varieties
being released are some of the most competitive per yield. "

The donation was announced during a screening of The Great American Wheat
Harvest, a documentary that follows four custom harvester families during a
season. The film was made by Conrad Weaver with the intent of public education.

http://www.journalrecord.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from this
resource.

© 2014 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              832 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Garhwal Post (India)

                            October 1, 2015 Thursday

Support from Centre enhanced, up to State Govt to utilise funds for Food
Processing Industry: Harsimrat Kaur

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: Haridwar


Haridwar, Oct. 1 -- The PHD Chamber, Uttarakhand, organised an interactive
session of the stakeholders in the Food Processing Industry & Agri/Horti based
business with Harsimrat Kaur Badal, Union Minister of Food Processing Industry,
today, at SIIDCUL,Haridwar.One of the key focus areas of the Chamber in
Uttarakhand isAgri/Horti based Business & Food Processing Industry, with
theobjective of taking forward the agenda to promote this sector.In the
inaugural remarks, Regional Director Anil Taneja stated that the chamber was
keen to take initiatives on holisticdevelopment of Uttarakhand keeping in view
the interest of the farmers in terms of enabling remunerative pricing for the
produce and value creation by taking advantage of the progressive initiatives of
the government like 'Make In India & Digital India'.Rajeev Ghai, Co-Chairman,
PHD Chamber, Uttarakhand Chapter, in his welcome remarks raised concerns about
curtailment of central grants to the food processing industry. He stated that,
being a hill state, there was need for increase in the incentives rather than
reducing them.The Director, Horticulture and Food Processing, BS Negi presented
the vision of the State Govern,emt for this sector.Acharya Balkrishan, MD of
Patanjali Food Park, also joined theUnion Minister on the dais. He stated that
success of the food park was all because of the service-oriented strategies
towards the farmers, consumers and economy of the country.

He stated that for the success of this sector, it was important that the
producers be handheld with active participation of industry and Government.Dr
Ranbir Singh, Principal Secretary, Food Processing Industry, Uttarakhand, also
expressed his concerns, stating that the government was in a tight financial
condition in fulfilling the liability for subsidy committed to the industry,
which was in doldrums after curtailment of the horticulture mission grants.
Government was taking new initiatives as per the vision document to be finalised
by October end, which was focused on export promotion and schemes for the MSME
sector.Union Minister Badal stated that MOFPI was very clear abouta focused
approach for the promotion of this sector, which wasa priority in the national
economic development agenda.'We are most concerned about the plight of the
producers and government is committed to putting in all efforts to enable higher
remunerations for the farmers by engaging them in primary food processing and
skill enhancement,' she declared.She appreciated the grand success of the
Patanjali Food Park.She expressed her deep concern that, out of 402 mega food
parks sanctioned, barely two were successful. For Uttarakhand, she stated that
the ministry did give extra support as MOFPI had sanctioned Rs 15 crore for the
state's cold chain, which was Rs 5 cr more than the prescribed limit for the
states. Rs 2000 cr had been set aside for this sector with NABARD for this
sector. She also stated that there was withdrawal of MissionHorticulture grants,
but the same had been included in the total grant to the state from the Centre
and that also with an increased amount from Rs 32 cr to Rs 42 cr. Now it was the
prerogative of the state if it wished to allocate the amount to Horticulture or
elsewhere. She stated that the potential of the state was immense as far this
sector was concerned and the Centre would surly consider more options to support
the state.Others present included Anuradha Prasad, Jt Secretary, Food Processing
Industry, CP Mohan, CGM, NABARD,Uttarakhand, and Sharad Goel, Convener, Agri
Horti Sub Committee, PHD Chamber.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Garhwal Post. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2015 Garhwal Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              833 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              Sunday Business Post

                                October 19, 2014

The last reel nears for film tax break

SECTION: HOME

LENGTH: 520 words


Investors are flocking to the popular Section 481 tax break as it heads towards
the end of its final reel.

According to industry sources, Grant Thornton has the most Section 481 projects
set to close before the end of the year while Mazars is also working on a number
of projects.

However, for other firms, the projects are starting to dry up as the investment
vehicle draws to a close, leaving individual investors cut out of film finance
due to changes in the tax code.

A number of high profile television and film productions - including Penny
Dreadful, Zig and Zag, Vikings, Calvary and Frank - have been beneficiaries of
the wildly successful Section 481 film financing provision, which attracted more
than 4,000 individual investors last year.

More than EUR 150 million is likely to be raised through Section 481 this year
as activity in the film industry will be roughly equal to that of last year,
when more than EUR 160 million was raised.

In overall volume, this year is likely to be the same as previous years,   said
John Gleeson, head of media at Grant Thornton.    I think in terms of what the
number will be, we'll be similar to recent years.

According to Gleeson, who recently moved from Crowe Horwath to take the reins at
Grant Thornton's media division, while the tax code may not benefit Irish
investors it will still prove a lucrative prospect for producers.

What the producers now have in their pocket is a 32 per cent tax credit which
they can use to go around selling Ireland as a location,   said Gleeson.    The
key is television - the onset of the binge watching of box sets, that's
important for Ireland. At 32 per cent, [our tax credit] is one of the highest in
the world. There has been a lot of interest in Ireland becoming a key location
for high end television in the US. But the problem is we may not have the
capacity. We have just two studios - one in Ardmore and one in Ashford - and
they're pretty busy.

However, while Grant Thornton may have a number of projects set to close before
the end of the year, others are finding that film deals are starting to dry up.
Crowe Horwath, an accountancy firm which has been involved in a number of
significant film deals, has told potential investors that the firm has noticed
that the supply of projects has been    reduced compared to previous years   and
that it has no current projects.

Under the previous tax regime, individuals could invest in special production
companies set up for named film or television projects and, up to a limit of EUR
50,000, make investments that they could set against their tax liabilities.
However, last year Section 481 was closed to individual investors as the tax
benefits shifted so that it accrued to the production companies rather than the
individual taxpayers.

From the outset of 2015, a production company can apply for a new tax credit
from the Revenue Commissioners amounting to 32 per cent of qualifying
expenditure (that is, the cost of all of the cast and crew working in Ireland,
as well as the goods and services produced in Ireland), up to a maximum value of
80 per cent of the global budget.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 Post Publications Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              834 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                             May 28, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Meat cutters trade sought

BYLINE: The Leader-Post

SECTION: BUSINESS & AGRICULTURE; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 317  words


Meat cutters in Saskatchewan could soon be able to get their journeyman's
papers.

The Saskatchewan Meat Processors Association (SMPA) is working to develop
curriculum to advance meat cutting as an indentured trade, an effort that was
bolstered Friday with $80,000 from the provincial government.

SMPA president Paul Rogers said the project -- a voluntary program that would
give people the opportunity to get official journeyperson meat-cutting status --
will increase the level of knowledge of meat processors province-wide, establish
a new level of food safety and reinforce consumer confidence.

"This grant will ensure that the success of the project will not be limited due
to lack of funds," said Rogers, who hopes three years of work will pay off this
fall with the completion of the necessary steps to put the program in place.

He said the association has had phone calls from people in other provinces
asking about the process.

The $80,000 grant was part of a $480,000 investment the provincial government
announced for the agri-food industry.

"Working with our partners and producers, we will grow and diversify our
agriculture and food sector," said Agriculture Minister Mark Wartman.

Money is also going to:

- The Saskatchewan Food Industry Development Centre: $200,000 for investing in
new food-processing equipment, such as a new thermal-processing unit and an
automatic labelling unit for its federally inspected pilot plant facility.

- The Saskatchewan Council for Community Development: $100,000 to promote,
educate and train producers about the value of supply chain partnerships.

- The Saskatchewan Food Processors Association: $50,000 to provide support for
food processors to develop the skills to enter the export market, and

- The POS Pilot Plant in Saskatoon (a not-for-profit research and development
processing facility): $50,000 to offset costs associated with serving
Saskatchewan clients.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              835 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Regional Times

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday

WB approves Sindh agricultural growth project

SECTION: Vol. VIII No. 548

LENGTH: 346  words


The World Banks Board of Executive Directors has approved the Sindh Agricultural
Growth Project in the amount of US$ 76.4 million. The project aims to improve
the productivity and market access of small and medium producers in important
commodity value chains. The project would benefit approximately 112,000 farmers
covering over 66,000 hectares. The project intends to achieve this objective by
investing in knowledge and technology for producers and sub-sectors of crops and
livestock, and strengthening public sector institutions to enhance the enabling
environment for sustained sectoral growth.

The project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive growth
by prioritizing support to small and medium sized producers who are trying to
compete in horticulture markets, said Rachid Benmessaoud, World Bank Country
Director for Pakistan. Investing in horticulture offers the best potential for
increased small producer incomes, new employment opportunities in production and
processing, improved resource productivity, and enhanced micronutrient
availability in the market.

The project focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small
farmer focus, have significant involvement of women in production and
processing, and, from a national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest
competitive advantage in these pro-poor production value chains. Capacity
building, technical assistance and strategic planning for sector growth will
also be provided through this project. The project will also promote the private
sector participation in the agricultural development and sector growth through
public-private models for agribusiness development and support services.

The Government of Pakistan and Government of Sindh have both highlighted
commercial agriculture and market linkages as priority investments for the
sector. The credit is financed from the International Development Association
(IDA), the World Bank Groups grant and low-interest arm. It will be on standard
IDA terms, with a maturity of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 Regional Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              836 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 4, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

WNET News Program Gains a Foothold but Draws Internal Complaints

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH JENSEN

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1290 words


The creators of WNET.org's four-month-old ''Worldfocus'' see it as a model for
low-cost news programming on public television. But its first-year budget of $8
million is causing dissent at the company, the parent of WNET/Channel 13 and
WLIW/Channel 21 in New York, and is being blamed for deep layoffs at the
stations.

The program, which uses inexpensive digital technology and worldwide
partnerships, has won praise for its international coverage. Recent
''Worldfocus'' broadcasts that included Gaza war coverage, with reports from Al
Jazeera English, one of the program's partners, brought an increase in viewers.

But the nationally distributed program isn't as popular internally. Two weeks
ago the stations laid off 14 percent of their combined staff, or about 80
people, part of an effort to cut WNET.org's $186 million annual budget by 8
percent, about $15 million. Some employees, none of whom would speak publicly
for fear of angering management, blame the spending on ''Worldfocus'' for the
cuts.

Among those laid off were many in WNET's local programming department, including
its director, John DeNatale.  The unit's half-hour ''New York Voices,'' which
had been seen only intermittently in recent months, was officially canceled.

''Worldfocus'' is a major project for Neal Shapiro, a former president of NBC
News who took over as chief executive of WNET.org (formerly known as Educational
Broadcasting Corporation) one year ago and has been moving quickly to revamp the
channels. In an interview Mr. Shapiro said that the layoffs were unrelated to
''Worldfocus.''

''Nobody wants to be laid off, and everybody looks for reasons why,'' he said.
''But the fact is, there are huge financial pressures facing this place.'' He
cited declining revenue from corporate underwriting, individual pledges,
foundation grants and endowment earnings. Many of the cuts were in back-office
functions, he said, adding that the reorganization would make the stations more
efficient.

Local programming isn't going away, he said. Some employees who worked on local
arts coverage have been reassigned to WNET's year-old ''SundayArts'' program.
WNET has also just begun the weekly ''It's the Economy, NY,'' with Andrew Ross
Sorkin of The New York Times as host.

''Worldfocus'' has been a point of internal contention since its premiere in
October. Mr. Shapiro conceived the program after a disagreement with the BBC,
the British broadcaster, over its newscast, which WLIW had distributed
nationally for a decade. When the two sides couldn't reach a new distribution
deal, WNET and WLIW decided to produce ''Worldfocus,'' and the BBC lined up a
new distributor.

Many public stations, but not WLIW or WNET, now carry both programs. The BBC
program remains more widely available and has higher ratings nationally, but
''Worldfocus'' is continuing to add stations, most recently in St. Louis and
Houston.

Mr. Shapiro defended the decision to start a competing program. The two have
different formats, he said, adding that ''it's good for public television to
have a show that belongs to public television.''

In an unusual departure, the seed money for ''Worldfocus'' came from WNET.org's
operating budget. Traditionally, public television stations raise part of the
necessary money for a program before starting production.

Mr. Shapiro said he didn't buy that approach. ''Public television would not be
anywhere if every time we had an idea, we said, 'Gosh it's going to be very hard
to raise money, let's not do it,' '' he said. ''Are we taking a chance?
Absolutely; that's what innovation is about.''

Last week the Peter G. Peterson Foundation provided the program's first outside
financing, a $1 million one-year grant. That led to a $1 million matching grant
from Rosalind P. Walter, a WNET trustee, and two other unnamed people gave a
total of $500,000, bringing the program to a self-sustaining $2.5 million for
its first months, Mr. Shapiro said.

Praising ''Worldfocus'' as a ''very high-quality program,'' David M. Walker, the
president and chief executive of the Peterson foundation, said the organization
believed ''in today's interconnected world that having a greater focus on the
world around us and where we stand in the world overall is very important.''

In exchange for the grant, Mr. Walker said, the foundation expected
''Worldfocus'' to produce reports examining how other countries have dealt with
the challenges facing the United States, like health care and Social Security
reform. ''Worldfocus,'' he said, will have ''total control over the content.''

Even before the grant, ''Worldfocus'' had reported on those topics; a series on
universal health care in Brazil, Singapore and Canada was shown last week.

To report such substantial stories every evening, the program turns to a number
of former network correspondents, including Lynn Sherr, Dave Marash and Mark
Litke, previously  of ABC News, and Edie Magnus, formerly of ''Dateline NBC.''

The show includes interviews by the anchor, Martin Savidge, formerly of CNN and
NBC News, and reports from worldwide news partners, including  A24, from Africa,
and Al Jazeera. Video is sent via Internet, not satellite, to save money, and
the entire show is assembled in a computer so that studio cost is minimal,
producers said.

One partner for the program is GlobalPost, a Boston-based Web site
(globalpost.com) also focused on international news. Its contributors are being
given $250 Flip camcorders to shoot video to send to ''Worldfocus.'' ''It's a
great, very simple idea,'' said Charles Sennott, a founder of GlobalPost.

Some advocates of increased international news coverage have questioned the
program's production values. ''I laud the concept; we've been agitating for more
global coverage for 20 years,'' said Rory O'Connor, the president of the
production company Globalvision. ''But I was taken aback at what seemed to be an
antiquated look and antiquated production values.'' He said the style was
''perilously close to radio on television.''

Marc Rosenwasser, the program's executive producer, said that viewers were more
interested in content than in style. ''I'm not dismissing production values, but
fundamentally our role is to provide information to people,'' he said. In a
YouTube age, he added, some viewers even believe that ''if it's too manicured,
it's not real.''

The audience for ''Worldfocus'' has been growing but remains small. In January
it had about 252,000 nightly viewers on average in the nation's 30 largest
markets, according to WNET.org. The program can also be seen at worldfocus.org.

Locally ''Worldfocus'' will get much more visibility in the spring, when its
studio moves from West 33rd Street to Lincoln Center, where WNET has signed a
15-year lease for a street-side studio at Broadway and West 66th Street. Mr.
Savidge will record his interviews there, and the studio will also be home to
''SundayArts''; a Saturday film program, ''Reel 13''; and the stations' on-air
pledge drives.

The studio's rent of just under $1 million a year is another cost that Mr.
Shapiro's critics have complained about. But Mr. Shapiro has the support of
WNET.org's board chairman, James S. Tisch, the chief executive of Loews
Corporation.

''I think that will be a game changer for 13,'' Mr. Tisch said of the new site
in an interview. ''It will give it presence, it will pair it with Lincoln
Center,and it will free up studio space on 33rd Street that can be used for
other reasons.''

Mr. Shapiro added, ''I think we're going to look back on the new studio and say
it's the best investment we ever made.''

''We face huge financial pressures,'' he said. ''But the way to get out of these
pressures is through innovation.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The newsroom of  ''Worldfocus,'' a program begun in October by
Neal Shapiro of WNET.org, top. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SUZANNE DECHILLO/THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              837 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 Daily Variety

                              May 12, 1992 Tuesday

Millennium SHOCK OF THE OTHER; STRANGE RELATIONS (Sun. (11), 9-11 p.m., PBS)

BYLINE: Van Gordon Sauter

SECTION: REVIEW

LENGTH: 466 words


A presentation of Biniman Prods., Adrian Malone Prods., KCET Los Angeles and the
BBC in association with the Global Television Network, Telefilm Canada and
Rogers Telefund. Executive producer, Adrian Malone. Producers, Michael Grant,
Richard Meech. Writers, Malone, Amanda McConnell. Editor, Michael Fuller,
Michael Todd, Roushell Goldstein; music, Hans Zimmer.

Host: David Maybury-Lewis.

In a startling and vaguely disconcerting manner, the starchy pedantics at PBS
give way here to the production values of "48 Hours" and the editorial
opportunism of dramatic re-creations. This 10-hour, magnificently mounted series
drags pubcasters and academics to the altar of contemporary broadcasting
techniques. It is a stunning ceremony but may foreshadow a stormy marriage.

In one of the most bizarre TV re-creations to date, the first installment
stages--in the name of anthropology, of course--the courtship ritual and
marriage of a young woman from the Wodaabe tribe in Nigeria who sets her sights
on a local entrepreneur with a clutch of cattle.

Not only are the events re-created, but we get the woman's thoughts conveyed to
us in a kind of pidgin-English voiceover. It works, but it is, well, different.

Under the engaging guidance of host David Maybury-Lewis, the series applies this
and conventional techniques to a range of human themes--love, family, sex,
personal identity--by framing them in the context of tribal cultures around the
world. As viewers, we play off our Western customs and beliefs against those of
people in distant and distinctly different communities.

The photography is breathtaking. Maybury-Lewis, a Harvard anthropologist who
describes his discipline as half science, half humanism, provides narration that
can achieve a moving eloquence. And, occasionally, one can establish an
elemental link between the customs of an aboriginal tribe and those embraced in
what we sometimes autocratically term civilization.

In the series' second hour (PBS will broadcast two-hour blocks on five
consecutive Sundays), there is a soaring celebration of love and marriage by
Maybury-Lewis as he stands in a crumbling French castle dating back to the days
of chivalry, when the concept of romantic marriage began to evolve. It is so
eloquent, so moving, so lucid, that you are prepared to commit for all 10 hours.

On the other hand, there is a lot of ethereal mumbo jumbo and not a few Jacques
Cousteau-like "procedural" episodes in which the production crew bickers, for
instance, over whether to take this river or that river.

On the basis of the first two hours, the series seems highly episodic, with no
coherent story line to establish an umbrella concept. But it is all strikingly
attractive, and many of the images and ideas are intellectually provocative.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1992 Daily Variety Ltd.
                               All Rights Reserved


                              838 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    Prince George Citizen (British Columbia)

                            August 13, 2016 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Early details on Site C agriculture fund released

BYLINE: Jonny Wakefield and Matt Preprost, The Citizen

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 534 words


BC Hydro expects to release its full plan on mitigating agricultural losses
caused by the Site C dam in the new year.

Provincial Agriculture Minister Norm Letnick was at the Dawson Creek Fall Fair
Friday to announce details of the "framework " that shaped the plan. Those
include construction management practices, developing individual farm mitigation
plans for producers in the valley who will lose land to flooding, managing
"residual " farmland, and establishing how a $20 million compensation fund will
be administered.

The full plan will be released in January 2017. The entirety of the fund will be
spent in the Peace Region, Peace River North MLA Pat Pimm said in a statement.

"This framework has been shaped by input received during consultation with
agricultural producers ," Letnick said. "I encourage the agricultural
associations and producers to provide their feedback on the framework to ensure
the plan supports the agricultural priorities of the region."

Talks on the fund began in November 2015 and ended in January of this year.

Letnick said the $20 million fund would go toward agricultural improvements
outside the flood zone and be administered by a board that would review grant
proposals.

Projects could include irrigation on parcels currently considered too marginal
for farming, he said.

The impact on farmland has been one of the most contentious issues around Site
C. Opponents of the dam say it will destroy 31,528 acres of prime Class 1-7
farmland along 83 kilometres of the Peace River Valley.

BC Hydro, meanwhile, touts a Joint Review Panel conclusion that the loss of
farmland in the valley is not significant "in the context of B. C. or western
Canadian agricultural production."

The panel determined the annual value of crops produced in the valley is around
$220,000, though it also noted the threat of Site C expropriation has
discouraged agricultural investment in the valley.

"While this may be due in part to the continuing threat of expropriation, the
more important reasons are labour costs and the availability of cheap produce
from elsewhere ," the panel report states. "Only if the future holds a radical
end to current cheap food prices and a breakdown in interregional and
international trade would higher figures become credible. The proposed $20
million agricultural investment fund, to be spent on improvements outside the
inundation zone, is generous by comparison."

The $20 million is separate from money that will be paid to farmers who lose
land to flooding, Letnick said.

"When people say to me 'why are you doing Site C, isn't that having an impact on
farmland ?'And yeah, it is, around 3,000 hectares, but compared to over two
million hectares in the Peace Country that's in the ALR (Agricultural Land
Reserve) and4.6 million province wide ," he said.

He said between 10 and 15 farmers will lose their farms to Site C.

"We understand that, and I feel for them ," he said. "But the greater good is
the low cost of electricity that we can provide not only to the general public
in Vancouver and the Okanagan and everywhere else throughout the province, but
also to farmers, and ranchers and fishers."

The province is accepting feedback on the plan through Sept. 26.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 Prince George Citizen
                              All Rights Reserved


                              839 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                           November 3, 2007 Saturday
                                 First Edition

China drives need for new vision;
THE ECONOMY

BYLINE: Alan Mitchell

SECTION: SMART MONEY; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 681 words


China's Nanjing MG Automobile Corporation soon will export its first MG sports
car to Britain, and car makers - from low-cost high-volume car makers of South
Korea to high-cost low-volume producers of Australia - will feel the shockwave.

The rebirth of the iconic British sports car in low-cost China is a striking
example of the threat posed by Chinese manufacturers to car makers across the
globe.

The Chinese are coming, and the Indians won't be far behind. The best hope for
car makers in other countries is to get out of the way by scrambling up the
value-added chain.

Fortunately, Australia's Treasurer and his Labor opponent seem to have got the
message. In this week's television debate, Peter Costello and Wayne Swan were
asked if Australia could continue to support four car manufacturers.

This is a red hot issue. Tariffs on imported cars are supposed to fall from 10
per cent to 5 per cent in 2010. The car makers have seized on the high
Australian dollar to lobby against any cut in the level of assistance. The
premiers of South Australia and Victoria have have joined in, with South
Australian Premier Mike Rann calling for a tariff freeze.

Neither Costello nor Swan took the bait. "I think the future for Australian
manufacturing will be increasingly in the value-add area, and I think our
automotive manufacturers are increasingly moving that way. . .," Costello said.

"I acknowledge that, with exchange rates the way they are, that is not helping
our manufacturers," he continued. "But I believe with our competitiveness
program, with our research and development grants, with the premium R&D that
we've introduced, there is a future for Australian manufacturing, and I want to
see that happen."

The car companies are one of Australia's most highly assisted manufacturing
industries and Costello, it seems, is in no hurry to surrender to the latest
demands.

Swan, too, resisted the temptation to embrace the car groups' rent-seeking: "At
the end of the day I think it all comes back to the extent to which we can
attend to the very basic foundations of our economy . . . We have got to do
everything we possibly can to lift our productivity. We have got to have
world-class training and education systems if we are going to move up the value
-added chain.

"We have to aim to have world-class modern infrastructure, such as high-speed
national broadband, if we are going to move up the value-added chain."

Everyone is in the same boat: it is not just the car industry, and not just
Australian manufacturers. Manufacturing everywhere is having to painfully adjust
to the Chinese onslaught.

The most successful manufacturer of low-cost cars and electrical goods in recent
decades has been South Korea. But, the International Monetary Fund tells us,
China already has surpassed South Korea in industrial competitiveness (based on
price, quality, production, organisation, and labour skills) in clothing and MP3
players, and is catching up rapidly in telecommunications equipment, digital
TVs, and steel.

South Korean manufacturers are having to scramble up the value-added chain to
get out of the way of the Chinese. Its shipbuilders have shown that it can be
done.

According to the IMF, South Korea has gained a competitive edge in shipbuilding
through its high productivity, strong infrastructure and labour skills, advanced
technology and improved design and construction capacity. Where about half the
new orders at Chinese shipyards in 2007 were for low value-added bulk carriers,
new orders in South Korea were mainly for high-technology LNG carriers, large
tankers and container ships.

South Korea's car producers are starting to follow the shipbuilders' example.
They have been moving up-market in terms of quality and model range over the
past decade. They are now competing less on price and more on their design and
engineering skills. Australia's car makers, like those of the UK, are operating
on a higher plain.

But no plain will remain sacred for long. The answer is not more protection and
subsidies. It is designing and building cars that compete on quality and
performance.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Nanjing MG Automobile Corporation is ready to export cars to
Britain. Photo AFP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2007 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              840 of 998 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                           December 29, 2015 Tuesday
                                 Early Edition

Shoreline Energy in bankruptcy; Announcement wraps up tough year for small oil
and gas producers

BYLINE: Dan Healing, Calgary Herald

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1085 words


Two days before Christmas, Calgary-based Shoreline Energy Corp. announced it had
filed for bankruptcy, a year-end event that was all too consistent with a truly
awful year for junior and small intermediate Canadian oil and gas producers.

The bankruptcy followed granting of Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act court
protection last spring and a year-and-a-half of asset sales and cost cutting to
try to meet debt holders' demands.

"As a result of a failed merger attempt and a default in the company's secured
credit facilities, the company was forced to sell many of its assets in order to
satisfy its secured creditors under forbearance agreements," chief executive Dan
Thompson said in a court affidavit dated April 9 and posted on monitor Grant
Thornton's website.

"The company now finds itself unable to satisfy its unsecured creditors in full
and in the face of declining value oil and gas assets, proposes to restructure
its debt into equity in order to preserve its enterprise value for its
stakeholders."

Throughout 2015, weak commodity prices contributed to layoffs, dividend cuts and
lower activity for all of Calgary's oilpatch players, big and small.

Companies were also buffeted by pipeline outages in northeastern B.C. and
northwestern Alberta and capital markets that became inaccessible for all but a
fortunate few.

But hard times affected small players with their limited resources far more than
big intermediates and majors who were able to hunker down, keep drilling wells
to maintain production and hope for better times.

In a report last month summarizing trends in third-quarter results, TD
Securities analysts noted capital spending and growth rates in the oil and gas
sector had reached POMP - the Point of Maximum Pessimism.

"The junior/intermediate EPs in our coverage group took a collective $5.5
billion in impairments during the quarter, representing five per cent of total
assets and nine per cent of shareholders' equity," it reported.

The writedowns were mainly because of removing assets from the companies' books
that could no longer be profitably developed on assumed commodity prices.

TD added that more than two per cent of production for the 40 companies it
covers - about 36,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day - had been shut in
during the threemonth period. It recorded 11 dividend cuts and one increase
among the 19 dividend-paying companies under coverage since July 1, saving those
companies a projected $1.3 billion in 2016 payouts to investors.

As 2015 went on and commodity prices refused to recover as expected, several
companies lost their battles with debt, including Exall Energy Corp., petitioned
into receivership by ATB Financial in April, and Spyglass Resources Corp., whose
creditors asked that Ernst Young Inc. be appointed receiver in November.

Shoreline Energy's regulatory filings and news releases show its struggles were
similar to those of its failed rivals. A company spokesman was not available for
comment Monday.

It was created in early 2011 from a publicly traded mutual fund and became a
producer a few months later by buying Peace River Arch assets, producing 850
boe/d, 79 per cent dry natural gas, for $28.5 million.

In November 2011, it completed the buyout of three small privately owned
Canadian producers. In early 2012, it proposed, then terminated a $12-million
share issue. In March 2012, it increased its bank line with ATB Financial to $20
million (later $22 million) from $17 million and, in August 2012, closed a
public offering of 9.25 per cent convertible unsecured debentures for $17
million.

Shoreline agreed to spend $12.5 million US for a non-operating interest in a
Colorado oilfield in November 2012, then added to its stake with acquisitions in
December and the following February. Average production for 2013 was 2,000
boe/d, an increase of 24 per cent from 1,600 boe/d in 2012.

In February 2014, Shoreline announced a deal to sell itself to Lilis Energy Inc.
but, on April 1, said the deal was off, blaming a reduced offer from Lilis. A
few weeks later, it announced a strategic review of alternatives; then, that its
primary lender had ordered the acceleration of repayment of $20.6 million of
outstanding bank debt.

Its Toronto Stock Exchange listing was halted and then delisted. The company
sold Canadian royalty interests for $9 million and producing Alberta properties
for $20.8 million (dropping output to 920 boe/d) to fully repay its bank debt,
but reported that the notice from its primary lender had triggered a default on
its unsecured convertible debentures. It sold its Colorado Wattenburg royalty
interests for $7.7 million US.

In September, Shoreline announced a last-ditch "plan of sponsorship and
reorganization"with a private company, Highbridge Energy Inc., which would
result in the merger of the two companies. The deal failed, leading to Shoreline
being assigned to bankruptcy with accounting firm Grant Thornton, previously its
CCAA monitor, appointed its trustee in bankruptcy. Shoreline's remaining assets
could wind up among a long list of oil and gas properties for sale. According to
a TD report released last week, there are 132,000 boe/d of production and 534
million boe of proved plus probable reserves currently listed for sale in
Western Canada.

"... About two-thirds is accounted for by companies currently exploring
strategic alternatives," the report notes. "We expect that these figures are
likely to increase as more assets will come for sale as the downturn continues,
with fewer buyers willing to transact at prices that arguably reflect a
meaningful recovery in prices."

Analysts say the recent deal by private Anegada Energy Corp. of Calgary to sell
itself for 11.7 million shares worth $96 million in Calgary producer Raging
River Exploration Inc. shows that expectations of sellers and buyers are getting
closer, which could lead to more deals being consummated.

Acquirers this year have tended to buy with equity instead of cash, as when
Tourmaline Oil Corp. made a $106-million all-stock deal to buy Calgary junior
Mapan Energy Ltd. and Crescent Point Energy Corp. bought Legacy Oil + Gas Inc.
for $1.5 billion and Coral Hill Energy Ltd. for $258 million.

In a recent report, ATB Financial calculated there were 70 notable oil and gas
transactions worth $10.8 billion in Canada through the first 10 months of 2015,
compared with 151 deals worth $37.5 billion in all of 2014.

dhealing@calgaryherald.com Twitter.com/HealingSlowly !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015
Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2015 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              841 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                            April 25, 1996 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

Cost-cutting orgy leaves manufacturers fuming;
Best practice

BYLINE: Peter Roberts

SECTION: COMPANIES AND MARKETS; Best Practice; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 495 words


Manufacturers are right to be angry at attempts by the new Federal Government to
abolish the tariff concession system as announced by its predecessor during the
election campaign.

Abolition will introduce a new tariff of 5 per cent on the import of raw
materials, components, production equipment and other inputs to industry where
none existed before.

As I said on February 13, this is a perversion of policy that will raise costs
for domestic producers at the same time as further falls in general tariffs make
imports cheaper. The cost of buying the high-technology production equipment our
companies need to compete will also rise 5 per cent.

While the new industry minister, John Moore, admits this is poor policy,
sections of his Government are rubbing salt into industry's wounds by appearing
to defend what is one of the last great rorts of the taxation system - the
diesel fuel rebate scheme.

Introduced in 1982, the scheme exempted primary producers and the mining
industry from diesel excise for a valid reason. The excise was imposed to pay
for increased road and other infrastructure spending, so off-road users of
diesel who would get no benefit were exempted.

There are 126,000 primary producers and miners receiving about 28 cents a litre
rebate on the diesel they use at a cost to excise of $1.26 billion in 1995/96.

However, since 1982 the diesel fuel rebate has become nothing more than another
revenue-raising measure. The Government doesn't even pretend the $3 billion it
raises from other diesel users goes to improving roads.

So let's call a spade a spade - the diesel fuel rebate is a subsidy paid to
rural and mining exporters. And this country should not be in the business of
paying such subsidies. If farmers or miners are not competitive without a
government subsidy then they should improve their own operations or move up the
value-adding scale, just as manufacturing has been forced to do.

Manufacturers are right to hammer home the fact that the abolition of the tariff
concession system imposes a new tax on production. The strongest argument,
perhaps the only argument, for retaining the diesel rebate is that imposing
excise would amount to a tax on production.

But if it is OK to slug manufacturing with a new tax on production, why not the
rural and mining industries?

Other disturbing noises coming from Canberra suggest that other valuable
industry assistance schemes such as the Development Import Finance Facility and
the Export Markets Development Grants scheme are in line to be abolished.

The DIFF scheme is not a subsidy but an essential provision if our exporters are
to stand a chance overseas against competitors armed by their governments with
concessional finance.

And the EMDG scheme has proved itself critical to the success of small and
medium-sized exporting companies.

But such arguments are getting short shrift in Canberra where a mindless orgy of
cost-cutting has replaced any semblance of serious industry policy deliberation.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1996 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              842 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 6, 2015 Tuesday

Washington: Over $700,000 in grants coming to Maine thanks to funding
Congresswoman Chellie Pingree inserted into Farm Bill

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the MP Chellie Pingree has issued the following news
release:



 Seven Maine organizations are receiving over $700,000 in federal investments to
promote the local food economy thanks to funding Congresswoman Chellie Pingree
was able to insert in the Farm Bill that passed Congress in2014.





 "Every dollar we put into the local food economy stays in our community and
generates jobs and income for the people who live here.  Building the farm
economy is good for families who want to put fresh food on the table, good for
farmers who want to grow their businesses and good for the environment by
reducing the pollution that comes from transporting food thousands of miles,"
Pingree said.



 The grants from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) are parts of programs
to support farmers markets, local food producers and helpSNAP (food stamp)
recipients take better advantage of fresh food at farmersmarkets.



 The funding, which was part of Pingree's Local Farms Food and Jobs Act, was
eventually incorporated into the 2014 Farm Bill, which Congress passed and
President Obama signed.



 "Maine is making great progress in growing our local farm economy," Pingree
said.  "The number of farmers markets in the state continues to increase, the
number ofyoung farmers is growing rapidly and organic farming is growing faster
in Maine than in any other state in the country.  We have some great momentum
and we need to keep it going by making these kind of investments."



 Among the grants Pingree announced today are $100,000 to help Cultivating
Community in Portland launch a mobile food market, $250,000 to help make it
easier for SNAP beneficiaries to use farmers markets and $50,000 tohelp finance
upgrades to cold storage equipment for the Gardiner Food Co-op.



 The full list of grants in Maine includes:



     Maine Federation of Farmers Markets received $99,000 to "Increase domestic
consumer consumption of locally sourced foods by developing an educational
campaign to inform the public about the multiple benefits provided by farmers'
markets, and facilitating the annual Maine Farmers' Market Snapshot Week, that
will keep local foods and local farmers in the spotlight. "



     Cultivating Community received $99,614 for "Leveraging a Food Hub and
Launching a Mobile Market to Develop a Value Chain Benefitting Local Producers
and Low-Income Consumers in Maine". This project will increase the scale and
operations of the recipient's food hub while launching a mobile food market.



     Forq LLC received $100,000 for the establishment of the FORQ Food Lab in
Portland, Maine.  This project will launch Maine's first private,
membership-based kitchen incubator. The organization will enroll entrepreneurs
to scale-up home enterprises to full-time operations and find markets for raw,
underutilized food.



     Cumberland County received $25,000 for the Lakes Region Food System
Planning Project. This project will produce a food system plan that will examine
15 existing rural food economies, the present state of local agriculture, and
current initiatives at the local level. The organization will identify the
highest potential opportunities for increasing local food sales.



     Southern Maine Planning and Development Commission received $25,000 for an
Initiative to Explore the Feasibility of a York County Food Hub. This
organization will conduct a feasibility study to determine the need for a
potential food hub and local food marketing plan.



     Blue Sky Produce received $51,630 for a Wild Blueberry Shipping Hub. This
project establishes a shipping hub to provide aggregation, storage, and
distribution services for small and mid-scale wild blueberry growers. Other
regional food producers will also use the hub to store and ship their products.



     Gardiner Food Co-op received $53,955 for "Cooling it: A modernized and
customized refrigeration system as the focal point for increasing sales of local
foods at the Gardiner Food Co-op. " This project will upgrade existing co-op
equipment to new, energy efficient, remote refrigeration units.



     Maine Federation of Farmers' Markets received $249,677 for  "Building a
SNAP Support System for Maine Farmers Markets." The Maine Federation of Farmers'
Markets will use funds to provide training for market managers and farmers on
EBT, provide support and technical assistance for local farmers markets, produce
and utilize SNAP-Farmers Market communication tools, update EBT training manual,
implement a branding campaign in conjunction with FINI, and develop and train
market liaisons.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              843 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                              June 12, 2015 Friday

Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II

LENGTH: 553  words


Project ID : P149553
Total Project Cost : us$ 200.00 million usd
Region : South Asia
Country : Bangladesh


Sectors : Agricultural extension and research, Animal production, Crops,
Information technology
Preliminary Description
NATP-2 will achieve the PDO by: (i) continuing to strengthen the capacity of the
NARS and extension services to generate and disseminate agricultural
technologies aimed at increasing farm productivity; and (ii) promoting the
sustainability of existing and new farmer groups and producer organizations by
strengthening their linkages with markets.

Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture through
technological change requires an efficient and productive national agricultural
technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development and
refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to
be supported by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the
development of supply chains for high value agriculture. To that effect, while
NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research and extension, it will
need to have a much stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value
chains and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market
opportunities, than under NATP-1. A differentiated approach will be required for
project activities at field level to account for the vertical and horizontal
scaling up efforts under NATP-2. The new project will deepen the interventions
in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) while expanding the geographic
coverage to include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up)
Component 1: Enhancing the Agricultural Innovation System This component, led by
the Project Management and Coordination Unit with implementation support from
other agencies, will support the development of decentralized, demand-driven and
integrated agricultural research. This component will likely include
investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in areas launched
under NATP-1 (such as sustainability of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and
emerging Producer Organizations (POs), rehabilitation of rural markets,
technical advisory services), strengthening National Agricultural Research
Institutes (NARI) (including investments in physical infrastructure), developing
one-stop farmer advisory service centers. The component will also include the
window for competitive research and matching grants under the Agricultural
Innovation Fund

Component 2: Supporting crop development This component, coordinated by the
Department of Agricultural Extension, will support the development of
decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for crop production
(including horticulture), post-harvest management and processing, and facilitate
the integration of smallholder farmers in selected crop-based value chains
(bananas, vegetables, and aromatic rice). This componen
Project completion date : 2021-09-30 12:00:00
Major organization : MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE

Address : Bangladesh
http://www.moa.gov .bd/

Country :Bangladesh
Email : secretary @ moa.gov.bd

Financier : World Bank (WB),

Financier address : The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
tel: (202) 473-1000
fax: (202) 477-6391
http://www.worldbank.org /

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2015 Tenders Info
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              844 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

                             March 27, 2015 Friday

The importance of cultural spending

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 300 words


According to a staff presentation given to the current council soon after it was
elected in 2012, city hall spends roughly $70,000 on annual wages and benefits
attached to its cultural affairs office. Yet in this year's budget, city hall
dedicated only $35,000 to the city's arts board, and the most recent allocation
of community grants offered no cash support to any of the deserving arts
organizations that enrich our municipality.

While city hall often spends in a way in which staff needs take precedence over
the needs of citizens, there is an unfortunate consequence to the city's
stinginess on cultural spending - Salty Jam, the city's longstanding waterfront
music festival, has shut its doors partly because of a lack of municipal
support. And important cultural producers such as the Saint John Theatre Company
are warning that the lack of financial support from city hall is effectively
preventing them from accessing cultural funding from other levels of government.

Even as Saint John focuses its spending on roads, water and improved recreation
opportunities, it can't discount the value of strategic cultural investment. The
city that has a rich history in visual art and theatre, and an impressive list
of contemporary cultural producers, and a meagre approach to cultural funding
does little to bring added urban vitality.

While we don't believe city hall should break the bank to fund cultural
initiatives, it doesn't have to - with an annual operating budget that is more
than $150 million in size, improved efficiencies in other areas can free up
small amounts for culture. Such an approach would enhance our urban quality of
life, and focus more of the city's spending on areas in which citizens truly
want to see civic investment. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Telegraph-Journal (New
Brunswick)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 The Telegraph Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              845 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 23, 1998 Thursday Final Edition

Foul-up shows how Canadian TV really works

BYLINE: Andrew Coyne

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. D1 / FRONT

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: TORONTO


Well, lunch is off. To judge by the minute-by-minute news reports, it seems the
whole of what is sometimes ironically called the Canadian television industry is
camped day and night outside the Toronto offices of Telefilm Canada, waiting in
line for funding.

Some have been there since last Thursday.

The picture of some of the country's leading television producers clutching
thermoses of coffee as they wait, like teenagers at a rock concert, for the
bureaucrat's door to open offers a telling glimpse of the industry at work.
Seldom has the willing subservience of culture to the imperatives of state been
quite so nakedly displayed -- even in Canada, where the nauseating is the norm.

Naturally, the folks in the industry are a little upset: the taxpaying public,
long accustomed to industry harangues on the necessity of "telling ourselves our
own stories" and other nationalist cliches, might not be so easily separated
from their money if they ever got a look at how the business really operates.

Officially, the story is about a bureaucratic "snafu." The money comes out of
something called the Canadian Television and Cable Production Fund, a
$200-million annual allotment. In the business, it's known as "Sheila's money,"
after federal Heritage Minister Sheila Copps, which tells you all you really
need to know: not one thin dime of the fund is from the minister's personal
fortune, but as far as the industry is concerned, she might as well be Lorenzo
the Magnificent.

About half the fund is distributed through the Licence Fee Program, of which
half is tithed directly from the cable companies and broadcasters, the remainder
coming out of the minister's departmental budget -- which is to say, from the
taxpayer. The money is doled out on a first-come, first-serve basis, to those
productions that meet the usual complicated criteria of "Canadianness" -- hence
the lineups.

But this year, one group of producers got shut out, and they're not at all happy
about it. Which producers would that be? That would be the ones who had already
received assistance from the other side of the fund, which is administered
directly by Telefilm Canada.

It seems that before they can go back for a second helping at the public trough,
these producers have to show proof that their Telefilm grant has been approved.
And by the time Telefilm got around to mailing out the notices, a number of
hungrier producers had scarfed up all the money.

So the jilted producers have done the Canadian thing, and filled the papers with
sob stories. As it happens, those productions having to make do on only one
grant include some of Canada's most heavily hyped programs -- shows like
Riverdale and Cold Squad, not to mention Wind at My Back. Without the additional
slice of public funds, we are warned, many of these programs might not be back
in the fall. No more Riverdale! Can the country ever survive?

To bolster their case, the singly granted shows are putting it about that they
are the truly "Canadian" productions. For in order to qualify for Telefilm
funding, it's not enough merely to hire the requisite number of Canadians: the
content itself has to be "distinctively Canadian." What does "distinctively
Canadian" mean? If, say, you did a show about a group of television producers
lining up for government grants, that would probably count.

The programs that did get in under the Licence Fee Program wire, on the other
hand, are dismissed as "industrial Canadian" -- shows like Psi Factor and Once a
Thief that may employ a lot of Canadians but are indistinguishable from imported
dreck -- as opposed to the proudly, self-consciously Canadian dreck that
Telefilm funds.

But wait a minute: many of these programs are made by major Canadian production
houses like Atlantis and Alliance -- companies that brag about their
contribution to nation-building every chance they get, to enormous publicly
funded profit. Could it be that we have been conned all these years: that
programs that were justified in the name of nation-building were in fact nothing
more than old-fashioned industrial subsidies?

But is it any more defensible to be enmeshing culture in the promotion of
"distinctively Canadian" themes? I know of no esthetic theory that connects the
worth of a work of art to its nationality. The aim of the program, rather, is
entirely political: to create a national identity, the better to justify the
existence of the Canadian state. That may be an eminently worthy ideal, but it
is poisonous to art. Which may explain the dire results.

In most countries it is held that the arts emerge from that broader fabric of
customs, values and ways of life that make up a culture. Only in Canada is the
reverse held to be true: that with enough public funds, the arts can invent our
culture for us. It doesn't make much sense, whether in cultural or political
terms. But it sure seems to appeal to the artists.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Column

                    Copyright 1998 Metroland Media Group Ltd


                              846 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          December 21, 2016 Wednesday
                                Ontario Edition

COMMODITIES;
U.S. launches probe into Canadian softwood dispute

BYLINE: ROSS MAROWITS, The Canadian Press

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 320 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL


The U.S. government says it is launching investigations to determine whether
softwood lumber imports from Canada were dumped into the country and harmed the
American forestry sector.

The U.S. Commerce Department says it will work with the U.S. International Trade
Commission to examine allegations that wood was dumped at less than its fair
value and that Canadian forestry firms received unfair financial assistance from
governments.

The decision to investigate is in response to petitions filed last month from
the U.S. Lumber Coalition and could result in the imposition of preliminary
duties in the next few months.

The Commerce Department will determine whether dumping took place while the
International Trade Commission will decide if the U.S. industry was materially
injured or threatened.

If the commission determines by Jan. 9 that Canadian softwood harmed the U.S.
lumber sector, it will issue preliminary countervailing duties on Feb. 21 and
preliminary anti-dumping duties on May 4, unless those deadlines are extended.

Canada exported about $4.5billion (U.S.) worth of lumber to the United States
last year, according to the Commerce Department.

The U.S. Lumber Coalition alleges that provincial governments, which own most of
Canada's vast timberlands, provide trees to Canadian producers at rates far
below market value, along with other subsidies.

As a result, the group says Canadian lumber is being sold for less than fair
value in the United States, hurting mills, workers and communities.

Softwood producers in Canada dispute the U.S. Lumber Coalition's allegations.
Montrealbased Resolute Forest Products Inc. said producers in Quebec and Ontario
pay market prices and should have access to free trade with the United States.

The B.C. Lumber Trade Council has said the claims levelled by the U.S. lumber
lobby are based on unsubstantiated arguments that were previously rejected by
independent NAFTA panels.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2016 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              847 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                            October 6, 2016 Thursday
                                 Print Edition

Bandaid from those who delivered cheap milk

BYLINE: Shaughn Morgan

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 533 words


WHILE we should always be grateful for small mercies, the Vic Farmers' Fund milk
deal between supermarket retailer Coles, processor Murray Goulburn and a
"reluctant" peak state farmers' body raises some concerns.

The Vic Farmers' Federation and Coles have signed off on a venture to sell
Farmers' Fund branded milk supplied by MG designed to generate a "guaranteed 40
cents from every two litre bottle" to go to a special fund.

Money raised will be used in Vic for grants to farmers for dairy infrastructure,
education or expert advice "to help build more viable farm businesses".

Coles has kick-started the Farmers' Fund with a lazy $1 million sweetener.

Some in the industry and outside it might be reacting a tad cynically.

Dairy producers in Vic have taken a financial beating from milk processors, with
their co-operative MG front and centre.

Earlier this year, Australia's biggest processor slashed fresh milk prices and
began clawing back money paid to producers from July 1 the previous year. The
average family farm payback is reportedly $120,000.

The company set up a loan assistance scheme that no one wanted. Last month it
announced it was reviewing its response to the economic chaos it had caused in
the past six months - which is a welcome step.

Coles continues to sell its supermarket house brand milk disturbingly cheaply,
at $1 a litre, which continues to put downward pressure on farmgate price
contracts. Therefore, not surprisingly the Farmers' Fund licensee, the VFF, says
its relationship with Coles is not really that close.

Arguably a couple of the parties applying the economic bandaid to help farmers
are those who actually delivered the beating.

Dairy Connect, naturally, supports the concept of the Vic Farmers' Fund milk
program and wishes producers who apply for grants every success.

What the fund fails to address however, are systemic problems crying out to be
fixed, such as:

* the unfair amount being paid for fresh milk at the farmgate

* one-sided milk supply agreements which reduce farmers to the role of serfs in
a 21st century feudal economy

* agreements that demand exclusive supply but fail to deliver price or volume
certainty for producers.

We need a mechanism which ensures the certainty of price and volume. We need the
mechanism to ensure that dairyfarmers can sell their excess milk without being
subject to restrictive and unfair clauses in their milk supply agreements.

Let's have a look at overseas models such as the Dairy UK's Voluntary Code of
Practice. We need to start somewhere and we need unity of purpose and voice.

Perhaps it is time for dairyfarmers to be given a minimum percentage amount of
the retail price paid for their milk - would this not be fair?

Dairy Connect has welcomed deputy Prime Minister and Agriculture Minister
Barnaby Joyce's instruction to the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission to go hard in reviewing relationships all along the dairy value
chain.

Arising from this is the opportunity, with unity of purpose on all sides, to
create an equitable, commercially realistic, whole-of-industry solution.

This may be the way forward to obtain that 'fairness', that 'transparency' and
that 'equity' that we are all talking about.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              848 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                           September 15, 2014 Monday

Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II

LENGTH: 554  words


Project ID : P149553
Project Status : Active
Phase : Planning
Total Project Cost : us$ 200.00 million usd
Region : South Asia
Country : Bangladesh


Sectors : Agricultural extension and research, Animal production, Crops,
Information technology
Preliminary Description
NATP-2 will achieve the PDO by: (i) continuing to strengthen the capacity of the
NARS and extension services to generate and disseminate agricultural
technologies aimed at increasing farm productivity; and (ii) promoting the
sustainability of existing and new farmer groups and producer organizations by
strengthening their linkages with markets.

Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture through
technological change requires an efficient and productive national agricultural
technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development and
refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to
be supported by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the
development of supply chains for high value agriculture. To that effect, while
NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research and extension, it will
need to have a much stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value
chains and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market
opportunities, than under NATP-1. A differentiated approach will be required for
project activities at field level to account for the vertical and horizontal
scaling up efforts under NATP-2. The new project will deepen the interventions
in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) while expanding the geographic
coverage to include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up)
Component 1: Enhancing the Agricultural Innovation System This component, led by
the Project Management and Coordination Unit with implementation support from
other agencies, will support the development of decentralized, demand-driven and
integrated agricultural research. This component will likely include
investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in areas launched
under NATP-1 (such as sustainability of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and
emerging Producer Organizations (POs), rehabilitation of rural markets,
technical advisory services), strengthening National Agricultural Research
Institutes (NARI) (including investments in physical infrastructure), developing
one-stop farmer advisory service centers. The component will also include the
window for competitive research and matching grants under the Agricultural
Innovation Fund

Component 2: Supporting crop development This component, coordinated by the
Department of Agricultural Extension, will support the development of
decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for crop production
(including horticulture), post-harvest management and processing, and facilitate
the integration of smallholder farmers in selected crop-based value chains
(bananas, vegetables, and aromatic rice). This componen
Project completion date : 2016-12-31 12:00:00
Major organization : MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE

Address : Bangladesh
http://www.moa.gov .bd/

Country :Bangladesh
Financier : World Bank (WB)

Financier address : The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
tel: (202) 473-1000
fax: (202) 477-6391
http://www.worldbank.org /

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2014 Tenders Info
                Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.(Syndigate.info)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              849 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Farmers Weekly

                               September 21, 2012

SECTION: LIVESTOCK

LENGTH: 197 words


P2 carcass measurement is an "overly simplistic method" and the industry should
also be using intramuscular fat measurements to assess carcass quality, Grant
Walling of JSR told delegates at this year's JSR conference.

"The methods we use are overly simplistic. Fat depth is a poor indicator of
carcass value and the system desperately needs changing," he said.

Currently, pig producers get paid on the deadweight of their carcasses and P2
measurements are taken to assess back fat.

But Dr Walling said the method was outdated and while other countries had moved
forward with their methods, the UK had "stopped still".

"In Asia they measure meat-eating quality, while in Russia they measure carcass
yield, but the UK has stopped still," he explained.

"Now we are in danger of falling behind and it has to change."

Dr Walling said pigmeat producers should start being rewarded for the value of
their carcasses and said using IMF technology to measure muscle depth would
allow for better classification.

Dr Walling stressed he wasn't proposing using IMF alone as a measurement of meat
quality, but said it would help to improve valuations alongside other
technologies such as P2.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2012 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              850 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                             Edinburgh Evening News

                           December 10, 2013 Tuesday

Karen Koren: In festive mood at Festival Theatre

LENGTH: 286  words


I HAVE been very much enjoying the beginning of the Christmas festivities with a
brace of theatre outings.

First, I attended the press night of Irving Berlin's White Christmas at the
Festival Theatre.  The show is based on the 1954 film White Christmas, starring
Bing Crosby, Danny Kaye, Rosemary Clooney (George's aunt) and Vera Ellen, so the
nostalgia is right up there.

The music, as you might expect, is wonderful and perfect for the seniors among
us, which includes me.

I absolutely loved it. Though the actors are not quite as iconic as Bing, Danny,
Rosemary and Vera, they are still excellent - the two best performers, in my
opinion, being Wendi Peters, who really belted out her songs and 12-year-old
local schoolgirl Erin Mooney, who I could see performing in Tim Minchin's
Matilda!

It is a really great show, with sumptuous costumes and one that will get
families into the Christmas spirit.

The other show, and my favourite, was the King's panto, Peter Pan, with the
brilliant team of Allan Stewart, Andy Gray and Grant Stott. And what a joyous,
happy panto it is too - the best in years, due to the new look, courtesy of
producer Michael Harrison and director Ed Curtis.

Michael is the producer responsible for the musical The Bodyguard and I Dreamed
A Dream, in which Elaine C Smith plays Susan Boyle.

This Peter Pan has an Edinburgh feel to it, with big production values, good
costumes, sets and a really strong cast.

The Peter Pan story, set in Edinburgh's New Town, finds Mr and Mrs Smee (Andy
and Allan) following the children to Neverland.  Grant plays the dastardly, but
warm, villain Captain Hook. There are too many funny lines to mention. There's
also a nice homage to the word Balloon. Don't miss it.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STEN


                       Copyright 2013 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              851 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 29, 2015 Thursday

Minnesota:Add value to your ag business

LENGTH: 373  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Minnesota Department of Agriculture has issued the following news release:

The Minnesota Department of Agriculture (MDA) has another round of funding
available for projects to help farmers, producers and processors add value to
their operations. A total of $1 million in funding has been made available
through the Agricultural Growth, Research and Innovation Program (AGRI),
established by the legislature to advance Minnesota's agricultural and renewable
energy industries.

The MDA will distribute the funds through its AGRI Value Added Grant Program
which aims to increase sales of Minnesota agricultural products by diversifying
markets and by increasing market access and food safety. Specifically, these
grants are intended to:

start, expand or update livestock product processing businesses;
    purchase equipment to start, upgrade, or modernize value added businesses;
    increase on-farm food safety, such as implementation of a food safety plan
    increase farmers' processing and aggregating capacity to sell to schools,
hospitals or others

Applications with a meat processing, farm-to-school (or other institution)
component, or are addressing Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) or similar type
of food safety plan will receive priority, but all value added proposals are
encouraged to apply.

Equipment purchases or physical improvements are eligible for 25 percent of the
total project cost up to a maximum grant award of $150,000. There is a minimum
grant of $1,000. Equipment purchases and facility improvements must accomplish
the goals of the grant and address improved efficiency, expansion,
modernization, or profitability.

This round of applications must be received no later than 4:00 p.m. on March 6,
2015. Grant applications are submitted through our online system. The
application is accessed through a link on the MDA Value Added website:
www.mda.state.mn.us/valueadded.aspx. If you cannot apply using this process, you
may submit an application by e-mail, mail, or by dropping it off at the MDA. An
application must be received by MDA staff by the deadline to be included in this
round of applications.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              852 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 29, 2015 Thursday

Minnesota:Add value to your ag business

LENGTH: 373  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Minnesota Department of Agriculture has issued the following news release:

The Minnesota Department of Agriculture (MDA) has another round of funding
available for projects to help farmers, producers and processors add value to
their operations. A total of $1 million in funding has been made available
through the Agricultural Growth, Research and Innovation Program (AGRI),
established by the legislature to advance Minnesota's agricultural and renewable
energy industries.

The MDA will distribute the funds through its AGRI Value Added Grant Program
which aims to increase sales of Minnesota agricultural products by diversifying
markets and by increasing market access and food safety. Specifically, these
grants are intended to:

start, expand or update livestock product processing businesses;
    purchase equipment to start, upgrade, or modernize value added businesses;
    increase on-farm food safety, such as implementation of a food safety plan
    increase farmers' processing and aggregating capacity to sell to schools,
hospitals or others

Applications with a meat processing, farm-to-school (or other institution)
component, or are addressing Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) or similar type
of food safety plan will receive priority, but all value added proposals are
encouraged to apply.

Equipment purchases or physical improvements are eligible for 25 percent of the
total project cost up to a maximum grant award of $150,000. There is a minimum
grant of $1,000. Equipment purchases and facility improvements must accomplish
the goals of the grant and address improved efficiency, expansion,
modernization, or profitability.

This round of applications must be received no later than 4:00 p.m. on March 6,
2015. Grant applications are submitted through our online system. The
application is accessed through a link on the MDA Value Added website:
www.mda.state.mn.us/valueadded.aspx. If you cannot apply using this process, you
may submit an application by e-mail, mail, or by dropping it off at the MDA. An
application must be received by MDA staff by the deadline to be included in this
round of applications.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              853 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                  Western Mail

                           January 9, 2002, Wednesday

EUROPE OFFERS RICH MARKET FOR PRODUCTION COMPANIES;
 FUNDING: BROADCASTERS FROM DIFFERENT COUNTRIES ENCOURAGED TO COLLABORATE

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 792 words


The EU Media Plus programme has recently given TV and film production companies
in Wales close to half a million pounds to develop new programming.

Gwawr Hughes, head of the Media office, celebrates the best bi-monthly round of
EU media funding that Wales has ever had WALES has a vibrant and innovative
media industry and I'm proud that the European Union has recognised our
strengths by giving Welsh production companies a pounds 500,000 shot in the arm.

The recent announcement that six companies have been awarded grants to develop
and distribute their programmes underpins Media's commitment to Wales.

The latest round of financing, published bi-monthly, is the largest ever for
companies operating in Wales.

Producers here have finally become convinced of the attractions of using EU
money.

Agenda TV of Llanelli has been granted more than a quarter of a million euros
for its major international co-production, Gold - The History of an Obsession.

This will enable it to sell the series to broadcasters other than the three
channels already committed:

S4C International, La Cinquieme of France and RTE in Ireland.

The grant is one of the largest to any European company this year.

I believe strongly that the TV and film industry in Wales needs to realise that
we are now operating in a single European market - we have the right to sell our
products in all member states.

Experience gained by companies working for S4C of producing programming in more
than one language means that we "the Welsh" are highly skilled in the techniques
of programme making that can be transmitted in several languages.

This Welsh modus operandi of producing programming is the norm in continental
Europe, with countries working together to produce content with high production
values.

It is this type of collaboration between broadcasters in different nation states
that the EU seeks to encourage.

In addition to distribution funding given to Agenda, six Welsh companies have
been awarded funds to develop programmes that have trans-national appeal.

Cardiff's Cambrensis will spend its grant on documentary and drama programmes.

Fairwater Films of Cardiff will use its development award on an exciting new
animation project called Man and Puppet.

Opus TV, already a leading producer of international programming, will develop a
raft of new documentary ideas.

B-Dag, a Cardiff multimedia company, will use its funding to develop an exciting
interactive game called Green Fields.

In the field of feature films, Salem Films has been granted a development grant
to seek production funding for a film based on Dylan Thomas's wife, Caitlin.

To enable Welsh production companies to work effectively in the international
market, we at the Media office, based at Sgrin, provide a whole raft of
assistance.

In addition to the grants available to develop and distribute films and
television works, there are also incentives for training courses, film festivals
and cinemas. The Celtic Film Festival was a recent benefactor of funding for its
annual gathering, to be held in Quimper, Brittany later in the year.

Numerous individuals from Wales attend courses run by the programme in different
EU countries to enable them to develop their skills in screenwriting,
production, directing, animation, new media and business management.

We also organise a presence for companies at major media markets and festivals
throughout Europe. These initiatives have enabled many Welsh producers to find
markets outside the UK for their productions.

A number of Media-supported events and training courses have been held in Wales.
This year, Europe's largest animation event, the Cartoon Forum, will be held at
the Y Faenol Estate near Bangor.

If Welsh TV and film companies are to grow they need to realise that the
domestic market is too small. But they can prosper and become world-class
players by selling into Europe.

Gwawr Hughes is the head o the Media Plus programme in Wales which offers
specialist advice on co-production opportunities, European funding and career
development.

What is the Media Plus Programme?

THE European Union's Media Plus office is based at Sgrin, the Media Agency for
Wales.

The Media Programme offers the following funding opportunities to production
companies and media professionals:

Up to 125,000 euros in Development funding for drama, film, documentary,
animation and multimedia works.

Up to 500,000 euros in distribution funding for the same genres as above.

Up to 20,000 euros in funding for film festivals showing European films.

Up to 300,000 euros for media training initiatives.

Up to 300,000 euros for media promotional activities.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: WINDFALL: Gwawr Hughes welcomes EU grants for Wales's film and TV
industry

                    Copyright 2002 Western Mail and Echo Ltd


                              854 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                           February 11, 2016 Thursday

Pro-Poor Value Chain Integration Project

LENGTH: 467  words


Partners : Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources,
national non-governmental organizations, private sector companies and Chambers
of Commerce and Industry
Focus Area: Livelihoods and Early Recovery
Beneficiaries: 10,000 producers and processors with potential outreach and job
creation for 100,000
Project details: Ten years of conflict in Darfur has left 1.4 million internally
displaced reliant on food aid and a generation disempowered. UNDPs work has long
been guided by the conviction that conflict requires investment in improving the
conditions in which people live. In response, UNDPs Darfur Livelihoods Recovery
Programme sets a strong foundation for expanded livelihood and economic recovery
activities in Darfur through the implementation of four projects. One of these
projects is the Pro-Poor Value Chain Integration Project.


The Pro-poor Value Chain Integration Project is implemented in West, North and
South Darfur and aims at creating sustainable livelihoods opportunities for
conflict affected communities, especially women and youth. The project supports
rural communities in brokering and marketing agricultural and livestock
products, specifically honey, groundnuts, livestock (hides and skins) and
hibiscus. It facilitates linkages between lead firms and producer groups through
forward purchase agreements and builds the capacity of local partners, such as
national NGOs, CBOs and Government institutions to be better able to deliver
services along value chains. The project also supports rural communities access
to financial services, vocational training and provides start up grants for
vulnerable women, youth, agro pastoralists, pastoralists, farmers, IDPs and
returnees. Finally, the project supports market monitoring carried out by the
national NGO, the Darfur Development and Reconstruction Agency (DDRA), across
the Darfur region, and by in-depth studies into trade in agricultural
commodities (e.g. cereals, cash crops, livestock), carried out by Tufts
University  Feinstein International Center (Tufts-FIC).
The project targets 45 communities with 10,000 producers and processors. The
project is in line with the Darfur Development Strategy (DDS) and its
Foundational and Short-Term (FaST) priorities, and the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur (DDPD).
Project completion date : 2016-12-31 12:00:00
Major organization : MINISTRY OF FINANCE

Address : Sudan

Country :Sudan
Email : Info@mof.gov.sd

Url : http://www.mof.gov .sd/


Financier : United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),

Financier address : UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
UNDP Sudan Gamaa Avenue,House 7,Block 5
P.O. Box 913
Postal Code 11111
Khartoum - Sudan
(+249) 1 87120000
(+249) 1 83 783 764 (+249) 1 83 773 128
registry.sd@undp.org
/www.sd.undp.org /

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2016 Tenders Info
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              855 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              March 3, 2002 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Save the Farms -- End the Subsidies

BYLINE: Chris Edwards and Tad DeHaven

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B07

LENGTH: 718 words


"This nation has got to eat," President Bush said in a recent speech supporting
the $ 170 billion farm subsidy bill pending before Congress. In the new federal
budget, Bush is quoted as saying that "our farmers and ranchers are the most
efficient producers in the world . . . we're really good at it."

Does the government really need to subsidize such an efficient industry, then?
Do we need farming subsidies in order for Americans to eat?

Evidence from New Zealand indicates that the answer is an emphatic no on both
counts. In 1984 New Zealand's Labor government took the dramatic step of ending
all farm subsidies, which then consisted of 30 separate production payments and
export incentives. This was a truly striking policy action, because New
Zealand's economy is roughly five times more dependent on farming than is the
U.S. economy, measured by either output or employment. Subsidies in New Zealand
accounted for more than 30 percent of the value of production before reform,
somewhat higher than U.S. subsidies today. And New Zealand farming was marred by
the same problems caused by U.S. subsidies, including overproduction,
environmental degradation and inflated land prices.

Subsidy elimination in New Zealand was swift and sure. There was no extended
phaseout of farm payments, as was promised but not delivered under U.S. farm
reforms in 1996. Instead, New Zealand's government simply offered one-time "exit
grants" to those who wanted to leave farming when subsidies ended.

New Zealand's plan was initially met with protest marches on parliament and
organized resistance by farmers. Bolstering opposition was the government's own
prediction that 10 percent of all the country's farms would go out of business.
But the subsidies were ended, and New Zealand farming has never been healthier.

A report last year from the country's main farmers' group, the Federated Farmers
of New Zealand, documents the positive change and growth in that country's
agriculture industry since subsidies ended. While land prices initially fell
after reform, by 1994 they had rebounded, and they remain high today. The mass
of farm bankruptcies some had expected never occurred; just 1 percent of farms
have gone out of business.

Meanwhile, the value of farm output in New Zealand has soared 40 percent in
constant dollar terms since the mid-1980s. Agriculture's share of New Zealand's
economic output has risen slightly, from a pre-reform 14 percent to 17 percent
today. Since subsidies were removed, productivity in the industry has averaged 6
percent growth annually, compared with just 1 percent before reform. Farming in
New Zealand scores well on the export "report card," with producers competing
successfully in world markets against subsidized farm production in much of the
rest of the world.

The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) confirms that
New Zealand has the least subsidized farm sector among the industrial nations,
concluding that its reforms "resulted in a dramatic reduction in market
distortions." The OECD's data show that agriculture subsidies account for just 1
percent of the value of agriculture production in New Zealand and consist mainly
of scientific research funding. By contrast, subsidies represent 22 percent of
the value of U.S. farm production.

Forced to adjust to new economic realities, New Zealand farmers cut costs,
diversified their land use, sought non-farm income opportunities and altered
production as market signals advised -- for example, by reducing sheep numbers
and boosting cattle ranching. Farmers were aided on the cost side as input
prices fell, because suppliers could no longer count on subsidies to inflate
demand.

The striving for greater efficiency also supported environmental protection as
marginal land farmed only to collect subsidies was replaced with native bush,
and overuse of fertilizers ended when fertilizer subsidies were removed.

The Federated Farmers of New Zealand believe their country's experience
"thoroughly debunked the myth that the farming sector cannot prosper without
government subsidies." It is still not too late to revisit the U.S. farm bill
and debunk the myth in this country.

Chris Edwards is director of fiscal policy at the Cato Institute and Tad DeHaven
is a research associate there.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post


                              856 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Queensland Country Life

                           January 22, 2015 Thursday

QUEENSLAND'S primary producers cannot have a prosperous

SECTION: AGFORC; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 495 words


QUEENSLAND'S primary producers cannot have a prosperous long-term future in the
agriculture industry without policy changes to overcome short-term challenges,
such

as financial pressure and recovery from drought.

Myriad factors, both climatic and economic, are placing pressure on the
prosperity of the sector, which could in part be addressed by a proactive
government.

Unfortunately, we have heard very little to date in this campaign addressing
rural issues and concerns.

The fact is, with rising global demand for food and fibre, Australian
agriculture has an almost unprecedented opportunity ahead in the longer term.
However, it will be difficult to realise this without some critical short-term
policy changes.

What is required is a clear pathway towards sustainable profitability.

AgForce has identified a number of priority, short-term changes including:

l Continuation of the Drought Relief Assistance Scheme and expansion of existing
financial assistance to eligible producers, including local government rate
relief, further leasehold land rent relief and the waiving of stamp duty on
insurance.

l Provision of assistance to the next generation of producers entering through
in ter generational transfer of farm enterprises and water rights by providing
stamp duty exemptions and investigation of a first farm buyers grant to cover
state charges.

l Improvement of the business environment through streamlining or reducing
unnecessary regulatory costs and government charges, such as current excessive
vegetation development application fees for high-value and irrigated high-value
agriculture approvals.

l Addressing the rising costs of business, including electricity prices, through
funding of on-farm efficiency studies and ongoing relief from tariff increases.

l Provision of a low-interest loan product, provided by QRAA, to increase the
number of lessees converting to freehold tenure.

l Support providing additional experienced Rural Financial Counselling Service
counsellors in the drought and non-performing-debt affected regions.

l Assistance including facilitation of the delivery of independent, professional
business-viability assessment, followed by ac cess to advanced business skills
development packages for viable businesses, or the provision of expert advocacy
services during debt mediation and exit assistance for non-viable businesses.

l Greater funding of extension services to promote on-farm adoption of
profit-generating innovation.

These are relatively simple yet highly important actions that have potential to
lift the rural sector in Queensland and allow it to capitalise on the growth
opportunities ahead.

We produce the best food and fibre in the world and demand for our high-value
product is growing.

However, we need a simple and strong regulatory foundation upon which to build
and grow our businesses, to promote pros perity across rural and regional
Queensland, and to provide scope for agriculture to further contribute to the
state economy.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              857 of 998 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2016 Directors Deals, All Rights Reserved

                                Directors Deals


                           ISSUER: Victoria Oil & Gas
                             BUYER:  Grant Manheim


                         LAST UPDATE:  August 23, 2016
                            ANNOUNCED: June 6, 2005
                         TRANSACTION DATE: June 6, 2005

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * TRANSACTION SUMMARY * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



Security Description:                Ord
Amount:                              129,630
Price:                               GBP 0.3700
GBP Value:                           47,963
EUR Value:                           71,177
USD Value:                           86,976
Transaction Significance Index:      67
Holding:                             479,630
Holding %:                           0.585
Holding Type:                        Direct Beneficial
Change in Holding:                   37

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * TARGET DETAILS * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


Name:                                Victoria Oil & Gas
Ticker:                              VOG
Sedol:                               BRWR375
ISIN:                                GB00BRWR3752
Sector:                              533 - Oil & Gas Producers

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * BUYER DETAILS * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


Name:                                Grant Manheim
Executive Status:                    Former
Holding:                             479,630
Holding Percentage:                  0.585

Biography:

[01/03/2007] Grant has extensive financial experience in the City of London
gained over 37 years at N M Rothschild and Sons Limited with 25 years as a main
board director.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2016


                              858 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 5, 2015 Thursday

California State Legislature bill updates 03/03/2015; Assembly BillNo. 1321
Introduced by Assembly Member Ting

LENGTH: 1314  words

DATELINE: Sacramento


California State Legislature has issued the following bill updates:

Assembly BillNo. 1321
Introduced by Assembly Member Ting
(Principal coauthor: Assembly Member Bonta)
(Principal coauthor: Senator Wolk)
(Coauthors: Assembly Members Levine and Perea)
February 27, 2015
An act to add Chapter 13 (commencing with Section 49010) to Division 17 of the
Food and Agricultural Code, relating to food and agriculture.
LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGEST

AB 1321, as introduced, Ting. Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program.

Existing law establishes the Office of Farm to Fork within the Department of
Food and Agriculture, and requires the office, to the extent that resources are
available, to work with various entities, including, among others, the
agricultural industry and other organizations involved in promoting food access,
to increase the amount of agricultural products available to underserved
communities and schools in the state. Existing law requires the office to, among
other things, identify urban and rural communities that lack access to healthy
food, and to coordinate with local, state, and federal agencies to promote and
increase awareness of programs that promote greater food access. Existing law
creates the Farm to Fork Account in the Department of Food and Agriculture Fund
that would consist of money made available from federal, state, industry, and
other sources, and would continuously appropriate the money deposited in the
account without regard to fiscal years to carry out the purposes of the Office
of Farm to Fork.

This bill would establish the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program in the
Office of Farm to Fork, and would create the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant
Account in the Farm to Fork Account to collect matching funds received from a
specified federal grant program and funds from other public and private sources
to provide grants under the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program and to
administer the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program. The bill would
require that moneys in the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Account be awarded
in the form of grants to qualified entities, as defined, for consumer incentive
programs, as defined, subject to an appropriation in the annual Budget Act and
in accordance with certain priorities. The bill would require the Office of Farm
to Fork to establish minimum standards, funding schedules, and procedures for
awarding grants, as specified.

Vote: majority. Appropriation: no. Fiscal committee: yes. State-mandated local
program: no.

The people of the State of California do enact as follows:
P2    1
SECTION 1.

Chapter 13 (commencing with Section 49010)
2is added to Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code, to read:

3
4Chapter  13. Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant
5Program
6


7
49010.

This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the
8California Nutrition Incentives Act.
9
49011.

The Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program is
10hereby established in the Office of Farm to Fork for purposes of
11encouraging the purchase and consumption of California fresh
12fruits, nuts, and vegetables by directly linking California fresh
13fruit, nut, and vegetable producers with nutrition benefit clients.
14
49012.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions
15shall apply:

16(a) "Nutrition benefit client" means a person who receives
17services or payments through any of the following:

18(1) California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women,
19Infants, and Children, as described in Section 123280 of the Health
20and Safety Code.

P3    1(2) CalWORKS program, as described in Chapter 2
2(commencing with Section 11200) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the
3Welfare and Institutions Code.

4(3) CalFresh, as described in Section 18900.2 of the Welfare
5and Institutions Code.

6(4) Implementation of the federal WIC Farmers' Market
7Nutrition Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-314).

8(5) The Senior Farmers' Market Nutrition Program, as described
9in Section 3007 of Title 7 of the United States Code.

10(6) Supplemental Security Income or State Supplementary
11Payment, as described in Section 1381 et seq. of Title 42 of the
12United States Code.

13(b) "Qualified entity," for purposes of this article, means either
14of the following:

15(1) A certified farmers' market, as described in Section 47004,
16an association of certified producers, or a nonprofit organization
17representing a collective or association of certified producers that
18is authorized by the United States Department of Agriculture to
19accept federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (Chapter
2051 (commencing with Section 2011) of Title 7 of the United States
21Code) benefits from recipient purchasers at a farmers' market.
22Certified producers shall be certified by the county agricultural
23commissioner pursuant to Section 47020.

24(2) A small business, as defined in Section 14837 of the
25Government Code, that sells California grown fresh fruits, nuts,
26and vegetables and that is authorized to accept nutrition benefits
27from any of the programs listed in paragraphs (1) to (6), inclusive,
28of subdivision (a).

29(c) "Consumer incentive program" means a program
30administered by a qualified entity that doubles the purchasing value
31of a nutrition benefit client's benefits when the benefits are used
32to purchase California fresh fruits, nuts, and vegetables.
33
49013.

The Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Account is
34hereby created in the Farm to Fork Account to collect matching
35funds from the federal Food Insecurity Nutrition Incentives Grant
36Program (7 U.S.C. Sec. 7517), and other public and private sources,
37to provide grants under the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant
38Program and to administer the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant
39Program in accordance with all of the following:

P4    1(a) Subject to the regulations adopted by the National Institute
2of Food and Agriculture in the United States Department of
3Agriculture in accordance with the federal Agricultural Act of
42014 (Public Law 113-79) and an appropriation in the annual
5Budget Act, moneys in the Nutrition Incentive Matching Account
6shall be awarded in the form of grants to qualified entities for
7consumer incentive programs.

8(b) (1) The Office of Farm to Fork shall establish minimum
9standards, funding schedules, and procedures for awarding grants
10in consultation with the United States Department of Agriculture
11and other interested stakeholders, including, but not limited to, the
12State Department of Public Health, State Department of Social
13Services, organizations with expertise in nutrition benefit programs
14or consumer incentive programs, small business owners that may
15qualify as a qualified entity, and certified farmers' market
16operators.

17(2) The department shall not use more than one-third of the
18Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program funds for consumer
19incentive programs with entities described in paragraph (2) of
20subdivision (b) of Section 49012.

21(c) Priority in the awarding of grants by the department to
22qualified entities shall be based on, but not limited to, the
23following:

24(1) The degree of the existence of the following demographic
25conditions and the character of the communities in which sales of
26California grown fresh fruits, nuts, and vegetables are made to the
27public by authorized vendors operating in conjunction with a
28qualified entity:

29(A) The number of people who are eligible for, or receiving,
30nutrition benefit program services.

31(B) The prevalence of diabetes, obesity, and other diet-related
32illnesses.

33(C) The availability of access to fresh fruits, nuts, and
34vegetables.

35(2) Demonstrated efficiency in the administration of a consumer
36incentive program.

37(3) The service of an area of population currently not being
38served by a consumer incentive program.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              859 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Business Day (South Africa)

                          November 27, 2013 Wednesday
                              Business Day Edition

Industrial incentives can 'spur growth'

BYLINE: CAROL PATON

SECTION: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE

LENGTH: 497  words


Industrial incentives can 'spur growth'

Writer at Large

THE Department of Trade and Industry had made the case for an active industrial
policy through the success of its incentive programme, which has & transformed&
several economic sectors, according to director-general Lionel October.

The value of industrial policies has been vigorously contested since 1994
between those in government who believed that incentives & created distortions&
and led to the wastage of state resources and those who argued for the state to
take an active role in economic development.

In an interview on Monday following the release of the department's incentive
report for 2013, Mr October said the effectiveness of policies in four sectors -
automotives, clothing and textiles, film and business process outsourcing - had
proved beyond doubt that incentives to investors could provide growth where none
existed before and arrest decline in others.

The automotive sector, for instance, had attracted R16bn of investment through
incentives.

While critics of industrial policy continue to argue that government incentive
schemes encourage capital intensity and raise the cost of imported cars to the
public by providing tariff protection for car producers who have local
production facilities, Mr October said that the investment came & at a net
benefit& to the state.

& Without incentives we would have had zero investment. Producers would simply
have imported everything. We forced them to relocate production. There is no
point in doing a cost-benefit analysis of the cost to the state. Either you have
investment or you don't,& he said.

Incentives had enabled the film and business process outsourcing sectors to grow
into established centres in SA from almost nothing 15 years ago. Incentives had
also arrested & the massive decline that began in the 1980s in the clothing and
textiles sectors& quot;We have turned that industry around and employment is now
starting to grow in clothing and in footwear. Our message is that it is possible
to turn things around with well-targeted and well-resourced industrial policy.
However, it does not come cheap.& Over the past year, the department disbursed
R7bn in a range of incentive programmes aimed at improving competitiveness,
widening participation and giving support to the services sector.

One of the notable changes over the past year has been the large expansion in
the Black Business Supplier Development Programme, which provides grant funding
for tools, machinery and equipment to black-owned businesses, provides
enterprise support and links entrepreneurs to markets.

The programme has a strong resonance with the department's revamped black
economic empowerment policy, which emphasises the development of new black-owned
suppliers that can feed into the procurement chains of established companies.

While last year the programme disbursed R96m in grants to 306 enterprises, this
year 1,213 companies benefited from grants worth R451m.

patonc@bdfm.co.za

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              860 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  Farm Weekly

                           November 5, 2015 Thursday

Joyce hops to support 'roo exports

SECTION: EARLY GENERAL NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 879 words


KANGAROO meat exports to Asia will be developed after Federal Agriculture and
Water Resources Minister Barnaby Joyce committed $800,00 to improving producers'
market access.

Mr Joyce said the kangaroo meat industry had great potential and people
throughout the world were starting to recognise its benefits as a lean and
healthy source of protein.

"We literally are on the hop meeting the growing demand for 'roo products,'' he
said.

"The government's objective is to advocate for the best possible returns to
producers in the kangaroo industry and indeed, other emerging niche markets.

"More than $800,000 will be made available to promote this delicious, healthy
meat into Asia, through industry-to-industry and government-to-government
advocacy as well as through promotional work."

Mr Joyce announced a further $500,000 will be provided to the NSWFarmers'
Association to develop alternative supply chains for small beef producers and
exporters, including for supply chain mapping, developing partnerships with key
stakeholders and investigating potential new Asian markets.

The grants come under the federal government's $15 million, four-year Package
Assisting Small Exporters (PASE) program, under which a total of $6.6m has
already been committed to small exporters of fish, meat, egg, dairy, grains and
horticulture.

A further $1.3m has been provided in rebates to assist small exporters with
export registration charges.

"A delegation of farmers will visit overseas markets and share what they have
learned to open up new opportunities for red meat producers,'' Mr Joyce said.

"These grants are timely.

"We're giving targeted support on the back of historic trade agreements with
China, Japan and Korea that will mean real returns to the nation's farmers."

Mr Joyce said the kangaroo meet industry operates under stringent animal welfare
standards and is based on sound science and principles of sustainability.

He said drought in many regions of Australia had made the issue of high kangaroo
numbers more dominant.

A group of western Queensland mayors supported the industry, with Quilpie mayor
Stuart Mackenzie calling on all Australians to eat more kangaroo to help
drought-hit farmers.

The RSPCA also recognised the need for better kangaroo management in drought
affected districts.

"In the face of on-going and frankly irrational arguments that continue to be
put forward by extreme green groups and some politicians, Australia's 'roo
industry risks being jeopardised and having its reputation tarnished,'' Mr Joyce
said.

"Claims that kangaroo numbers are perilously low or that harvesting methods are
cruel are simply not borne out by the facts.''

Only four kangaroo species are approved for harvest and 2014 population
estimates of these species within commercial harvest zones were at about 49
million head.

In comprison, the national cattle herd is estimated to be about 27m head.

State wildlife management agencies determine the sustainable annual harvest
levels, which are generally about 15-20 per cent of the population of the four
allowed species, with the 2014 harvest taking just 3.3pc of the estimated
population.

All State governments have strict regulations about who can harvest kangaroos
and where harvesting can take place.

Mr Joyce said kangaroos are harvested humanely under a national code of practice
which was developed in consultation with animal welfare groups.

Compliance with the code is a requirement of wildlife trade management plans for
the commercial use and export of kangaroos.

"Commercial harvest is about sustainable management of kangaroo populations, and
any reduction in numbers will assist farmers and other land managers by reducing
any impact these animals may have on their properties,'' Mr Joyce said.

ABARES estimated the gross value of production of kangaroo meat in 2013-14 at
$36m, with exports totalling about $20.3m in 2014.

These figures don't include the value of other products made from kangaroo hide,
such as leather goods, sporting boots and souvenirs.

Mr Joyce said the government is committed to seeing the industry grow as well as
ensuring kangaroo populations are sustainably managed.

Market access has been negotiated for 62 countries, including most recently to
Peru, and that continues to increase.

"I and other members of the government, such as Queensland LNP senator Barry
O'Sullivan, actively advocate for this ethical and sustainable industry
overseas,'' Mr Joyce said.

"The government's targeted investments and partnerships with industry will help
the kangaroo industry to improve traceability of products, refine production
methods, identify new supply chains, build relationships in key markets and
boost understanding of the markets they wish to supply.''

He said projects totalling more than $1.1m to support these export objectives
had been announced since September.

"My job is to improve the returns our farmers get but to also fight for them
when they come under unfair and ill-informed attack,'' he said.

"Australia's kangaroo industry is one we can all be proud of.

"It is sustainable, humane and ethical and delivers environmental and economic
benefits to our farmers and land managers at a time when we need these benefits
the most.

"It's an industry that deserves a fair go and one that I will continue to fight
for."

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              861 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  Farm Weekly

                           November 5, 2015 Thursday

Joyce hops to support 'roo exports

SECTION: EARLY GENERAL NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 879 words


KANGAROO meat exports to Asia will be developed after Federal Agriculture and
Water Resources Minister Barnaby Joyce committed $800,00 to improving producers'
market access.

Mr Joyce said the kangaroo meat industry had great potential and people
throughout the world were starting to recognise its benefits as a lean and
healthy source of protein.

"We literally are on the hop meeting the growing demand for 'roo products,'' he
said.

"The government's objective is to advocate for the best possible returns to
producers in the kangaroo industry and indeed, other emerging niche markets.

"More than $800,000 will be made available to promote this delicious, healthy
meat into Asia, through industry-to-industry and government-to-government
advocacy as well as through promotional work."

Mr Joyce announced a further $500,000 will be provided to the NSWFarmers'
Association to develop alternative supply chains for small beef producers and
exporters, including for supply chain mapping, developing partnerships with key
stakeholders and investigating potential new Asian markets.

The grants come under the federal government's $15 million, four-year Package
Assisting Small Exporters (PASE) program, under which a total of $6.6m has
already been committed to small exporters of fish, meat, egg, dairy, grains and
horticulture.

A further $1.3m has been provided in rebates to assist small exporters with
export registration charges.

"A delegation of farmers will visit overseas markets and share what they have
learned to open up new opportunities for red meat producers,'' Mr Joyce said.

"These grants are timely.

"We're giving targeted support on the back of historic trade agreements with
China, Japan and Korea that will mean real returns to the nation's farmers."

Mr Joyce said the kangaroo meet industry operates under stringent animal welfare
standards and is based on sound science and principles of sustainability.

He said drought in many regions of Australia had made the issue of high kangaroo
numbers more dominant.

A group of western Queensland mayors supported the industry, with Quilpie mayor
Stuart Mackenzie calling on all Australians to eat more kangaroo to help
drought-hit farmers.

The RSPCA also recognised the need for better kangaroo management in drought
affected districts.

"In the face of on-going and frankly irrational arguments that continue to be
put forward by extreme green groups and some politicians, Australia's 'roo
industry risks being jeopardised and having its reputation tarnished,'' Mr Joyce
said.

"Claims that kangaroo numbers are perilously low or that harvesting methods are
cruel are simply not borne out by the facts.''

Only four kangaroo species are approved for harvest and 2014 population
estimates of these species within commercial harvest zones were at about 49
million head.

In comprison, the national cattle herd is estimated to be about 27m head.

State wildlife management agencies determine the sustainable annual harvest
levels, which are generally about 15-20 per cent of the population of the four
allowed species, with the 2014 harvest taking just 3.3pc of the estimated
population.

All State governments have strict regulations about who can harvest kangaroos
and where harvesting can take place.

Mr Joyce said kangaroos are harvested humanely under a national code of practice
which was developed in consultation with animal welfare groups.

Compliance with the code is a requirement of wildlife trade management plans for
the commercial use and export of kangaroos.

"Commercial harvest is about sustainable management of kangaroo populations, and
any reduction in numbers will assist farmers and other land managers by reducing
any impact these animals may have on their properties,'' Mr Joyce said.

ABARES estimated the gross value of production of kangaroo meat in 2013-14 at
$36m, with exports totalling about $20.3m in 2014.

These figures don't include the value of other products made from kangaroo hide,
such as leather goods, sporting boots and souvenirs.

Mr Joyce said the government is committed to seeing the industry grow as well as
ensuring kangaroo populations are sustainably managed.

Market access has been negotiated for 62 countries, including most recently to
Peru, and that continues to increase.

"I and other members of the government, such as Queensland LNP senator Barry
O'Sullivan, actively advocate for this ethical and sustainable industry
overseas,'' Mr Joyce said.

"The government's targeted investments and partnerships with industry will help
the kangaroo industry to improve traceability of products, refine production
methods, identify new supply chains, build relationships in key markets and
boost understanding of the markets they wish to supply.''

He said projects totalling more than $1.1m to support these export objectives
had been announced since September.

"My job is to improve the returns our farmers get but to also fight for them
when they come under unfair and ill-informed attack,'' he said.

"Australia's kangaroo industry is one we can all be proud of.

"It is sustainable, humane and ethical and delivers environmental and economic
benefits to our farmers and land managers at a time when we need these benefits
the most.

"It's an industry that deserves a fair go and one that I will continue to fight
for."

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              862 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               India Retail News

                      November 1, 2016 Tuesday 6:30 AM EST

Whole Foods Market Opens Nov. 2 in Victoria

LENGTH: 1286  words


Nov. 1 -- Whole Foods Market, the world's leading natural and organic grocer,
will open Wednesday, Nov. 2, in Victoria, British Columbia. The
40,000-square-foot store is located in the Uptown Shopping Centre, at 3587
Blanshard Street, in Saanich. It is the first Whole Foods Market store on
Vancouver Island and is the company's 12th location in Canada.

The store will host a bread-breaking ceremony at 8:30 a.m. Saanich Mayor Richard
Atwell will join Whole Foods Market leaders, local suppliers and community
partners to welcome shoppers. Doors open at 9 a.m.

"For more than a decade, we've been building relationships in the communities we
serve throughout British Columbia, and we're excited to continue this growth on
Vancouver Island," said Angela Lorenzen, president of Whole Foods Market's
Pacific Northwest Region. "We've long believed that Victoria would be a
wonderful home for a new store because of our shared values. Like us, this
community is a champion for strong, local food systems and believes in
environmental stewardship. Our team members, many of whom come from Vancouver
Island, have been working hard to create a store experience that reflects what
island residents tell us they want and need. We look forward to continuing to
build relationships here and serving Greater Victoria."

The new store will provide an unmatched selection of high-quality natural and
organic goods, as well as a wide variety of island-sourced products and
delicious dining options.

Store features:

* Fin & Pearl, an in-store seafood venue with seating at the bar, and ample cafe
seating, offers a place to gather and enjoy fresh, local seafood and local beers
and cider on tap. At opening, the 12 local taps will feature selections from
Hoyne Brewing Co., Driftwood Brewery, Phillips Brewing Company and Tod Creek
Craft Cider. The menu includes favorites such as B.C. oysters on the half shell,
steamed mussels and clams, and tempura-battered fish and chips.

* Top-notch customer service: Out of 154 team members working at the Victoria
store, 141 are from Vancouver Island.

* Whole Foods Market has partnered with Victoria-based Discovery Coffee to run a
full-service coffee bar inside the store. Discovery Coffee uses Island Farms
dairy milk, features seasonal teas from island local tea company, JagaSilk, and
serves an assortment of fresh donuts, made every morning at Yonni's Bakery.

* The Victoria store is also home to Bliss Juice, a juice bar run by the
creators of Cafe Bliss and Be Love restaurant. Bliss Juice offers seasonally
inspired, made-to-order juices, super food smoothies, wheatgrass shots,
live-food lunches, healthy snacks and raw desserts. Bliss Juice products are 100
percent animal-product free, wheat free, gluten free and are made from scratch.

* Local product offerings: On top of the more than 300 B.C. vendors shoppers
already find in all B.C. Whole Foods Market stores, more than 40 products from
new Vancouver Island and Gulf Islands vendors were added as a result of Whole
Foods Market's Local Producer Fair held in March 2016.

* All 365 Everyday Value food products are enrolled in the Non-GMO Project.

During the store's grand opening festivities, Whole Foods Market will present
B.C.-based Terra Breads with a $100,000 Local Producer Loan. To date, Whole
Foods Market has made five loans to B.C.-based, independent food producers, and
has contributed more than $400,000 to the local economy through this program
alone. Past Local Producer Loan Program recipients include Tree Island Gourmet
Yogurt, Le Gateau Bake Shop, Harker's Organics and Lina's Garden.

Shoppers visiting Whole Foods Market's Victoria store can look forward to a
full-service experience:

* An industry-leading seafood team - Whole Foods Market's quality standards for
seafood lead the industry. All wild-caught seafood sold in the store is
certified sustainable by the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC), and is entirely
traceable from the fishery to store. The seafood department takes the hassle out
of prepping seafood, and in-store fishmongers will fillet whole fish, skin and
debone fish, peel and devein shrimp, shuck oysters, and with 48 hours' notice,
smoke fish per customers' requests.Look for "Island Local" products, including
Salt Spring Island mussels and Fanny Bay oysters, in the seafood department. The
store also features a bivalve tank to ensure the highest quality, live
shellfish.

* Quality standards and selection in the meat department - All products in the
full-service meat department come from animals raised without antibiotics or
added growth hormones. Whole Foods Market's animal welfare standards are
industry leading and include the Global Animal Partnership's (GAP) 5-Step Animal
Welfare Rating standards. Whole Foods Market's Victoria store is proud to offer
Canadian beef from Northern British Columbia and local poultry, including
turkeys, sourced from the Fraser Valley. Other British Columbian producers
include McLean Meats and Black Forest Meats.

* Highest quality produce- The Victoria store features locally sourced produce
from growers such as Saanich Organics, Kildara Farms, Longview Farms, and Blue
Root Farm.

* Prepared foods galore - A wide range of grab-and-go meal options, including
burritos and tacos, artisan sandwiches and pizza, are available daily. A
rotating hot bar and a salad bar with plenty of organic vegetables and fresh-cut
fruit makes mealtime decisions quick and convenient. Everything made and sold by
the prepared foods team complies with Whole Foods Market's ingredient standards.

* Specialty department - Shoppers can find the finest local and organic artisan
cheeses and a wide variety of pickles, olives, pates, fresh pastas, dips and
nitrate-free cured meats. The specialty department has a thoughtfully curated
selection of Island Local and B.C. produced products, including Paradise Island
cheese, Little Qulicum cheese, Happy Days goat cheese, Kootenay Alpine cheese,
Salt Spring Island cheese, Edible Gardens balsamic condiments, Natural Pasture
cheese, Farm House Cheese, Golda's Pesto, and Old Country Pasta.

* Bakery department - One of the highlights of the new Victoria store is the
bakery department, featuring products from True Grain, and locally sourced
ingredients such as Anita's Flour, B.C. eggs, and Canadian milk.

* All cage-free eggs - Whole Foods Market sells only eggs that come from
cage-free hens and will carry Island-sourced, free range and organic eggs from
Island Egg.

Giving back to the community is one of Whole Foods Market's core values. For the
past several years, Vancouver Island residents and Whole Foods Market teams have
discussed the community's priorities and where Whole Foods Market resources
might make the greatest impact outside the store. From those conversations,
Whole Foods Market has identified several local nonprofit organizations and is
building long-range partnerships with the groups to support their great work.
One of these partners is The Mustard Seed, a nonprofit devoted to fighting
hunger and supporting food access work in Greater Victoria. On opening day, the
store's team members will present a $2,000 contribution to The Mustard Seed.
Whole Foods Market will continue to collaborate with The Mustard Seed on food
rescue and advocacy work.

In 2016, the Whole Kids Foundation, a Whole Foods Market foundation, awarded
garden grants to four Vancouver Island schools; 17 Vancouver Island K-12 schools
have received garden grants from the foundation since 2012. Whole Kids
Foundation also funded farm-to-school grants at nine Vancouver Island schools in
2016. These grants engage students in gardening, cooking, preserving, purchasing
and serving healthy local foods at school.

Source: Whole Foods Market

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2016 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              863 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          Bush Telegraph (Queensland)

                               February 14, 2017

Grants give farms chance to cash in on latest innovations

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 232  words


LIVESTOCK producer groups seeking to lift productivity and profitability are
invited to apply for funding from the Meat and Livestock Australia Producer
Demonstration Sites program.

The program provides up to $25,000 a year for up to three years, for up to 10
beef projects, five sheep projects and two goat projects able to start in 2017.

MLA Producer Consultation and Adoption general manager Michael Crowley said the
program aimed to shorten the lag between technological innovation and adoption
of practices by producers at a local level.

"The program supports groups of livestock producers to demonstrate and validate
the business value of integrating new management practices, research and
development outputs and associated skills into local farming systems," Mr
Crowley said.

"The key outcome of a PDS is producer adoption of the demonstrated innovation
and management practices, resulting in improved profitability and productivity."

MLA is calling for preliminary applications by March 10 for producer
demonstration sites related to sheep and beef enterprises aligned with relevant
2017/18 regional priorities: whole farm breeder productivity systems; future
feedbase scenarios; profitable and efficient ruminant nutrition.

A webinar has been recorded and is available at the MLA website.

For more information, go to mla.com.au/ extension-training-and-tools/ producer
-demonstration-sites

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WBT


                    Copyright 2017 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              864 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                           Oakes Times (North Dakota)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                 June 20, 2013

A Food Farm and Jobs Bill to Grow Local and Regional Markets

BYLINE: The Oakes Times staff

LENGTH: 425  words


USD A Office of Communications - This week, the U.S. Senate acted in bipartisan
spirit to approve the Agriculture Reform, Food and Jobs Act - a balanced,
comprehensive bill that will drive continued growth in rural America. The House
of Representatives now has another important opportunity to stand with rural
America and pass their version of a bill.

People often call this the Farm Bill - but it's much more than that. This is a
conservation bill.

It's a trade promotion bill. It's an innovation bill. It's a jobs bill.

And it's a bill that will help continue a tremendous increase in markets for
locally-grown foods. This includes creating more farmers markets, building
additional regional food hubs and strengthening farm-to-institution programs.

In recent years, USDA has carried out a very successful Farmers Market Promotion
Program that has increased the number of farmers markets bv 67% since 2008. The
Senate bill expands these efforts through its Farmers Market and Local Food
Promotion Program.

This would continue to help producers sell their product directly to consumers
through farmers markets, but it would also help farmers who are ready to scale
up and sell to local grocery stores or other institutions. Regional food hubs,
which connect farmers to these larger-volume markets, would have a new tool to
expand and grow.

Passage of a Food, Farm and Jobs Bill would help farmers develop new value-added
products for local or regional sale, creating new income opportunities in rural
America. In recent years, the Value-Added Producer Grant Program has already
helped more than 285 projects directly related to local markets for agriculture.

It would continue efforts to provide healthy, locally-grown food in schools -
building on our work to serve 3,200 schools and 2 million students through USDA
Farm-to-School projects across the country.

And it would provide investments in the infrastructure that locally-oriented
producers can use to grow a better crop. This includes support for new cold
storage facilities, hoop houses to extend the growing season, and access to
credit to start or expand an operation.

The Food, Farm and Jobs Bill isn't just needed by America's farmers and ranchers
- it's important for all of us who enjoy fresh, local foods at a farmers market.
It's important to ensure our nation's youngsters have access to healthy, fresh
foods. It's important to help create new economic opportunity in rural America.
These are all good reasons why Congress' must get a Food, Farm and Jobs Bill
passed as swiftly as possible.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Farming

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: OAK

                      Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                           Copyright 2013 Oakes Times


                              865 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The Frontier Star

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday

WB Approves Sindh Agricultural Growth Project

SECTION: Vol. 19 No. 189

LENGTH: 348  words


The World Bank's Board of Executive Directors approved on Monday the Sindh
Agricultural Growth Project in the amount of US$ 76.4 million.

The project aims to improve the productivity and market access of small and
medium producers in important commodity value chains. The project would benefit
approximately 112,000 farmers covering over 66,000 hectares.

The project intends to achieve this objective by investing in knowledge and
technology for producers and sub-sectors of crops and livestock, and
strengthening public sector institutions to enhance the enabling environment for
sustained sectoral growth.

"The project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive
growth by prioritizing support to small and medium sized producers who are
trying to compete in horticulture markets", said Rachid Benmessaoud, World Bank
Country Director for Pakistan.  "Investing in horticulture offers the best
potential for increased small producer incomes, new employment opportunities in
production and processing, improved resource productivity, and enhanced
micronutrient availability in the market."

The project focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small
farmer focus, have significant involvement of women in production and
processing, and, from a national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest
competitive advantage in these pro-poor production value chains.  Capacity
building, technical assistance and strategic planning for sector growth will
also be provided through this project.

The project will also promote the private sector participation in the
agricultural development and sector growth through public-private models for
agribusiness development and support services.  The Government of Pakistan and
Government of Sindh have both highlighted commercial agriculture and market
linkages as priority investments for the sector.

The credit is financed from the International Development Association (IDA), the
World Bank Group's grant and low-interest arm. It will be on standard IDA terms,
with a maturity of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 The Frontier Star
                              All Rights Reserved


                              866 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Messenger

                              July 8, 2014 Tuesday

WB Approves Sindh Agricultural Growth Project

SECTION: Vol. VI No. 188

LENGTH: 348  words


The World Bank's Board of Executive Directors approved on Monday the Sindh
Agricultural Growth Project in the amount of US$ 76.4 million.

The project aims to improve the productivity and market access of small and
medium producers in important commodity value chains. The project would benefit
approximately 112,000 farmers covering over 66,000 hectares.

The project intends to achieve this objective by investing in knowledge and
technology for producers and sub-sectors of crops and livestock, and
strengthening public sector institutions to enhance the enabling environment for
sustained sectoral growth.

The project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive growth
by prioritizing support to small and medium sized producers who are trying to
compete in horticulture markets, said Rachid Benmessaoud, World Bank Country
Director for Pakistan.   Investing in horticulture offers the best potential for
increased small producer incomes, new employment opportunities in production and
processing, improved resource productivity, and enhanced micronutrient
availability in the market.

The project focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small
farmer focus, have significant involvement of women in production and
processing, and, from a national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest
competitive advantage in these pro-poor production value chains.  Capacity
building, technical assistance and strategic planning for sector growth will
also be provided through this project.

The project will also promote the private sector participation in the
agricultural development and sector growth through public-private models for
agribusiness development and support services.  The Government of Pakistan and
Government of Sindh have both highlighted commercial agriculture and market
linkages as priority investments for the sector.

The credit is financed from the International Development Association (IDA), the
World Bank Group's grant and low-interest arm. It will be on standard IDA terms,
with a maturity of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2014 The Messenger
                              All Rights Reserved


                              867 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                             May 22, 2013 Wednesday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

In a flap over the Great Subsidy

BYLINE: MICHAEL BODEY

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1429  words


The costs of bringing a major film to Australia are clear but it is difficult to
measure the benefits

AUSTRALIA is the last major territory in the world to see The Great Gatsby. Yet
it is ostensibly an Australian film, qualifying for the federal government's
producer offset where 40 per cent of qualifying Australian expenditure is paid
for by the government.

The total contribution to the $US190 million ($194m) film by Australian
governments, when combined with state incentives, is reportedly $US80m-plus.

But during the film's global release, its studio, Warner Bros, made clear The
Great Gatsby was an American film.

Its marketing was targeted primarily for the US domestic market, with a Cannes
premiere icing on the cake for its European release last week. So much so,
Warner Bros did not allocate a slot on the red carpet at the film's world
premiere in New York to any Australian media.

The film is based on a seminal American book, stars three international actors
(although they are upstaged by two Australians, Joel Edgerton and Elizabeth
Debicki) and is set in New York, where it was going to be filmed (with key crew
already based there) before a last-minute decision to move production to Sydney.

So the argument there is a ``cultural imperative'' to subsidise this
``Australian film'' seems moot, even if its qualification by having
``significant Australian content'' is seemingly satisfied by its local creative
team, heads of department and new filming location.

So, culture aside, what are the economics of film subsidy? Does an $80m
investment in one film, a subsidy no different to a manufacturing industry, make
economic sense? Economists say yes, even if the cultural imperative can't be
removed from the equation.

``The emotion going on here is the struggling taxpayer, when they see Baz
Luhrmann jetting back from New York, they feel bad about it,'' says Simon
Molloy, managing director of digital industries consultancy Cumulus Insights.
``It's good to be able to diffuse the jealousy and indignation with the
economics, particularly as this (producer offset system) is considered and I see
it as the end of 25 years of policy evolution.

``It's a good piece of policy, well-defined and better than what came before
it.''

With breathless press releases and staged press conferences from federal and
state governments announcing big international films shooting here, the screen
sector is enjoying the kinds of government attention, protection and one-off
handouts that were once the domain of manufacturing industries.

Twentieth Century Fox and Hugh Jackman's X-Men spin-off, Wolverine, received a
direct federal government subsidy of $13m in addition to the 16.5 per cent
location offset it received on its budget. And the Gillard government allocated
an extra $22m to the Walt Disney Company on top of the location offset to lure
the remake of sci-fi adventure 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea to Australia. As
reported previously on these pages, Disney has yet to green-light the film,
which won't come here until next year, if at all.

Both payments were justified as countering our high exchange rate.

Grant Hill, the Australian producer of The Thin Red Line and The Tree of Life,
told The Australian in March such discretionary payments were ``fluky and
flaky'' and ``undermining the stable image that Australia has occupied for a
long time in these areas''.

The process may be wrong but the cultural imperative of such support is not in
dispute, says Molloy. Empirical evidence around the world shows there is a real
and tangible public benefit from having a film industry. People value it:
upcoming research to be released by Screen Australia is expected to reveal we
value our films to a surprising degree.

``But to what extent a particular project generates a benefit is a difficult
question,'' Molloy says.

Part of the issue is determining a film's ``economic output''. You can't value a
film's contribution to the gross domestic product as easily as you may a crate
of bananas or a car. And the economic value of a domestic film or television
project is far different to the value of an international project filming here.
Furthermore, economists seem united on the efficiency of the producer offset
system for local films.

As Macquarie University economics professsor David Throsby observes, the
producer offset subsidises Australian content with strictly codified terms for
Australian inputs and content, with the effect of stimulating the industry,
unlike the previous 10BA tax incentives that merely stimulated local investors.

``Providing incentives to foreign companies to make films here is a little more
problematic because it's harder to follow through and analyse,'' he says.

Rational arguments about international films made in Australia focus on issues
such as building a critical mass of industry and providing jobs, income and
support for a creative base, which is then critical for other elements of an
economy's creativity such as smart manufacturing. ``The thing about the cultural
industries, the argument is not so much about protectionism, it's more about
safeguarding skills and nurturing Australian talent and safeguarding local
narratives, and that's very important,'' Throsby says.

But the key factor, and one on which governments can base tangible forecasting,
is the inward investment of dollars into the system. Attracting international
dollars in the form of film expenditure by international studios has a positive
effect on growth.

``They're not fake jobs (on films),'' says Molloy. ``Employment is employment
and income is income, and the spark that comes in is real dollars coming in from
the US.

``The fact that we have big blobs of money coming in from other countries acts
to sustain the Australian film industry. If that can be secured on fairly
reasonable terms you're pulling in these large chunks of money that have
stimulus benefits.''

But Throsby and others question the ``multipliers'' used by the film and tourism
industries to quantify the value of one imported dollar into many dollars of
subsequent expenditure. Molloy says: ``There's a whole other discussion about
how industries looking for assistance bandy about multiplier effects. One
criticism I have is industries tend to overuse these arguments and tend to use
the higher multipliers.

``To count them as an added benefit may be misleading.''

Throsby argues for a cost-benefit analysis, saying any investment provides
multipliers and film can't necessarily claim its multiplier is more potent than
another industry.

Barry Burgan, head of the business school at the University of Adelaide, says
multipliers have more relevance at the regional level and less relevance
nationally because of controlling factors such as exchange rates.

Throsby says it would be beneficial to have a ``good solid economic analysis''
of a single film that assesses its net economic benefits to Australia in terms
of ongoing income or employment.

``My own sense is I'm not sure the expenditure is efficient,'' Throsby says.

``On Wolverine, for example, I'm not sure it sustains local creative producers
all that much. I wouldn't want to be dogmatic about it but there are questions
to be asked.''

The government's $23m sweetener to the ethereal 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea
preceded a policy announcement that the location offset might be raised if the
Australian dollar remained high. Again, no timeframe or exchange rate measure
was defined by the government. That can hurt in a competitive global market.

Molloy says assistance programs are becoming more popular worldwide. He says
there is a market in film incentives with studios trading off competing nations
for the best deal. Britain's film industry is the latest to propose an
offset-type incentive scheme.

``Most nations now realise there is a cultural imperative but that there is also
a substantial economic benefit getting the money in,'' he says.

Luhrmann told The Wall Street Journal earlier this month: ``I was instrumental
in organising the (tax) rebate in Australia with (a) previous prime minister.''

That he did. He didn't frame the policy -- it was the work of many people across
many months -- but he and other prominent filmmakers helped sell the changes in
a frantic few months in late 2006 and early 2007. Luhrmann said he met John
Howard and said, ``Look, the issue here isn't how to give a rebate to stories
set under gum trees. It's creativity, imagination -- people who drive creativity
by bringing other creators here and making major works, getting Australians to
make their imaginations here, in their home town.''

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              868 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                     Belfast News Letter (Northern Ireland)

                          October 13, 2004, Wednesday

CASH PLEDGE TO HELP PIG FARMERS

BYLINE: BY DAVID MCCOY

SECTION: 1st Edition; NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 498 words


More grants - totalling pounds 256,000 - have been agreed by the British Pig
Executive (BPEX) to improve the supply chain in Great Britain.

It brings the total number of projects so far to 39 and BPEX has committed about
pounds 2 million to the scheme.

Results from some of the earlier projects are starting to come through and are
showing direct benefits for British pig producers.

BPEX marketing manager, Chris Lukehurst, said: "The grant scheme was set up as
part of the BPEX Road to Recovery Strategy which is designed to provide a
sustainable future for the British pig industry.

"The scheme itself aims to encourage activity that improves cooperation up and
down supply chains and we are now supporting a number of exciting projects in
chains of all sizes.

"We will be reporting on the progress and success of these to encourage similar
co-operation from other suppliers, processors and retailers. I am looking
forward to another batch of diverse and interesting projects aimed at improving
our industry from the next round of applications which opens on Monday, December
6, and closes on Saturday, January 22, 2005."

The successful applications were:

* Tastes of Anglia Ltd, Suffolk:

To develop a supplier assurance scheme for regional pork breeders and processors
and create appropriate marketing and point-of-sale material to develop consumer
awareness of local produce.

* UK Country Life, Car Colston, Nottinghamshire: To produce a range of pork
sausages from locally-sourced pork and distribute these through established
customers and to seek new foodservice and retail customers.

* R M Gearing Wholesale Meat, Devon: To establish a base of west country pork
suppliers to enable them to help supply an increasing demand for west country
pork via three established local wholesalers supplying supermarket serve over
counters.

* Bowes of Norfolk: To help Bowes and Brakes set up a supply chain supplying
BQAP pork products into foodservice. The biggest costs claimed are sales and
marketing costs for Brakes to sell the products into foodservice.

* Anglia Quality Meat, Hertfordshire: To set up a gilt only supply chain and
develop a range of bespoke products for a variety of markets. The project will
include the development of a blueprint for producers and a range of products
most suited to the gilt carcase primarily targeted at the sausage and cooked
meat sectors using lower value primals.

* Piperfield Pork Ltd, Northumberland: Piperfield are primary producers of
Middle White pigs and produce a range of sausage, bacon and ham products. They
are also established in the northeast of England and Scotland as producers of
air-dried chorizo products. This project is to help them expand both their range
of Continental sausages and their customer base.

* Penrith Farmers' and Kidd's plc, Cumbria: To create a new supply chain for
branded Lakeland Pork to run beside the already established Lakeland Beef and
Lamb brands.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                   Copyright 2004 Century Newspapers Limited


                              869 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                           October 28, 2015 Wednesday

Montana: MMEC hires Claude Smith to provide food safety and manufacturing
expertise

LENGTH: 292  words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Helena: Montana State University, The State of Montana has issued the
following news release:



 In response to expanding food safety regulations, Montana State
University&rsquo;s Montana Manufacturing Extension Center (MMEC) has partnered
with Montana Department of Agriculture to hire Claude Smith to provide food
safety and manufacturing expertise to agriculture producers, value-added
producers and food manufacturers.





 Smith is a seasoned food safety and manufacturing professional with more than
33 years of hands-on food manufacturing experience, and he has worked for such
companies as Pillsbury, J.R. Simplot and Pasta Montana. Smith has a
bachelor&rsquo;s degree in biology and a minor in chemistry from Jamestown
University. He also worked for the University of North Dakota&rsquo;s Center for
Innovation, where he assisted food manufacturers in business planning,
engineering, project management and feasibility studies.



 &ldquo;We are very excited to leverage funds through the U.S. (Department of
Agriculture)&rsquo;s Specialty Crop Block Grant program to partner with
MSU&rsquo;s MMEC,&rdquo; said Ron de Yong, director of Montana Department of
Agriculture. &ldquo;This partnership will provide a highly needed service to the
growing food manufacturing and value-added agriculture industry of
Montana.&rdquo;



 &ldquo;Complying with the growing food safety regulations is one of the biggest
impediments to the fast-growing food manufacturing industry in Montana,&rdquo;
said Paddy Fleming, director of MMEC. &ldquo;There is nobody better to help lead
them through this than a seasoned professional like Claude Smith.&rdquo;



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              870 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             Barossa & Light Herald

                               September 23, 2014

Call to end the New Zealand wine producer rebate

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 265  words


Tony Pasin, Member for Barker, today called on the Australian Government to
immediately end the New Zealand wine producer rebate facilitated by the Wine
Equalisation Tax.

'Australians are currently providing a $23 million direct subsidy to New
Zealand, which is unfair and unnecessary,' Mr Pasinsaid.

The Wine equalisation tax (WET) is a tax on wine consumed in Australia. It is
paid on the value of the wine and generally applies to the last wholesale sale
(usually between the wholesaler and the retailer) although it may apply in other
circumstances as well.

The WET is levied at 29 per cent on the final wholesale price of wine, with a
full rebate paid on the first $500,000 of sales.

The New Zealand producer rebate is available for wine produced in New Zealand
and exported to Australia.

The producer rebate scheme for New Zealand wine producers started on July 1,
2005 and delivered $23 million to New Zealand producers in 2012/13 alone.

'The time has come to close this loophole and ensure Australian producers,
particularly producers in the Riverland, the Coonawarra and the Barossa, are not
disadvantaged by disingenuous tax rebates to our international competitors,' Mr
Pasin said. 'The wine industry is a foundation industry in my electorate and for
South Australia, and I am determined to ensure they are not being punished by
unfair tax arrangements that give our competitors a leg up.'

'It's the economic equivalent of playing the All Blacks a man down or the Silver
Ferns without a goal attack. We wouldn't cop it on the sporting field and we
shouldn't cop it in the vineyard either.'

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              871 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Bucharest Daily News (Romania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune News Service

                            July 12, 2006 Wednesday

Farmers accept wheat price, ask for diesel oil subsidies

BYLINE: Ciprian Domnisoru, Bucharest Daily News, Romania

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 552 words


Jul. 12--Farmers agreed to a 4,500 ROL per kilogram (12 eurocents) price for the
wheat in the new harvest, 500 lei under the initially set value, Minister of
Agriculture Gheorghe Flutur announced.

"The Ministry believes this value to be optimal, as it allows farmers to obtain
a profit," Flutur said.

According to the minister, the 4,500 ROL price per kilogram was accepted both by
representatives of agricultural producers and processors. The price was agreed
upon during talks in the product council, which reunites representatives of the
Ministry of Agriculture, of farmers, processors, retailers and storage facility
owners. The minister met last week with representatives of farmers and
processors in order to discuss a series of problems revealed to them, but also
measures suggested by the institution, such as licensing silos and marking bread
in order to eliminate tax fiscal in the field.

Initially the Product Council had set 5,000 ROL per kilogram reference price in
spite of opposition from processors, retailers and storage companies. Producers,
interested in a high price, saw the 5,000 lei reference price being accepted as
two representatives of their opponents abstained from voting but the ministry
did not agree to this value. Last week the ministry actually had proposed a
4,000 lei price but farmers rejected the offer. Wheat production in 2005 totaled
seven million tons. However, a third of the quantity cannot be used in bakery.
This year's production is estimated to be about five million tons.

Farmers accepted the price as part of a compromise: the Ministry needs to grant
a diesel oil subsidy of up to 10,000 ROL (28 eurocents) per liter for farming
works this fall. "It is a sort of compromise. Producers agreed to the reference
price preferred by the ministry but asked for diesel oil subsidies," said
president of Aurel Popescu, president of the employers' union in the milling and
bakery industry. According to Popescu, the ministry will give the aid from funds
allocated for subsidizing of activities for which the level of financing
requests was smaller than anticipated.

Agricultural landowners received 7,000 ROL (20 eurocents) this year in financial
aid for each liter of diesel oil used for spring farming works.

Last week farmers rejected the 4,500 ROL price suggested by the ministry and
threatened to launch street protests. Farmers had said that the reference price
was a measure to prevent the bread price from increasing but that such a measure
was useless, as the rise in the price of utilities would anyway make bread more
expensive.

The Ministry of Agriculture provided a 400 billion ROL (112 million euros) level
of expenditure this year in its budget for the purchase of wheat, said Ministry
of Agriculture official Miron Moldovan, quoted by NewsIn. The ministry has
bought this year for the first time wheat from farmers in order to intervene on
the market in case of crisis. Flutur said the ministry intends to buy 200,000
tons but has not set the price yet.

Copyright (c) 2006, Bucharest Daily News, Romania Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060712-RM-0712-Farmers-accept-wheat-price-ask-for-diesel-oil-subsidies

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RM


                 Copyright 2006 Bucharest Daily News (Romania)


                              872 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                            The Press (Christchurch)

                           February 5, 1998, Thursday

Candidates' ideas of value differ

BYLINE: GRANT Alan  RAWSTRON Brent

SECTION: FARMING Pg. 19; FARMING

LENGTH: 1291 words


The Press Farming today profiles Brent Rawstron, of Tai Tapu, and Alan Grant, of
Winchmore, the two candidates for the northern South Island ward of the Meat
Board. Voting papers were sent out this week to the 1987 meat producers enrolled
in the ward. Voting closes on March 4 at 5pm.

Brent Rawstron

Brent Rawstron says the Meat Board is changing and is already doing a better job
for farmers. The Tai Tapu beef farmer, beef exporter, vineyard owner, and
restaurateur is proud of the new-look organisation.

Mr Rawstron has been a Meat Board director for about two years. He says the aim
of the board now is to deliver top service for sheep and beef farmers.

He joined the board when six of the 11 directors had changed in six months, and
the new look board was keen to distance itself from the bureaucracy of the past.

The new board was committed to getting the best profits possible in all sectors
of the meat industry by creating competitive advantages for New Zealand meat, Mr
Rawstron said.

We must focus on the needs and desires of the consumer and then develop the most
profitable production systems to meet those needs'' he said.

The major concerns for the sheep and beef industry are the four P's -- pork,
poultry, pasta, and perception; and possibly the most significant is
perception.''

Mr Rawstron is determined to improve communication with farmers to allow them to
make more informed decisions.

Changing the Producer to be an information transfer magazine, bringing in 0800
telephone lines, starting an Internet website, setting up the Sheep and Beef
foundations, and working over the funding and focus of the Beef Council were all
done to encourage farmers to use research to make better profits from their
land, he said.

Mr Rawstron also has a hands-on approach to spreading the message, making more
than 150 speeches to farmers, bankers, and industry people in the last 18
months.

Based on his experience and convinced that sheep and beef farmers have a
positive future, he has given many farmers hope and confidence in an industry
that has more than its fair share of doom and gloom commentators.

Mr Rawstron supported the idea of a country of origin symbol at the last
election. He believes last October's New Zealand release of the revamped rosette
as the Quality Mark for red meat was a major achievement.

The local launch is seen as a testing ground for its possible use overseas and
in preparation for this the mark has been registered in overseas countries.''

Changing the board to be a business-minded service organisation has been another
achievement, he said. Neil Taylor's appointment as chief executive and the
development of the board's first business plan in 75 years were part of the new
era.

The soon-to-be published annual report would show the board's commitment to
getting its house in order, Mr Rawstron said. It would show full use of the
budgeted funds and strong cuts in running costs in areas such as wages,
vehicles, and property.

We must continue to reduce the costs of servicing the farmers in order to free
up money to be spent in areas such as market promotion and on-farm research and
development,'' said Mr Rawstron.

The size of the board's capital assets, and what that meant about the size of
levies paid by farmers, was a concern. It was to be talked about at next month's
annual meeting. The board might use some reserves on one-off projects such as a
national animal identification system, or the levy could be cut by half or a
third. Mr Rawstron said such a levy cut would reduce the board's reserves to a
more appropriate level within six to seven years.

The business plan would give farmers a starting point for discussion and he
wanted their opinions.

I understand that along with the business plan, there have been a couple of
remits to the AGM on the topic of levies and I hope that this sparks a lively
debate.''

Alan Grant

Cut all but the most-needed commercial ties with the meat industry and match
that with a big drop in the levy. That is the medicine candidate Alan Grant, of
Mid-Canterbury, prescribes for the Meat Board.

In the last two years, the board had made a $ 10 million surplus.  The board
hasn't been able to spend its budgeted money as meat companies are not taking up
joint-venture promotion activities.

Companies have changed their focus and the board's been left behind,'' he said.

By getting out of this role and sticking to its core functions, it could make a
big cut in its producer levy.

Mr Grant wanted the board out of any commercial or semi-commercial situation
where that involvement was slowing down the rate at which meat companies were
taking up responsibility for the work themselves.

His main targets were market development and promotion, which took 40 per cent
of the board's income.

He wanted the board to stop funding joint-venture promotion campaigns and force
meat companies to adjust to the post-commodity era.

Meat companies are making the move from commodity to specialist marketing and
want to forge close relationships with specialist customers without a third
party being involved,'' he said.

Subsidies blurred the competitive advantage between companies, he said.  For
example, if a meat company wanted to spend resources with a United Kingdom
supermarket to develop a special house brand, it would not want the money it had
refused going to a competitor in the same market.''

Mr Grant said he had no objection to joint-venture funding if, for instance, a
company such as PPCS or Alliance was trying to set up or expand Middle East
markets to take the increased numbers of lightweight lambs available this year
because of the drought.

Everyone in the industry benefits from taking those lambs from other markets.
It's a judgement directors have to make.''

The board's close management of market access issues, the Quality Mark domestic
red meat campaign, and the monitor farm technology-transfer programmes were all
doing good for producers.

These and other core functions should be continued.  I'm in agreement with a lot
of work that the board does and people who say it should disappear are only
fooling themselves.'' However, he said there was a strong belief amongst many
farmers and Government ministers that the board was past its use-by date.

Doubt amongst farmers about whether they were getting a full return on money
spent was highlighted by a continuing lift in board reserves -- up $ 12m over
the last two years and likely to exceed $ 140m by the end of the year.  There's
a challenge for the board to regain confidence and prove it has a vital role
within the meat industry.''

Alan and Alison Grant run a sheep, beef, and mixed cropping farm at Winchmore.
They also own an adjacent dairy unit which is managed by a sharemilker.

As deputy chairman of the Meat Industry Research Institute of New Zealand, Mr
Grant was a driving force in developing a research strategic plan which set
priorities for industry research.

As a former Meat Board deputy chairman, Mr Grant led final negotiations for the
removal of restrictions on chilled lamb access to the European Union, a move
which lifted over-all returns for lamb.

He is also the only farmer, and South Island director on Anzco Foods -- a meat
export company which owns Five Star Beef -- and of the Mid-Canterbury company,
Canterbury Meat Packers.

In 1988 Mr Grant won a Nuffield scholarship and has recently won a Churchill
fellowship. Both related to meat market access issues.

--------------------

CAPTION:

Beef farmer and restaurateur Brent Rawstron looks forward to a

more confident industry.

Alan Grant wants the board slimmer and the producer levy cut.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1998 Fairfax New Zealand


                              873 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        The Balochistan Times (AsiaNet)

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday

WB approves Sindh Agricultural Growth Project

SECTION: Vol. XXXVIII No. 189

LENGTH: 361  words


The World Bank's (WB) Board of Executive Directors approved the Sindh
Agricultural Growth Project in the amount of US$ 76.4 million.

The project aims to improve the productivity and market access of small and
medium producers in important commodity value chains, said WB press statement
issued here on Tuesday adding the project would benefit approximately 112,000
farmers covering over 66,000 hectares.

The project intends to achieve this objective by investing in knowledge and
technology for producers and sub-sectors of crops and livestock, and
strengthening public sector institutions to enhance the enabling environment for
sustained sectoral growth.

"The project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive
growth by prioritizing support to small and medium sized producers who are
trying to compete in horticulture markets", said Rachid Benmessaoud, World Bank
Country Director for Pakistan.

"Investing in horticulture offers the best potential for increased small
producer incomes, new employment opportunities in production and processing,
improved resource productivity, and enhanced micronutrient availability in the
market," Benmessaoud added.

The project focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small
farmer focus, have significant involvement of women in production and
processing, and, from a national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest
competitive advantage in these pro-poor production value chains.

Capacity building, technical assistance and strategic planning for sector growth
will also be provided through this project.

The project will also promote the private sector participation in the
agricultural development and sector growth through public-private models for
agribusiness development and support services.

The federal government and Sindh government have both highlighted commercial
agriculture and market linkages as priority investments for the sector.

The credit is financed from the International Development Association (IDA), the
World Bank Group's grant and low-interest arm. It will be on standard IDA terms,
with a maturity of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years, the statement
added.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 The Balochistan Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              874 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Ruidoso News (New Mexico)

                           September 16, 2008 Tuesday

NMSU helps New Mexico beef industry develop strategic plan

SECTION: LINCOLN COUNTY

LENGTH: 548 words


Leaders in the New Mexico beef industry are asking their fellow cattlemen,
"What's your vision for the future?" during meetings held across the state.
Outreach meetings are scheduled for Wednesday, Sept. 24, in Ft. Sumner, Friday,
Sept. 26, in Sky City, and Wednesday, Oct. 1, in Silver City.

"We are trying to get a sense of what is needed," said Steve Warshawer, a member
of the New Mexico Beef Industry Strategic Planning Initiative task force. "We
want to develop an industrywide, strategic approach for improving the
opportunities of the New Mexico beef industry."

New Mexico State University's College of Agriculture and Home Economics'
Agriculture Economics and Agricultural Business Department conducted a study,
and Terry Crawford, department head, and Jerry Hawkes, assistant professor, are
reporting the findings during the outreach meetings.

"We took a look to see where the beef industry is financially and economically
in regard to the numbers of usable land, mother cows, yearlings - all of the
industrial demographics of today," Hawkes said, prior to the Sept. 3 outreach
meeting in Santa Fe.

The study investigated the feasibility of an in-state feed lot/packaging
facility, a grass-fed program and a New Mexico-grown branding program.

The option with the most potential "seems to be a cooperative-branding program,
which would market New Mexico beef based on characteristics such as being
locally grown and fresh, as well as consumers' willingness to support local
producers," Hawkes said

The branding program would require independent cattle growers to form an
alliance. Under the program, yearlings would be sent to feed lots and on to
processing while the producers maintain ownership. The meat would be packaged
under the New Mexico-grown brand name and then returned to retailers in New
Mexico and the Southwest.

Currently, New Mexico produces 100,000 to 150,000 calves annually. The NMSU
study showed that the feasibility of a slaughter facility was unlikely because
of a lack of sufficient slaughter animals in the state.

"A grass-fed program is feasible for a small-scale, niche-marketing concept. But
is not practical at this point to move the entire commercial industry to a
grass-feed situation," Hawkes said. "We don't have the forage."

Findings from a grass-fed study as a value chain in north central New Mexico and
the San Luis Valley, found that this method would be feasible for small-scale,
direct marketing producers who don't want to expand beyond 10 to 20 animals,
Warshawer said.

They could participate as a supplier to existing value chains, such as Country
Natural Beef," Warshawer said. Or, the producer would have to find a buyer
serving the local/regional market to buy the whole carcass and work with a group
of producers to develop it as a New Mexico value chain, he said.

Locations of the 9 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. meetings will be:


     ·    Sept. 24: Ft. Sumner at the DeBaca County Extension office, 514 Avenue
          C.



     ·    Sept. 26: Sky City at the Sky City Casino.



     ·    Oct. 1: Silver City at the Grant County Exten-sion office, 2610 North
          Silver St.


Following the outreach meetings, a strategic planning summit will be held Nov.
18 and 19 in Albuquerque.

For further information, contact the New Mexico Cattle Growers at 505-247-0584
or the New Mexico Beef Council at 505-841-9407.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2008 Ruidoso News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              875 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                            March 26, 2015 Thursday

On-farm slaughter hits red-tape hurdle

BYLINE: MATT CAWOOD

SECTION: STUD STOCK; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 536 words


IF it's complicated to get your livestock to an abattoir, how about have the
abattoir come to you?

That's the principle behind mobile slaughter units, a concept much discussed in
Australia but actually in use in the United States.

WA Pilbara grazier Annabelle Coppin went to study MSUs in the US in 2009,
seeking a solution to the 2000 kilometres between her family's cattle station
and the nearest abattoir, at Gin Gin, near Perth.

Ms Coppin whose family's station musters about 10,000 cattle each year received
a George Alexander Foundation scholarship and comprehensively wrote-up her
experiences in a International Specialised Skills Institute report.

Six years later Ms Coppin still thinks MSUs can play a role in the Australian
beef industry and still thinks that red tape is the main hurdle to their
development.

"If I wanted to develop a mobile slaughter unit, I'd have to employ someone for
12 months just to deal with the regulations," she said.

On principle though, Ms Coppin found that MSUs could fill-in some of the cracks
that many Australian livestock producers grapple with at the processing stage.

The MSUs she studied were housed in insulated trailers hauled by a prime mover.

Sometimes two units, a slaughter unit and a chilling unit, operated in tandem.

On average, the MSUs she saw could put through 10 cattle in an eight-hour day
with two people.

A related concept, modular slaughter units, sacrificed mobility for throughput
by housing the slaughtering facilities in containers that are only moved
seasonally.

MOSUs have a daily throughput of about 50 head of cattle.

Limited economies of scale mean that MSUs MOSUs cannot financially succeed
merely as alternative slaughterhouses, Ms Coppin said.

They have to be part of a vertically-integrated program that generates extra
value from the meat.

On Lopez Island, near Seattle in Washington State, the Island Grown Farmers'
Cooperative multi-species MSU services an area where land values have soared
because of proximity to urban centres, but there is strong demand for
paddock-to-plate grassfed meat.

Island Grown Farmers' Cooperative MSUs also operate at Arlington, and have a
cut-and-wrap processing centre at Bow.

The Co-op uses several MSUs made by Bruce Dunlop of Lopez Island Farm since the
early 2000s.

The 11-etre base unit advertised on his website has daily throughput capacity of
eight cattle, 24 pigs or 40 sheep a day, with two butchers on board.

The on-board freezer holds about 3600 kilograms of carcases. It costs
US$210,000, without the prime mover.

Ms Coppin found that few of the MSUs she studied had been funded from the
ground-up by private enterprise, with the exception of Thundering Hooves.

Most had been floated with substantial contributions from state governments, or
other grant money.

The Puget Sound Meat Producers Cooperative, also in Washington State, bought its
13.7m unit in 2009 with $230,000 in government grants, plus another $100,000
from the co-op for equipment. The unit can process 30 sheep, 20 pigs or 10
cattle in an eight-hour day.

Processing is provided to co-op members at a not-for-profit rate, which in 2009
was $100 a head for cattle, and $50 for pigs and sheep.

Transport to a processing facility is included in the fee.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              876 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                            March 26, 2015 Thursday

On-farm slaughter hits red-tape hurdle

BYLINE: MATT CAWOOD

SECTION: STUD STOCK; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 536 words


IF it's complicated to get your livestock to an abattoir, how about have the
abattoir come to you?

That's the principle behind mobile slaughter units, a concept much discussed in
Australia but actually in use in the United States.

WA Pilbara grazier Annabelle Coppin went to study MSUs in the US in 2009,
seeking a solution to the 2000 kilometres between her family's cattle station
and the nearest abattoir, at Gin Gin, near Perth.

Ms Coppin whose family's station musters about 10,000 cattle each year received
a George Alexander Foundation scholarship and comprehensively wrote-up her
experiences in a International Specialised Skills Institute report.

Six years later Ms Coppin still thinks MSUs can play a role in the Australian
beef industry and still thinks that red tape is the main hurdle to their
development.

"If I wanted to develop a mobile slaughter unit, I'd have to employ someone for
12 months just to deal with the regulations," she said.

On principle though, Ms Coppin found that MSUs could fill-in some of the cracks
that many Australian livestock producers grapple with at the processing stage.

The MSUs she studied were housed in insulated trailers hauled by a prime mover.

Sometimes two units, a slaughter unit and a chilling unit, operated in tandem.

On average, the MSUs she saw could put through 10 cattle in an eight-hour day
with two people.

A related concept, modular slaughter units, sacrificed mobility for throughput
by housing the slaughtering facilities in containers that are only moved
seasonally.

MOSUs have a daily throughput of about 50 head of cattle.

Limited economies of scale mean that MSUs MOSUs cannot financially succeed
merely as alternative slaughterhouses, Ms Coppin said.

They have to be part of a vertically-integrated program that generates extra
value from the meat.

On Lopez Island, near Seattle in Washington State, the Island Grown Farmers'
Cooperative multi-species MSU services an area where land values have soared
because of proximity to urban centres, but there is strong demand for
paddock-to-plate grassfed meat.

Island Grown Farmers' Cooperative MSUs also operate at Arlington, and have a
cut-and-wrap processing centre at Bow.

The Co-op uses several MSUs made by Bruce Dunlop of Lopez Island Farm since the
early 2000s.

The 11-etre base unit advertised on his website has daily throughput capacity of
eight cattle, 24 pigs or 40 sheep a day, with two butchers on board.

The on-board freezer holds about 3600 kilograms of carcases. It costs
US$210,000, without the prime mover.

Ms Coppin found that few of the MSUs she studied had been funded from the
ground-up by private enterprise, with the exception of Thundering Hooves.

Most had been floated with substantial contributions from state governments, or
other grant money.

The Puget Sound Meat Producers Cooperative, also in Washington State, bought its
13.7m unit in 2009 with $230,000 in government grants, plus another $100,000
from the co-op for equipment. The unit can process 30 sheep, 20 pigs or 10
cattle in an eight-hour day.

Processing is provided to co-op members at a not-for-profit rate, which in 2009
was $100 a head for cattle, and $50 for pigs and sheep.

Transport to a processing facility is included in the fee.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              877 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                            March 26, 2015 Thursday

On-farm slaughter hits red-tape hurdle

BYLINE: MATT CAWOOD

SECTION: STUD STOCK; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 536 words


IF it's complicated to get your livestock to an abattoir, how about have the
abattoir come to you?

That's the principle behind mobile slaughter units, a concept much discussed in
Australia but actually in use in the United States.

WA Pilbara grazier Annabelle Coppin went to study MSUs in the US in 2009,
seeking a solution to the 2000 kilometres between her family's cattle station
and the nearest abattoir, at Gin Gin, near Perth.

Ms Coppin whose family's station musters about 10,000 cattle each year received
a George Alexander Foundation scholarship and comprehensively wrote-up her
experiences in a International Specialised Skills Institute report.

Six years later Ms Coppin still thinks MSUs can play a role in the Australian
beef industry and still thinks that red tape is the main hurdle to their
development.

"If I wanted to develop a mobile slaughter unit, I'd have to employ someone for
12 months just to deal with the regulations," she said.

On principle though, Ms Coppin found that MSUs could fill-in some of the cracks
that many Australian livestock producers grapple with at the processing stage.

The MSUs she studied were housed in insulated trailers hauled by a prime mover.

Sometimes two units, a slaughter unit and a chilling unit, operated in tandem.

On average, the MSUs she saw could put through 10 cattle in an eight-hour day
with two people.

A related concept, modular slaughter units, sacrificed mobility for throughput
by housing the slaughtering facilities in containers that are only moved
seasonally.

MOSUs have a daily throughput of about 50 head of cattle.

Limited economies of scale mean that MSUs MOSUs cannot financially succeed
merely as alternative slaughterhouses, Ms Coppin said.

They have to be part of a vertically-integrated program that generates extra
value from the meat.

On Lopez Island, near Seattle in Washington State, the Island Grown Farmers'
Cooperative multi-species MSU services an area where land values have soared
because of proximity to urban centres, but there is strong demand for
paddock-to-plate grassfed meat.

Island Grown Farmers' Cooperative MSUs also operate at Arlington, and have a
cut-and-wrap processing centre at Bow.

The Co-op uses several MSUs made by Bruce Dunlop of Lopez Island Farm since the
early 2000s.

The 11-etre base unit advertised on his website has daily throughput capacity of
eight cattle, 24 pigs or 40 sheep a day, with two butchers on board.

The on-board freezer holds about 3600 kilograms of carcases. It costs
US$210,000, without the prime mover.

Ms Coppin found that few of the MSUs she studied had been funded from the
ground-up by private enterprise, with the exception of Thundering Hooves.

Most had been floated with substantial contributions from state governments, or
other grant money.

The Puget Sound Meat Producers Cooperative, also in Washington State, bought its
13.7m unit in 2009 with $230,000 in government grants, plus another $100,000
from the co-op for equipment. The unit can process 30 sheep, 20 pigs or 10
cattle in an eight-hour day.

Processing is provided to co-op members at a not-for-profit rate, which in 2009
was $100 a head for cattle, and $50 for pigs and sheep.

Transport to a processing facility is included in the fee.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              878 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                          September 18, 2008 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Scriptwriter fails to convince candidate; Elizabeth Stewart couldn't win over
Conservative Meredith on Bill C-10

BYLINE: Yvonne Zacharias, Vancouver Sun

SECTION: WESTCOAST LIFE; Hollywood North; Pg. D13

LENGTH: 847  words


News from the election trail. The other day, Deborah Meredith, the Conservative
candidate for Vancouver Quadra, was out door-knocking when she happened upon the
home of Elizabeth Stewart, a scriptwriter and a delegate for the Writers Guild
of Canada.

A word of background here. Many people in the film community aren't too happy
with the Tories for a variety of reasons, not least of which is Bill C-10, which
would allow public monies to be withheld from films deemed to be out of sync
with Canadian values. (The inspiration for this controversial legislation is a
delightful Canadian film titled Young People F---ing, which, as you can guess,
contains scenes of nudity.)

Stewart seized on the opportunity to explain some of the issues.

Meredith's reply was: "So you think it's okay to expect taxpayers to pay for
pornography?"

Contacted later for her version of the exchange, Meredith said when she asked
the question, Stewart said No, but added that that wasn't the point.

The problem with Bill C-10, added Stewart, is it delays a ruling on whether a
film qualifies for public funds until after it is made. Meredith had to agree
that that must be changed.

- - -

Finally, Frances Bay, Hollywood's favourite grandma, has her star on Canada's
Walk of Fame. Bay was seated next to local actress Gabrielle Miller at a fête
celebrating the work of the elderly actress, who appeared on shows like Happy
Days.

Bay, who was born in Winnipeg and now lives in Studio City, Calif., is no
stranger to Vancouver.

A jazz lover, she took to Rossini's in the Kits area the way lemmings take to
the sea.

She received the honour after an online petition collected 3,407 signatures.

Letters came in from Henry Winkler, Jerry Seinfeld, David Lynch, Monty Hall and
many others with whom she has worked over the years.

Bay's acceptance speech on stage ended with: "You can take the girl out of
Canada, but you can't take Canada out of the girl."

She wants to thank everyone who signed the petition and made her a star once
again.

- - -

The Whistler Film Festival wants to hear from all you documentary film producers
out there. You have until Oct. 1 to get in your pitch to have the chance to
participate in Pitch Fest West, the signature event at DOC TALK in Whistler.

"DOC TALK provides a unique opportunity for Western Canadian documentary
producers to cultivate relationships with key buyers and distributors, as well
as to develop their craft," says Bill Evans, director of programming. DOC TALK
will take place Dec. 3 and 4.

- - -

The University of B.C.'s film program has reason to be proud.

The Vancouver International Film Festival has announced its 2008 program.
Included are 15 films by UBC film students, alumni and faculty.

Included are: MFA graduates Peg Campbell's and Charles Wilkinson's films, Your
Mother Should Know and Down Here; feature-length films including 50 Dead Men
Walking, by producer Stephen Hegyes; Edison and Leo, by producer Dean English;
Control Alt Delete, by writer/director Cam Labine, executive producer Lynne
Stopkewich, director of photography James Liston, editor Julian Clarke and art
director Madeleine Grant; Stone of Destiny, showcasing the work of
cinematographer Glen Winter and editor Fredrik Thorsen, and Crime, the first
feature film written and directed by UBC theatre and film faculty member Tom
Scholte (also includes the work of UBC film alumnus Bojan Bodruzic as
cinematographer and editor).

Short films by film program alumni include 30-Love (director/wri-ter/producer
Allison Beda, cinematographer James Liston, production designer/editor Lindsay
Allikas); Ctrl Z (director Rob Kirbyson); The Narrator (director Mark Ratzlaff,
producer Jessica Cheung); Gold! Gold! Gold! (producer Amy Belling); The
Collinwood Campaign (producer Andria Spring, production designer Madeleine
Grant) and Reverse (producer Jessica Cheung).

50 Dead Men Walking, Edison and Leo, Control Alt Delete and Stone of Destiny
were also screened at the Toronto International Film Festival. The feature film,
Passchendaele, directed by Paul Gross, also showcases the work of an alumnus,
cinematographer Gregory Middleton. The short film Hello Good-bye, produced by
film program students Antoine Bourges, Vivi Olsen and Patrick Beechinor, was
screened at the TIFF student showcase earlier this year.

- - -

You may want to mark Friday, Oct. 3, 8 p.m., on your calendars. That's when the
first episode of the sci-fi series Sanctuary will air on Movie Central, a
24-hour, commercial-free pay TV service in Western Canada. Sanctuary is the
first television series in North America to use the RED camera system, a digital
camera that provides the latest in technology by capturing images at more than
four times the resolution of a high-definition camera. Sanctuary takes audiences
into the mysterious and electrifying adventures of Helen Magnus (Amanda
Tapping), an enigmatic doctor and researcher who has devoted her life to science
and cutting-edge medicine, and her reluctant protege, Will Zimmerman (Robin
Dunne), a forensic psychiatrist and master of behavioural profiling.

yzacharias@vancouversun.com

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Richard Lam, Vancouver Sun; Sanctuary's Amanda Tapping (left), actor and
executive producer, Martin Wood, executive producer and Damian Kindler, creator
and executive producer pose for a photo after the Internet-base science fiction
series was picked up for TV. ;
Photo: Lynne Stopkewich ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 The Vancouver Sun, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              879 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 4, 2014 Tuesday

Creative Placemaking: What it is and Why it's Important for Communities

LENGTH: 851  words


Washington, D.C.: The Aspen Institute has issued the following news release:

Type "creative placemaking" into Microsoft Word and it will suggest that perhaps
what you mean is "creative platemaking," or "creative peacemaking," or possibly
even "creative lacemaking." But during a recent Aspen Institute Arts Program in
New York event on the topic, former National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)
Chairman and Broadway producer Rocco Landesman, along with ArtPlace America
Executive Director Jamie Bennett, discussed the origins of the phrase with Arts
Program Director Damian Woetzel and assured the audience that the word is indeed
"placemaking."

The story of creative placemaking begins with the birth of ArtPlace America.
Landesman, a successful Broadway producer, makes the unlikely pitch of himself
as chairman for the NEA in 2009 and gets the job. Once presiding over the NEA,
Landesman is determined to show that fundraising for the arts doesn't have to be
an act of begging but rather one of receiving payment for vital services -- that
the arts are as important a part of community development as anything else.

As part of Landesman's efforts he convinces 10 of the country's biggest
philanthropic organizations, six of the world's biggest banks, and five federal
agencies to devote time, money, and resources to help him prove his point.
Everyone agrees with him, and they promise to provide $23 million and serious
operational support for something called ArtPlace, which will furnish
Landesman's proof by promoting and growing a practice that most of those who
have agreed to support it probably can't even define -- creative placemaking.

The evidence of its success need not rest on spellcheck. In the past few months,
if you traveled to Mount Rainer, MD; Springfield, MO; Pittsburgh, PA; Loveland,
CO; Camden, NJ; or Governor's Island, NY, you could find a public arts festival
or celebration that received funding from ArtPlace America. The organization,
whose grants average $330,000, works with communities of virtually every size on
a variety of projects: decorating a disrupted public-construction zone with
community art to bring residents back to neglected local businesses,
establishing cultural centers or museums where there were none, or breathing
life back into struggling neighborhoods by providing artists housing and
exhibition spaces.

Supporters haven't been slow to recognize the value of these projects. Since
ArtPlace was first announced in 2011, its list of contributing foundations has
grown to 12, and its budget has grown to accommodate a total $56.8 million in
grants across 189 projects, including $14.7 million just this year alone. On the
other side of the equation, ArtPlace received 1,300 grant applications last year
and was only able to approve 4 percent of them; this year, two weeks before the
application deadline, Bennett explained, it had already received over 2,000
applications.

ArtPlace has helped creative placemaking in just a few short years grow from an
unfamiliar phrase to an accepted field. Supporting proof on that score was
offered by students from the New School, who were part of a private student
roundtable discussion prior to the public event, and who informed Landesman that
they came from a creative placemaking class at the New School, the first he had
ever heard of it.

Bennett, who prior to taking the helm at ArtPlace was chief of staff to
Landesman at the NEA, explained that while it is not necessary for every arts
organization to work on creative placemaking, he does believe that every
community needs to make use of it. When civic leaders sit down to discuss
community development, his hope is that along with transportation, sanitation,
parks and recreation, or education, the arts will have a place at the table. And
its inclusion shouldn't be novel; it should be normal.

Not every city has a waterfront, a baseball park, or a civic center to help
drive development, but every community -- whether it's Cincinnati, Ohio; Santo
Domingo Pueblo, New Mexico; Charleston, South Carolina; or Brooklyn, New York --
has artists. Bennett and Landesman both agreed that in their experience, mayors
have never demonstrated difficulty understanding this -- they have seen
firsthand what artists do to drive a community's social, economic, and physical
futures; it is a matter of translating that understanding to the broader range
of private funders and public institutions who help drive development.

"The fact that you're in this room means I don't need to talk to you," Bennett
told the audience. He said that reaching the broader field will be one of his
biggest focuses for the remainder of his tenure at ArtPlace (whose lifespan is
finite; ArtPlace is designed to sunset in 2020). A big part of Bennett's job in
his mind is getting invited to discussions of community development where the
arts aren't being included. But his highest achievement will come, he said, when
placemaking is no longer a word that gets red-lined by Microsoft.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              880 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Mirror Publications

                              May 22, 2015 Friday
                                Bangalore Mirror

Bengaluru engineer selected for Agro summit

BYLINE: Deepthi Sanjiv

SECTION: OTHERS

LENGTH: 531 words


Raghav Raghunathan, who works with tribal women in Madhya Pradesh, will fly to
Canberra in August

An alumnus of the National Institute of Technology (NITK), Surathkal,
24-year-old Raghav Raghunathan from Bengaluru is one of the three selected to
participate in the second Global Youth Ag Summit themed "Feeding a Hungry
planet", to be held in Canberra, Australia from Aug 24 to 28.

The event is being organised by Future Farmers Network, Australia, and Bayer
CorpScience. The two other participants from India include Aatika Singh from New
Delhi and Rohit Fenn from Kottayam in Kerala. A total number of 1,932 essays
from 87 countries were submitted for selection to participate in the meet.

After graduating as a Metallurgical Engineer, Raghav had two good job offers on
hand - one from Caterpillar, the second from Credit Suisse, the second largest
Swiss investment bank. But he decided to spend a year at the Young India
Fellowship to study liberal arts.

PARENTS DOUBTFUL

His parents, A Raghunathan and Lakshmi, were doubtful about his decision. As a
student, he had the opportunity to build Eforea, a10-member student club. He led
the club to the institute's E-cell by providing an international business plan
event and mentorship platforms with NS Raghavan Centre for Entrepreneurial
Learning (NSRCEL) at Indian Institute IIM-B and funding from Dept of Science and
Technology. Eforea has incubated multiple and diverse start-up ideas. He also
founded TechVentures, an industry institute interface that aims to crowd source
techno-managerial solutions for SME industries by exposing students to industry
based problems. This was rated as one of India's best ventures by Tata First Dot
and NEN.

Raghav told Bangalore Mirror that during the one year at the Young India, "I was
greatly influenced by Dr Mihir Shah, member of the planning commission. He gave
me a new perspective to rural development. Till then, economics meant terms such
as GDP and the like. With inspiration from Samaj Pragathi Sahayog that Dr Mihir
Shah launched, I not only got more involved with farmers and tribes but also
realised the importance of strengthening the producer chain."

Pramath Sinha, the architect of Young India Fellow, offered a full scholarship
to Raghav.

Raghav is a fellow at Acumen. Acumen raises charitable donations to invest in
companies, leaders, and ideas that are changing the way the world tackles
poverty.

Today, Raghav represents 2,662 women shareholders of RamRahim Pragati Producer
Company Ltd, one of India's largest producer-owned agri-value chain companies.

RamRahim Pragati was the first company of its kind to receive an equity grant
from the Indian government to support its work and is the first producer-owned
company to become a listed member with the National Commodity and Derivative
Exchange.

"The model is not about women empowerment, but we are actually being empowered
by women. In India, we never look at women as farmers. Their efforts are often
ignored. The advantage of being listed on the NCDEX is that the farmer can hedge
the produce (lock its price) and even if the price falls in the future, he is
given the price that existed at the time he hedged the produce," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              881 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Craven Herald

                             June 25, 2015 Thursday

Food network aims to bring 'gastronauts' to the Dales

BYLINE: Lesley Tate

SECTION: COUNTRYFILE

LENGTH: 992 words


LOVERS of good food will be licking their lips over the impressive choice of
food and drink on offer in the Yorkshire Dales National Park.

It follows the launch of two new projects aimed at promoting businesses in the
national park and getting gastronauts to come and visit.

The Yorkshire Dales Food Network aims to boost awareness of the huge variety of
food producers in the Dales, while the Ales way project plans to encourage
people to visit pubs in Upper Wharfedale.

The food network aims to improve trade by connecting members up with retailers,
restaurants, accommodation providers and consumers within the national park.

It is led by a team of people who specialise in marketing, food production and
hospitality and includes the setting up of a new website with the help of a
£10,000 grant from the national park authority's Sustainable Development Fund
(SDF).

Jamie Roberts, owner of Kilnsey Park, is a perfect fit for the network with a
multi-faceted business, including farm shop,cafe and trout farm and supplier of
trade.

"As a local food business one of our biggest challenges is being able to
communicate directly with consumers, this project will enable us to connect with
potential retail and trade customers much more effectively," he said.

Bruce Elsworth, chef director at the award-winning Angel Inn at Hetton, says he
is passionate about using local produce wherever possible and in-season
ingredients.

"Sometimes you can become isolated working in a professional kitchen...
initiatives like this help us to collaborate with suppliers and get excited
about new local producers that we might not otherwise find," he said.

Ian Smith, spokesman for the Yorkshire Dales Food Network, said: "The key to the
success of the project is to get consumers involved as members - and the great
thing is it's absolutely free.

"As we build the trade membership, we hope to be able to give discounts and
other incentives at great places to eat, drink and stay in the Dales, thereby
encouraging trade and helping people enjoy what's on offer."

He added that after trying to get the project off the ground for a number of
years, it had finally been made possible with the SDF grant.

"Now it's up to businesses and consumers to take up the offer and help us make
it a success," he said. "Without the funding we would not be able to offer free
trade membership and hopefully after the free trial period business owners will
see enough value to upgrade to a paid membership."

He added: "Many of the food businesses I talk to are too busy keeping up with
the challenges of running their business to look at new opportunities. This will
provide an opportunity for them to get their message out to customers and
discover new suppliers."

Andrea Burden, the park's sustainable development officer, said: "This is a
pilot project that aims to create a searchable, interactive, internet-based
directory and network of local food producers connected to retailers,
restaurants, hospitality businesses and consumers.

"It's a fantastic chance to raise the profile of the national park as a visitor
destination and to boost tourism-related businesses all at the same time."

To encourage businesses to sign up, those based in the national park are being
offered a year's free membership.

Carl Lis, Craven councillor and the park's member champion for sustainable
development, said the project fitted well into the aims of the authority.

"The National Park Management Plan contains a specific objective to improve the
quality and value of farm produce and to promote local food. This project is a
great way to help to do that.

"The website provides information on where to eat and buy locally produced food
and where to stay."

And he added it was hoped that the network would eventually become self-funding
from its membership, promotional activity and income from the website.

As the network grows, consumers will be able to access a whole range of offers
and discounts from the best restaurants, pubs and shops in the region.

At the same time, the SDF has given £3,000 to another project that aims to
encourage people in and around Ilkley, Skipton and neighbouring towns and cities
to visit pubs throughout the Upper Wharfedale area of the National Park.

The Ales Way - Wharfedale's Ale Trail was launched in 2014 and was originally
funded by Wharfedale Brewery. Since then the Brewery has been working with the
newly-formed Upper Wharfedale Community Interest Company (UWCIC), which raises
funds for good causes in the area, to develop the project further.

The SDF cash will be used to create a range of promotional material including
leaflets, posters, stamp cards, beer pump clips, and promotional t shirts, as
well as updating the existing website: thealesway.com .

UWCIC spokesman Jonathan Shepherd said the grant would help the development of
the project.

"It is not just a great tourist attraction but the alliance with Wharfedale
Brewery and the hostelries serving their beers has helped to create a truly
innovative community initiative," he said.

"The public can get involved and enjoy a great day out in the knowledge that
every time they buy a pint of Wharfedale beer they are also making a
contribution to the UWCIC's coffers and, in turn, supporting good causes in the
local area."

In addition to promoting the Ales Way all year round, plans are underway to
create a special beer festival by bus towards the end of summer - a first for
the country.

"The National Park Authority has a statutory duty to promote opportunities for
the understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities of the National Park -
and both these projects fit the bill," she said.

"They also help us to foster the economic and social wellbeing of local
communities within the National Park by helping to improve the quality and value
of farm produce and to promote local food."

To find out more about the Yorkshire Dales Food Network visit eatthedales.co.uk,
and for the Ales way trail visit: thealesway.com

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2015 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              882 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                             Daily News (New York)

                           August 28, 2002, Wednesday

POST 9/11, FILM BIZ STILL REELS

BYLINE: By ISAAC GUZMAN DAILY NEWS FEATURE WRITER

SECTION: NOW; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 612 words

When the twin towers fell on Sept. 11, members of New York's film community
sprang into action.

Teamsters brought lighting rigs and power trucks to illuminate the rescue
efforts at Ground Zero. Action shows such as "Third Watch" sent real-life rescue
props - including a Jaws of Life and bandages - to the scene. Afterwards, dozens
of actors and filmmakers helped raise millions for disaster-relief charities.

But in the year since the attacks, New York's film and television business has
been in dire circumstances. Between 1998 and 2001, local production dropped by
20%, according to the Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting. Many in
the business say that the downward trend has only accelerated in 2002.

"Jobs here have become scarce," says Kevin Fox, creator of "Queens Supreme," a
CBS midseason replacement and the only new television show being shot in the
city. "The film and television industry here has taken a hit because people got
scared."

It's hard to say just how bad things are, because the city doesn't compile
mid-year statistics. It is also hard to estimate precisely what Sept. 11's
impact was on the film and TV business, which also includes commercials and
corporate films. But film commission spokeswoman Julianne Cho says there has
been continued fallout from dot-com failures, the retraction of the general
economy and budget-trimming by studios and networks.

If there's anything positive for the industry from last year's awful events,
however, it's that Sept. 11 inspired a number of productions to film in New York
as a sign of solidarity with the city. This spring and summer saw Jennifer Lopez
hitting New York streets for "Maid in Manhattan," Sandra Bullock flirting with
Hugh Grant at the River Cafe on "Two Weeks Notice" and Steven Spielberg, Tom
Hanks and Leonardo DiCaprio taking over Brooklyn Borough Hall for "Catch Me If
You Can."

"If anything, 9/11 gave us a resolve that we had to shoot here," says Revolution
Studios' Elaine Goldsmith-Thomas, producer of "Queens Supreme," "Maid in
Manhattan" and "Mona Lisa Smile," which stars Julia Roberts and begins shooting
here in October.

"We would be in very luxurious spaces in L.A.," says Goldsmith-Thomas in her
"Queens Supreme" offices at Silvercup East Studios in Long Island City. "We
would be comforted and feted. But it wouldn't be Queens."

Shooting in New York is an expensive proposition. Labor costs are higher here,
and the city's snarled traffic and tight spaces make logistics a nightmare.
Meanwhile, Canada is offering tax and labor subsidies that, producers say, cut
costs by as much as 15%.

Despite that, Tribeca-based Greene Street Films is shooting the movie "Molly
Gunn," starring Brittany Murphy and Heather Locklear, locally.

" 'Molly Gunn' was one of those films that could have been shot in Canada," says
Greene Street's John Penotti. "[But] the director and I were really interested
in this film being a love letter to New York City. Given what we had just lived
through, it was great to imagine the city with a sparkling, almost magical
photographic quality."

While New York continues to be the nation's center of independent filmmaking,
major producers are hoping that recently appointed film commissioner Katherine
Oliver will help the city compete with Canada and Los Angeles. They say the
city's actors and seasoned film crews are every bit as essential as its dramatic
skylines and lively neighborhoods.

"Sure, we're expensive, but we have to prove value," says Morty Dubin of the New
York Production Alliance, which represents 50 businesses, production companies
and unions. "And the value is the city and the talent in it."

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: FILE PHOTO WORKING FOR THE CITY: Jennifer Lopez and Tyler Garcia Posey
filming "Maid in Manhattan" on location in the Bronx

                        Copyright 2002 Daily News, L.P.


                              883 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      July 3, 2002 Wednesday Home Edition

Spanish language legal show wins respect, seeks audience

BYLINE: YOLANDA RODRIGUEZ

SOURCE: AJC

SECTION: Atlanta & the World; Pg. 3E

LENGTH: 570 words


The first season's audience was so low that it barely registered, though the
program did snag nominations for two regional Emmys.

Now, producers of Atlanta Public Broadcasting's Spanish language show "Leyes
Cotidianas," or "Everyday Law," are banking on a move to Sunday nights, from
Friday evenings, to propel the program's Nielsen ratings more in line with the
peer praise.

The legal affairs program debuted last year on WPBA-TV (Channel 30) and began
shooting its second season last week. The new season begins airing Sept. 1.

"The goal of the program is to educate people about their rights and
responsibilities, particularly new immigrants," said Ralph Perales, co-producer
and host of the show.

Alan Smith, the director of marketing for WPBA, said the station is looking into
creating a block of "Latino programming" by pairing the show with Sunday night
rebroadcasts of the PBS show "American Family," about an extended
Mexican-American family in East Los Angeles. The drama's ensemble cast includes
Edward James Olmos, Rita Moreno and Raquel Welch.

Programs in Spanish on public broadcasting are rare. "Leyes Cotidianas" is
trying to reach a segment of the population that has very little knowledge about
Georgia and U.S. laws, said Perales, a former president of the Georgia Hispanic
Bar Association.

"As a lawyer, I hear so many complaints from people who say they are being taken
advantage of. With a little knowledge about what to expect, that could be
prevented," Perales said. "Historically, the Hispanic population [in Georgia]
has been blue-collar workers. They don't have a lot of schooling. They need to
know the nuances of the law."

Perales and co-producer Rafael Ortiz-Guzman think that viewership was low
because its target audience didn't know about it.

Ortiz-Guzman, who has won local Emmys before, said they plan to engage college
students and other volunteers to hand out fliers about the program in area
apartment complexes.

The first season included segments on auto accidents and DUIs, divorce, child
support, immigration, family law, employment discrimination, workers'
compensation, Fourth Amendment rights, forming a company, landlord-tenant
relations, and how to buy a house.

The Georgia Civil Justice Foundation funds the show.

"Our mission is to educate Georgians about the civil justice system and the
value of it in our society," said Fred Smith, executive director of the
foundation.

The first year's $57,000 grant included $15,000 to build a new set --- complete
with snazzy leather couch and chair. Ortiz-Guzman designed the set that it
shares with the English language program "The Layman's Lawyer," which also is
funded by the foundation.

This year's $70,000 grant will allow the program to be closed-captioned in
English.

"We are very excited about that," Smith said.

The idea for the show came to Perales after working with the foundation and the
Georgia Hispanic Chamber of Commerce on a Spanish language course, "People's Law
School," which familiarized newcomers with U.S. and Georgia laws.

On local Atlanta television, "Leyes Cotidianas" is the only Spanish language
program on an English channel.

Univision, the Spanish language network that bought WUVG-TV last year, began
airing "Nuestra Georgia" ("Our Georgia") on Saturday mornings in January. The
30-minute program features interviews with local Latino leaders.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney Ralph Perales, host of "Leyes Cotidianas" ("Everyday
Law"), is shown on a monitor practicing his intro before a show. / BITA HONAVAR/
Staff; Photo: Bankruptcy lawyer Tamara Ogier has makeup applied before taping of
a "Leyes Cotidianas" program. / BITA HONAVAR/ Staff

                Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                              884 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                      June 3, 2000 Saturday Final Edition

New network to link up agri-businesses: Entrepreneurs realize they 'can't do it
on their own'

SOURCE: The Edmonton Journal

BYLINE: Mairi MacLean, Journal Business Writer

SECTION: Business; Pg. G2

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: Edmonton

Alberta agri-businesses are encountering a "knowledge gap" as they strive to
diversify their operations and boost the value of home-grown product.

So the Alberta Value-Added Corporation (AVAC) is creating the blueprints for a
new knowledge network to aid agricultural entrepreneurs, says AVAC's new
president and CEO Keith Jones.

"We found people just don't need money. Lots really need help trying to fill a
void in their business concept, to fill in the knowledge experience," says
Jones. "We're developing a formal structure to link entrepreneurs with whatever
knowledge they need to make the business fly."

A not-for-profit private corporation founded with a one-time grant of $35
million from the province in 1997, AVAC helps innovative agri-businesses access
investment capital. It also funds agriculture-related research positions at the
University of Alberta, the Alberta Research Council and Olds College.

To date, it has invested in 12 commercial enterprises with seed capital ranging
from $10,000 to $500,000 -- including deals with Edmonton-based CV Technologies
and Ceapro Inc -- and it has distributed about $8 million in total.

Jones, who succeeded Bruce Healy as AVAC head in February, says that sifting
through 100-plus funding and support proposals helped him to see the need for
some form of knowledge clearing house.

"One big void is market access -- how to take this idea and find a market, who
to partner with, how to reach distribution channels, retail channels," said
Jones.

He envisions a virtual network, "using collaborative technology with an online
e-business component ... a chat room with a virtual library, together with more
formal structure and more resources."

The agriculture sector must become more collaborative and think more
strategically if it is to tap its potential in the value-added area, Jones
suggests.

"From my experience in other industries, most have got the fact that they
(individual businesses) can't do it on their own," says Jones, who has degrees
in agriculture and international business, and comes from a fifth-generation
Alberta farming family.

"It's harder in agriculture where there's such a tradition of producer versus
producer, versus processor, versus retailer. It's making it difficult to break
out ... it's hard to shake the competitive roots of agriculture."

But that's what must happen if the province is to achieve its goal of $20
billion per year in value-added business by 2005. It's an ambitious target, says
Jones, admitting it will be difficult to achieve. Value-added receipts totaled
$6.6 billion in 1996 and $7.8 billion in 1999.

"We won't get there with incremental change, it must be a dramatic difference.
And AVAC is one of the things about operating differently," he says, pointing
out that it is vital to nurture the value-added aspects because, "the 80-year
trend line on commodity prices is down, and it doesn't matter if it's
agriculture, lumber, or oil and gas."

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Journal Stock; (Keith Jones)

TYPE: Business

               Copyright 2000 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              885 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2017 Dun & Bradstreet Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                         D&B Financial Analysis Reports

                                 March 16, 2017

                            RADIO INDEPENDENTS GROUP

                                     UNIT 2
                                 OLYMPIC COURT
                            WHITEHILLS BUSINESS PARK
                               BLACKPOOL FY4 5GU


TRADE ADDRESS: Unit 2 Olympic Court Whitehills, BLACKPOOL FY4 5GU

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
FAX: 02070-792080
URL: www.radioindies.org

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
REGISTRATION NO.: 06527771

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: March 7, 2008
JURISDICTION/PLACE OF REGISTRATION

* * * * * * * * * * CORPORATE STRUCTURE * * * * * * * * * *



TOP SUBSIDIARIES BY TURNOVER
Registration    Company Name  Turnove
No.                                 r
06614180        RIG EVENTS          0
                LTD
-               -                   -
-               -                   -
-               -                   -
-               -                   -
-               -                   -
-               -                   -
-               -                   -
-               -                   -
-               -                   -

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
DIRECTORS:

     ·    Mr Trevor John Dann, Media Consultant
     ·    Ms Susan Clark, Radio Producer
     ·    Mr Jeremy Nelson, Ceo
     ·    Mr Philip John Critchlow, Director
     ·    Susan Marling, Radio Producer
     ·    Mr Michael Douglas Hally, Journalist
     ·    Ashley Aston Byrne, Director Radio Producer
     ·    Andrew John Cartwright, Radio Producer
     ·    Mr John Price Barnard Wynne-williams, Accountant
     ·    Mr Gethin Wyn Thomas, Tv & Radio Producer
     ·    Miss Janet Lindsay Graves, Radio Producer
     ·    Mr David Joseph Prest, Managing Director
     ·    Mr Husain Naqui Husaini, Radio Producer
     ·    Mr William Reid Jackson, Managing Director
     ·    Ms Caroline Sarah Raphael, Director Production Company
     ·    Miss Kellie While, Head Of 7digital Creative


Go To ICC Directors
SECRETARY:

     ·    MrTrevor JohnDann


* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
PRINCIPLE ACTIVITIES: Activities of business and employers membership
organisations
INDUSTRY TYPE:
COMPANY TYPE:  Prvt ltd by guarantee w/out share cap under section 30::Prvt ltd
by guarantee w/out share cap under section 30::
COMPANY SIZE:  Ceased IRL

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC:
94110

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: March 31, 2016
FISCAL YEAR END: March 31

LAST FILED ACCOUNTS:  March 31, 2016
ACCOUNTS LODGED DATE:  August 26, 2016
ANNUAL RETURN:  March 7, 2017
CREDIT LIMIT:  22,500

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS
Date of Accounts                           31/03/201 31/03/201 31/03/201
                                                   6         5         4
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Tangible Assets                                    2         2         2
Intangible Assets                                  -         -         -
Total Fixed Assets                                 2         2         2
Stocks                                             -         -         -
Debtors                                            -         -         -
Cash                                           5,798     7,822    26,663
Miscellaneous Current Assets                   9,587     6,342     3,861
Other Current Assets                          15,385    14,164    30,524
Total Current Assets                          15,385    14,164    30,524
Fixed Assets                                       -         -         -
Intermediate Assets                                2         2         2
Due From Group, Non Current                        -         -         -
Due From Group, Current                            -         -         -
TOTAL ASSETS                                  15,387    14,166    30,526



LIABILITIES
Date of Accounts                           31/03/201 31/03/201 31/03/201
                                                   6         5         4
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Creditors                                          -         -         -
Bank Overdraft                                     -         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Liabilities              8,591     7,196     4,413
Bank Loans - Current Portion                       -         -         -
Other Short Term Finance                           -         -         -
Due To Group, Current                              -         -         -
Due To Directors, Current                          -         -         -
Other Current Liabilities                      8,591     7,196     4,413
Short Term Loans                                   -         -         -
Long Term Loans                                    -         -         -
Long Term Bank Loan                                -         -         -
Other Long Term Finance                            -         -         -
Due To Group, Non Current                          -         -         -
Due To Directors, Non Current                      -         -         -
Other Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
Total Current Liabilities                      8,591     7,196     4,413
Total Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
TOTAL LIABILITIES                              8,591     7,196     4,413
Called Up Share Capital and Sundry            13,281    13,281    26,113
Reserves
Profit & Loss Account Reserve                  -6485     -6311         0
Revaluation Reserve                                -         -         -
Shareholder Funds                              6,796     6,970    26,113
Called Up Share Capital                            -         -         -
Sundry Reserves (Including Grants)            13,281    13,281    26,113
Contingent Liabilities                             -         -         -
NET ASSETS                                     6,796     6,970    26,113


* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
Date of Accounts   31/03/201 31/03/201 31/03/201
                           6         5         4
                         GBP       GBP       GBP
Total Sales                -         -         -
Cost of Sales              -         -         -
Gross Profit               -         -         -
Operating Profit           -         -         -
Export                     -         -         -
Nontrading Income          -         -         -
Interest Payable           -         -         -
Pretax Profit              -         -         -
Taxation                   -         -         -
Profit After Tax           -         -         -
Dividends Payable          -         -         -
Retained Profits           -         -         -
Value Added                -         -         -
Capital Employed       6,796     6,970    26,113
Net Worth              6,796     6,970    26,113
Working Capital        6,794     6,968    26,111
Emp. Renumeration          -         -         -
Dir. Renumeration          -         -         -
Audit Fees                 -         -         -
Non-audit Fees             -         -         -
Depreciation               -         -         -
Number of                  -         -         -
Employees

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *


GROWTH RATES
Date of Accounts        2      3      5
                    Years  Years  Years
                      GBP    GBP    GBP
Sales                   -      -      -
Pretax                  -      -      -
Total Assets         8.62 -49.59 -10.39
Current Assets       8.62  -49.6  -10.4
Current             19.39  94.67 145.67
Liabilities
Capital Employed     -2.5 -73.97  -50.3
Employee Wages          -      -      -
Number of               -      -      -
Employees



INDUSTRY AVERAGES
Compared to 1,334 companies in the same industry
sector
(year ending 2016)
SIC Code:
91110 Activities of business and employers
organisations



INDUSTRY QUARTILES
                                                      Lower   Median    Upper
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                  -3.03     3.45    17.39
Pretax Profit / Total Assets (%)                       -2.1     1.81     7.66
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                             -1.89     1.78      7.6
Sales / Total Assets (%)                              66.59   125.16   205.49
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales) x       52.81    15.92        0
365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                      1     1.79     3.72
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)            26,360.4 40,372.4 60,819.7
                                                          7        9        9
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees (GBP)  19,684.2 31,020.4 43,972.2
                                                          1        1        2
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                  44,064.9 89,532.4  141,175
                                                          6
Wages / Turnover (%)                                  49.87    38.53    25.08



CREDIT RATING
Year  0  90
=
Year -1  92
=
Year -2  89
=
Year -3  10
=         0

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *
Date of Accounts                                1/03/201 31/03/201 31/03/201
                                                       6         5         4
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                   -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Assets (%)                             -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Shareholders Funds (%)                 -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                              -         -         -
Sales / Total Assets (%)                               -         -         -
Sales / Fixed Assets (%)                               -         -         -
Export / Sales (%)                                     -         -         -
Working Capital / Sales (%)                            -         -         -
Sales / Stocks                                         -         -         -
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales )         -         -         -
x 365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                1.79      1.97      6.92
Quick Assets / Current Liabilities                  1.79      1.97      6.92
Total Debt / Net Worth (%)                             -         -         -
Shareholders Funds / Total Assets                   0.44      0.49      0.86
Long Term Debt / Net Worth (%)                         -         -         -
Interest / Pre Interest Profit (%)                     -         -         -
Current Liabilities / Stocks                           -         -         -
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees            -         -         -
(GBP)
Employee Remuneration / Sales (%)                      -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Number Of Employees (GBP)              -         -         -
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                      -         -         -
Capital Employed / Number Of Employees                 -         -         -
Fixed Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)               -         -         -
Total Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)               -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Value Added (%)                        -         -         -
Value Added / Sales (%)                                -         -         -
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)                -         -         -
Value Added / Employee Remuneration                    -         -         -
Sales / Audit Fees                                     -         -         -
Total Assets / Audit Fees                              -         -         -
Creditors / Debtors                                    -         -         -
Total Debt / Working Capital                           -         -         -
Total Debt / Total Assets                              -         -         -

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
CURRENT SHARES OUTSTANDING: GBP 6,796

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2017


                              886 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                            November 11, 2001 Sunday

Ag briefs

BYLINE: Telegraph Herald Staff

SECTION: Pg. d3

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: CLIVE, Iowa


Iowa Premium Pork Co. to hold meetings

Iowa Premium Pork Co., a producer-owned pork cooperative, will hold
informational meetings around Iowa. Locally, a meeting will be held at 7 p.m.
Monday at the United Methodist Church in Manchester. A meeting also is scheduled
for 1 p.m. Wednesday at DeWitt Bank and Trust in DeWitt.

For more information, contact Rex Hoppes, Iowa Premium Pork Co. at 877/572-7675.

Sheep programs to be delivered over ICN

EDGEWOOD, Iowa - Sheep producers are invited to attend the first in a series of
four sheep programs delivered via the Iowa Communications Network. The first
installment is 7 p.m. Tuesday.

The evening's featured program will cover the national Scrapie Eradication
Program and mandatory identification.

Future programs in the series are Nov. 27, Dec. 11 and Jan. 8.

ISU Extension Service slates 2 seminars

DYERSVILLE, Iowa - The Iowa State University Extension Service has scheduled two
agricultural outlook and management seminars Nov. 27. The seminars are designed
to provide agribusiness leaders with a concise evaluation of current conditions,
expected trends in crop- and livestock- income potential and management
implications for the future, and an overview of value-added agricultural
opportunities for conventional and alternative crops.

The seminar will be held at 10:30 a.m. at the Country Junction Restaurant in
Dyersville, and 4:30 p.m. at the Northeast Iowa Dairy Education Center in
Calmar.

Registration is required by Nov. 20 with any county extension office.

Grant County cattle group presents awards

LANCASTER, Wis. - The Grant County Cattlemen and Cow Belles presented their
annual awards during the annual meeting Nov. 5.

Four-year scholarships were awarded to Casey Jentz, of Fennimore, and Kaci Edge,
of Lancaster. Adam White, of Lancaster, was the recipient of this year's Travel
Grant.

The 2001 Mike Spitzbarth Memorial Award Winner was Susan Orth, of Lancaster.

Grant County 4-H Leaders give awards at banquet

LANCASTER, Wis. - Grant County 4-H Leaders honored Finney Implement, Bob and
Doreatha Page, Carol Hughs and Maxine Wachter with Meritorious Service Awards at
the recent Grant County 4-H Leaders Banquet. The Meritorious Service Award is
given to individuals and businesses who have given an extended period of
exceptional service to Grant County 4-H and youth.

This year's Grant County Volunteer of the Year Award was presented to Brenda
Martin. She has been a dairy leader with the Stitzer Go-Getters 4-H Club for six
years.

Singles in Ag plan event

DICKEYVILLE, Wis. - Wisconsin Singles in Agriculture invites all singles, ages
18 and older, with an agricultural background, to a weekend event Nov. 23-25 in
Dickeyville.

SIA is a nationwide organization offering an opportunity to meet other singles
with similar interests and backgrounds. Activities include bowling, dinner and
dances.

For more information, contact Pat McComish at 608/776-2052.

Commodity-loan rates set

WASHINGTON - The interest rate for 1995 and prior crop year commodity loans
disbursed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Commodity Credit Corp. during
November 2001 is 2.375 percent, down 0.875 from the October 2001 rate.

For 1996 and subsequent crop year commodity loans, the interest rate is 3.375
percent for loans disbursed during November 2001, down 0.875 from October 2001.
The interest rate for farm storage facility loans approved in November 2001 is
4.375 percent, down 0.250 from the October 2001 rate.

Repayment rate set

WASHINGTON - The loan repayment rate for the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
Honey Nonrecourse Marketing Assistance Loan and Loan Deficiency Payment Program
during November 2001 is 65 cents per pound. That is equal to the loan rate and
3.4 cents above the repayment rate for October.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                              887 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Idaho Business Review (Boise, ID)

                               September 13, 2007

Idaho PUC grants rate adjustments for small-power producers

BYLINE: Robb Hicken

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 235  words


The Idaho Public Utilities Commission has granted a request by utilities to
adjust rates paid to small-power producers so they more closely match the actual
value of energy at the point of time it is delivered.

The value of energy increases during peak demand times and decreases during
light-load hours, yet utilities maintain they must pay the same price to the
small-power generator during light-load hours as the generator pays when the
energy is delivered during heavy-load hours, the PUC states on the Web.

Utilities are already allowed a seasonable adjustment to account for the
changing value of energy between the various seasons of the year. But because
the value of energy fluctuates hourly, Idaho Power Co. and Rocky Mountain Power
(formerly Utah Power) had petitioned the commission for a daily load shape
adjustment. The PUC adopted an adjustment of $7.28 - less than Idaho Power's
initial proposal of $11.63.

In a related matter, the PUC denied a request by utilities to place further
restrictions on the distance allowed between wind projects, or other small-power
generation projects, which are owned by the same entity.

According to the commission, Idaho Power and Avista had asked the PUC to adopt a
rule, similar to one approved in Oregon, that prevents utilities from having to
pay the published avoided-cost rate when the same owner/developer has
small-power projects located within five mile.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Government activity

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              888 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                              July 8, 2014 Tuesday

WB approves Sindh Agricultural Growth Project

LENGTH: 362  words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD


The World Bank's (WB) Board of Executive Directors approved the Sindh
Agricultural Growth Project in the amount of US$ 76.4 million. The project aims
to improve the productivity and market access of small and medium producers in
important commodity value chains, said WB press statement issued here on Tuesday
adding the project would benefit approximately 112,000 farmers covering over
66,000 hectares. The project intends to achieve this objective by investing in
knowledge and technology for producers and sub-sectors of crops and livestock,
and strengthening public sector institutions to enhance the enabling environment
for sustained sectoral growth.

"The project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive
growth by prioritizing support to small and medium sized producers who are
trying to compete in horticulture markets", said Rachid Benmessaoud, World Bank
Country Director for Pakistan. "Investing in horticulture offers the best
potential for increased small producer incomes, new employment opportunities in
production and processing, improved resource productivity, and enhanced
micronutrient availability in the market," Benmessaoud added. The project
focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small farmer focus,
have significant involvement of women in production and processing, and, from a
national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest competitive advantage in these
pro-poor production value chains. Capacity building, technical assistance and
strategic planning for sector growth will also be provided through this project.
The project will also promote the private sector participation in the
agricultural development and sector growth through public-private models for
agribusiness development and support services. The federal government and Sindh
government have both highlighted commercial agriculture and market linkages as
priority investments for the sector. The credit is financed from the
International Development Association (IDA), the World Bank Group's grant and
low-interest arm. It will be on standard IDA terms, with a maturity of 25 years,
including a grace period of 5 years, the statement added.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              889 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 5, 2015 Thursday

California State Legislature bill updates 03/03/2015; Assembly BillNo. 1321
Introduced by Assembly Member Ting

LENGTH: 1314  words

DATELINE: Sacramento


California State Legislature has issued the following bill updates:

Assembly BillNo. 1321
Introduced by Assembly Member Ting
(Principal coauthor: Assembly Member Bonta)
(Principal coauthor: Senator Wolk)
(Coauthors: Assembly Members Levine and Perea)
February 27, 2015
An act to add Chapter 13 (commencing with Section 49010) to Division 17 of the
Food and Agricultural Code, relating to food and agriculture.
LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGEST

AB 1321, as introduced, Ting. Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program.

Existing law establishes the Office of Farm to Fork within the Department of
Food and Agriculture, and requires the office, to the extent that resources are
available, to work with various entities, including, among others, the
agricultural industry and other organizations involved in promoting food access,
to increase the amount of agricultural products available to underserved
communities and schools in the state. Existing law requires the office to, among
other things, identify urban and rural communities that lack access to healthy
food, and to coordinate with local, state, and federal agencies to promote and
increase awareness of programs that promote greater food access. Existing law
creates the Farm to Fork Account in the Department of Food and Agriculture Fund
that would consist of money made available from federal, state, industry, and
other sources, and would continuously appropriate the money deposited in the
account without regard to fiscal years to carry out the purposes of the Office
of Farm to Fork.

This bill would establish the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program in the
Office of Farm to Fork, and would create the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant
Account in the Farm to Fork Account to collect matching funds received from a
specified federal grant program and funds from other public and private sources
to provide grants under the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program and to
administer the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program. The bill would
require that moneys in the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Account be awarded
in the form of grants to qualified entities, as defined, for consumer incentive
programs, as defined, subject to an appropriation in the annual Budget Act and
in accordance with certain priorities. The bill would require the Office of Farm
to Fork to establish minimum standards, funding schedules, and procedures for
awarding grants, as specified.

Vote: majority. Appropriation: no. Fiscal committee: yes. State-mandated local
program: no.

The people of the State of California do enact as follows:
P2    1
SECTION 1.

Chapter 13 (commencing with Section 49010)
2is added to Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code, to read:

3
4Chapter  13. Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant
5Program
6


7
49010.

This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the
8California Nutrition Incentives Act.
9
49011.

The Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program is
10hereby established in the Office of Farm to Fork for purposes of
11encouraging the purchase and consumption of California fresh
12fruits, nuts, and vegetables by directly linking California fresh
13fruit, nut, and vegetable producers with nutrition benefit clients.
14
49012.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions
15shall apply:

16(a) "Nutrition benefit client" means a person who receives
17services or payments through any of the following:

18(1) California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women,
19Infants, and Children, as described in Section 123280 of the Health
20and Safety Code.

P3    1(2) CalWORKS program, as described in Chapter 2
2(commencing with Section 11200) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the
3Welfare and Institutions Code.

4(3) CalFresh, as described in Section 18900.2 of the Welfare
5and Institutions Code.

6(4) Implementation of the federal WIC Farmers' Market
7Nutrition Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-314).

8(5) The Senior Farmers' Market Nutrition Program, as described
9in Section 3007 of Title 7 of the United States Code.

10(6) Supplemental Security Income or State Supplementary
11Payment, as described in Section 1381 et seq. of Title 42 of the
12United States Code.

13(b) "Qualified entity," for purposes of this article, means either
14of the following:

15(1) A certified farmers' market, as described in Section 47004,
16an association of certified producers, or a nonprofit organization
17representing a collective or association of certified producers that
18is authorized by the United States Department of Agriculture to
19accept federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (Chapter
2051 (commencing with Section 2011) of Title 7 of the United States
21Code) benefits from recipient purchasers at a farmers' market.
22Certified producers shall be certified by the county agricultural
23commissioner pursuant to Section 47020.

24(2) A small business, as defined in Section 14837 of the
25Government Code, that sells California grown fresh fruits, nuts,
26and vegetables and that is authorized to accept nutrition benefits
27from any of the programs listed in paragraphs (1) to (6), inclusive,
28of subdivision (a).

29(c) "Consumer incentive program" means a program
30administered by a qualified entity that doubles the purchasing value
31of a nutrition benefit client's benefits when the benefits are used
32to purchase California fresh fruits, nuts, and vegetables.
33
49013.

The Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Account is
34hereby created in the Farm to Fork Account to collect matching
35funds from the federal Food Insecurity Nutrition Incentives Grant
36Program (7 U.S.C. Sec. 7517), and other public and private sources,
37to provide grants under the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant
38Program and to administer the Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant
39Program in accordance with all of the following:

P4    1(a) Subject to the regulations adopted by the National Institute
2of Food and Agriculture in the United States Department of
3Agriculture in accordance with the federal Agricultural Act of
42014 (Public Law 113-79) and an appropriation in the annual
5Budget Act, moneys in the Nutrition Incentive Matching Account
6shall be awarded in the form of grants to qualified entities for
7consumer incentive programs.

8(b) (1) The Office of Farm to Fork shall establish minimum
9standards, funding schedules, and procedures for awarding grants
10in consultation with the United States Department of Agriculture
11and other interested stakeholders, including, but not limited to, the
12State Department of Public Health, State Department of Social
13Services, organizations with expertise in nutrition benefit programs
14or consumer incentive programs, small business owners that may
15qualify as a qualified entity, and certified farmers' market
16operators.

17(2) The department shall not use more than one-third of the
18Nutrition Incentive Matching Grant Program funds for consumer
19incentive programs with entities described in paragraph (2) of
20subdivision (b) of Section 49012.

21(c) Priority in the awarding of grants by the department to
22qualified entities shall be based on, but not limited to, the
23following:

24(1) The degree of the existence of the following demographic
25conditions and the character of the communities in which sales of
26California grown fresh fruits, nuts, and vegetables are made to the
27public by authorized vendors operating in conjunction with a
28qualified entity:

29(A) The number of people who are eligible for, or receiving,
30nutrition benefit program services.

31(B) The prevalence of diabetes, obesity, and other diet-related
32illnesses.

33(C) The availability of access to fresh fruits, nuts, and
34vegetables.

35(2) Demonstrated efficiency in the administration of a consumer
36incentive program.

37(3) The service of an area of population currently not being
38served by a consumer incentive program.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              890 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                The Western Mail

                           December 11, 2012 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Rural communities reap rewards of Leader scheme

SECTION: COUNTRY AND FARMING;FEATURES; Pg. 4,5

LENGTH: 1578 words


RURAL communities across south east Wales are benefiting from funding made
available for community-led local development.

Supported by their rural development teams and local action groups (made up of
local people) the rural areas of Bridgend, Caerphilly, Merthyr, Monmouthshire,
Vale of Glamorgan and Torfaen are now reaping the rewards of Leader investment.

While initial grant funding is relatively small, this "seed" money has proven it
can yield big results including new jobs, new business start-ups and the
regeneration of buildings and places.

The Rural Development Plan (RDP) for Wales supports the development of local
solutions to identified local needs and provides rural businesses and community
organisations with opportunities to try out new innovative products or service
delivery methods.

With strong local involvement and ownership, from administration right through
to delivery, this bottom-up approach to rural development, makes the
sustainability of each project a realistic goal.

The programme shows that when people are involved in exploring, developing and
implementing solutions, their confidence grows and local delivery really works.

While south east Wales has a strong industrial heritage, this has always been
coupled with a rich and varied rural landscape. Across these six local authority
areas around 75% of the land area is rural.

This presents a unique picture, including rural wards that sit next to some of
the most deprived urban wards in Wales and farmland divided by key transport
networks.

The challenges faced by these rural communities are often unique and are an
ideal test ground for new ideas to be cultivated in a safe and supportive
environment.

Across south east Wales teams have established good working relationships,
including delivering some projects in co-operation, ensuring best practice and
experiences are shared across communities, and are now looking to build on these
solid foundations for the next funding period 2014-2020.

The case studies featured on these pages demonstrate the range of support that
is available, from farming and supply chains to cultural heritage, tourism,
enterprise and the enhancement of biodiversity and our natural environment.

¦ Leader grant money comes from the European Agricultural Fund using the acronym
of Liaison Entre Actions de Développement de l''Economie Rurale. This means the
fund acts as liaison between European fund and the project instigators in the
local area.

FROM FARM GATE TO DINNER PLATE THERE are a number of pubs in Bridgend County
Borough that are proud to serve meals using locally-sourced produce. This is
largely thanks to support received to develop their menus, skills and links with
local primary producers as part of the borough's local produce pub project.

From this project, producers identified a need for better co-operation and
dialogue with buyers. In response Reach, Bridgend's rural development team,
established the Bridgend Local Food Network. The network meets regularly and is
supported by case study visits, skills workshops, one on one mentoring and "meet
the buyer" events.

Mentoring now helps producers maximise opportunities, allowing them to explore
new approaches to marketing and product development and also access funding for
their innovative ideas.

One ambition of the network is the creation of shared retail space. With the
support of Reach, a Food Tourism Centre of Enterprise will be created. This
partnership project with Bridgend College will offer not only an outlet for
producers in the area, but also a learning space, a community space and will put
food tourism at the heart of the college curriculum, instilling the ethos of
local produce into the next generation of buyers.

www.bridgendreach.org.uk www.reach4food.co.uk Project adds value to local
hardwood timber THE Caerphilly Cwm a Mynydd project is adding value to local
timber and the project is gradually nurturing a healthy wood supply chain within
the local area.

When a tree falls, its usual fate is the open fire or the log burner, but this
no longer needs to be the case. Welsh hardwood timber has been vastly underused
in the past, and the timber yard was set up to tackle this very issue, by
collecting from difficult locations, storing, processing and distributing wood.

This is also assisting farm woodland owners to establish added value at the
start of the process, by careful management of their wood stock.

Using the mobile sawmill at the project's Aberbargoed yard, timber, in its raw
green state, is processed into workable planks in readiness for use by community
projects such as: Aberbargoed Grasslands Education Centre, Parc Cwm Darran, Coed
y Werin, Groundwork Caerphilly's "Routes to Life", Markham Resource Centre and
numerous other projects and schools. Nothing is wasted and low-grade planking
has been supplied to allotment groups for growing beds and wood chip for paths.

Visit You Tube - CaerphilliCBCTV channel, RDP Timber Yard video
www.caerphilly.gov.uk/cwmamynydd/en/index.html MADE IN MONMOUTHSHIRE THE Made in
Monmouthshire initiative was originally created by Adventa simply as a means of
bringing together local food, drink, arts and craft producers to help them to
benefit from working together and to become more sustainable in an increasingly
difficult market place.

From small beginnings at monthly networking meetings, came funded training
opportunities, marketing and branding workshops, selling events and also
economies gained through combining distribution costs.

Beneficiaries of the initiative have found they have not only gained from a
stronger brand by working under one banner as Made in Monmouthshire, but many
have launched new products and diversified.

Adventa was and still is able to take the financial risk out of trialling a new
product or service on behalf of a business, providing the support to make a
success of that new idea, and the potential for a sustainable future.

Visit www.monmouthshirerdp.org.uk to see the many RDP initiatives in
Monmouthshire.

Bees and biodiversity MERTHYR Tydfil is a hive of activity as part of a European
transnational co-operation project focusing on bees and biodiversity. Seven
partners from across Europe are involved, working together to prevent the
decline of pollinating insects and protect biodiversity.

The three key aims are land management to encourage a bee-friendly environment;
the economy and bee keeping - maintaining and reviving bee keeping and bee
hives, and information and education - raising awareness of the importance of
bees and biodiversity and the problems associated with bee mortality. A range of
training, workshops and information sessions will be held to nurture these aims.

Local actions relevant to each area, which include France, Finland, Slovakia,
Germany, Denmark and Belgium will be funded but common activities will also take
place to share best practice, provide an update of local findings and provide
opportunities for exchange visits for partners to experience actual activities
in other countries. This project will be delivered by Merthyr Tydfil County
Borough Council in conjunction with the Merthyr Tydfil and District Naturalists.

rurala@merthyr.gov.uk Carry on camping in the Vale of Glamorgan A CAMPING
project led by Creative Rural Communities has generated over £60,000 worth of
revenue to the Vale of Glamorgan this year.

More than 700 campers pitched up tents during the 28-day coastal camping pilot
scheme, launched by the Vale of Glamorgan Council's rural regeneration
initiative at the end of 2011. Five local landowners took part in the trial in
July and August this year, to diversify their existing businesses and raise the
profile of camping in the Vale.

In addition to providing alternative income for farm and land owners, the
project had a positive impact on the wider rural community with a number of
local businesses reporting an increase in visitors and trade.

As a result of the trial, one local landowner has already secured planning
consent to run a permanent campsite in Monknash. Glyn George, co-owner of the
Heritage Coast Campsite said: "In these difficult economic times the Perfect
Pitch initiative has had a positive impact on struggling rural communities;
creating employment opportunities and attracting visitor to the area.

"From licensing and planning to health and safety, marketing and grading, we've
been given expert advice." www.creativeruralcommunities.co.uk TASTE OF TORFAEN
SINCE the Taste of Torfaen project began in May 2011, the Torfaen Rural
Development Team has been working with local producers to research and pilot
methods of developing local produce and find new methods to get the produce to
market.

A producers' network was created to ensure producers were working together and
sharing ideas and resources. As a result, a food and craft market has been
launched at the RDP funded Llanyrafon Manor Rural Heritage Centre.

The market now takes place on the last Sunday of the month, between 10am and 2pm
and promotes locally sourced and produced food, drink and hand made craft
products. The range and quality of local produce has already exceeded
expectations and range from fresh made bread, cakes, meat, cheese, fruit and
vegetables to hand made jewellery and craft.

The first two markets have brought in over 1,000 visitors and the feedback has
been extremely positive from visitors and producers. ¦ For more information on
this project please visit www.torfaen.gov.uk or email create@torfaen.gov.uk

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Links with local food producers are vital
Wood can be collected from difficult locations
businesses of the Made in ¦ One of the successful member Monmouthshire
initiative
A project across Europe focuses on bee best practice
More than 700 campers pitched up tents
Llanyrafon Manor Food and Craft Market
¦ Owners John and Rhys with dairy cows in a field at Ty Tanglwyst Dairry, Pyle -
they have been supported by Reach, Bridgend's rural development team

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WWM


                    Copyright 2012 Western Mail and Echo Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              891 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 4, 1988 Wednesday

Countries continue to raise farm subsidies, report says

BYLINE: REUT

LENGTH: 243 words

DATELINE: Washington DC


Reuter
  WASHINGTON
  Despite international support for reversing the trend, governments have
generally continued increasing farm subsidies, according to a report
released by the U.S. Agriculture Department .

Japan and South Korea provide the most extensive support for their
farmers. But the report says the European Community, Canada and the United
States have all substantially boosted assistance to farmers.

The just-completed report reinforces three of the central conclusions
of an earlier study:
 . Less-developed countries tend to use subsidies to aid consumers.
 . Developed countries tend to assist producers.
 . Subsidies to producers of food grains, dairy products and sugar tend to
be higher than aid to other producers.

Examining a range of Japanese Government policies affecting producers
of 12 commodities, the report says the average farmer received 79 per cent
of the value of his output in the form of subsidies.

That percentage, called the 'producer subsidy equivalent,' was up
from an average of 72 per cent between 1982 and 1986.

The U.S. subsidy equivalent for 12 commodities soared to 36 per cent in
1986 from a 1982-86 average of 25 per cent, pushed up by sharply higher
income subsidies to wheat, feed grain and rice farmers following enactment
of the 1985 farm bill.

Canada's subsidy equivalent for 13 commodities rose to 43 per cent from
a 1982-86 average of 31 per cent. Dairy products, barley and rye were
commodities attracting the heaviest subsidies.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1988 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              892 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                            January 22, 2013 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Feds pony up oat money; Producers to target U.S., Mexico

BYLINE: Will Chabun, Leader-Post

SECTION: BUSINESS & AGRICULTURE; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 497 words


Bill Wilton quips that he "wasn't that great a student of geography", but he's
still baffled as to why oats from Australia are getting into the Mexican market
instead of oats from Canada.

But they are - and that's why the organization he heads, the Prairie Oat Growers
Association, wants to get back in the race there and in the U.S. with the help
of a $195,000 federal grant announced Monday by Regina-Lumsden-Lake Centre MP
Tom Lukiwski.

There's a lot at stake. Saskatchewan alone produces about two million tonnes of
oats each year. And in 2011, oat production in the Prairie provinces brought in
about $425 million.

The association will get the federal grant under a three-part export initiative
that will start by bringing together horse industry experts to raise awareness
of western Canadian oats and their nutritional value among buyers in the U.S.
equine feed industry.

As well, the federal money will help the association seek ways of cutting
transportation costs into the U.S. by bringing together stakeholders like
railways and millers.

Finally, the money, which is coming from Western Economic Diversification
Canada, will help the association send two trade missions to Mexico.

Wilton said the heyday of Canadian oats production was in the mid-1990s, when
the American equine - that's "horse", for city folks - market was over one
million tonnes per year and human consumption (think granola bars and breakfast
foods) was twice that.

Since then, Americans' human consumption of oats has been growing at a slow, but
steady pace, one or two per cent each year. But the use of Canadian oats as
equine food south of the border has tumbled by 75 per cent.

As a result, oat production in Canada has fallen about 20 per cent over the past
three years and Wilton has seen projections that acreage will fall by another 10
per cent this year. Prices, however, have remained steady and even increased a
little, "but not to the same level in recent years that other commodities have".

The biggest factor "was that convenience came into the market: Feed
manufacturers in the U.S. found things to substitute for oats ... basically,
anything they could put into a bag to meet the nutritional requirements for
horses."

"We understand the convenience issue - we just want the oats back in the bag,"
said Wilton, adding the association has commissioned a pair of "high-powered"
studies into oats' nutritional virtues.

Wilton said his group is exploring all shipping possibilities, including the
port of Churchill, on Hudson Bay.

Despite being hard to reach by rail, Mexico "is the most accessible market that
we think we can reach," he said, adding that his group's research will include
looking for buyers and millers in that country.

"We think we've got a quality product that has some advantage on its own, but we
have, frankly, never investigated that market for producers. And unless
producers are prepared to initiate these activities themselves, they simply
don't get done."

wchabun@leaderpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Will Chabun, Leader-Post; Regina-Lumsden-Lake Centre Conservative MP
Tom Lukiwski, left, announces a $195,000 federal grant Monday to help the
Prairie Oat Growers Association and its president Bill Wilton, expand Canadian
oat exports to the U.S. and Mexican markets.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2013 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              893 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           September 23, 2012 Sunday

Value-added ventures can get help

SECTION: DAKOTA WIRE; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 111 words


Agriculture Commissioner Doug Goehring is encouraging North Dakota farmers and
ranchers to look into a new federal program that provides help in developing
value-added agricultural ventures.

Goehring said the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Value-Added Producer Grant
Program provides up to $100,000 for planning and up to $300,000 for working
capital.

He said the money can be used for feasibility studies, business plans, marketing
and advertising. Grants cannot be used to buy property or equipment to build
facilities.

Goehring said Bowdon Meat Processing and Dakota Pride Cooperative each have
gotten nearly $50,000.

The deadline to apply is Oct. 15.

AssociatedPress

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2012 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              894 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              March 9, 2015 Monday

Missouri: Local Foods Matching Grant Program

LENGTH: 1074  words

DATELINE: Jefferson


Department of Agriculture, Missouri has issued the following news release:

Up to $5,000 in grant funding through the Department of Agriculture's Local
Foods Matching Grant Program is available to urban and small rural area
organizations assisting underserved areas increase fresh food access in rural
and urban areas through the development of production infrastructure, direct
distribution venues, education programs, workforce development and expand the
understanding of the importance of agriculture.

All funds for 2014-2015 have been awarded. New funds should be available July 1,
2015.

The one-time competitive grants may be used to:

Assist farmers' markets, urban/community garden expansion efforts and youth
initiatives related to promoting agriculture.
    Establish or expand partnerships with urban/community gardens, youth
initiatives and farmers' markets.
    Encourage agricultural production to combat hunger, poor nutrition and
obesity.
    Provide training and develop skills to the next generation of agricultural
producers.

Funds must be used for the creation of a farmers' market, the expansion of an
urban or community garden, to promote local food efforts and/or youth
initiatives that combat hunger, poor nutrition and obesity in collaboration with
community gardens or farmers' markets.

Grant applications are considered as received while funding remains, or through
June 30, 2015, whichever occurs first.

Local Foods Matching Grant ApplicationPDF Document

Grants awarded during July 2013 - June 2014 and the recipients' plans for those
funds include:

Historic Downtown Sikeston will use funds to expand the existing Sikeston
Farmers' Market and partner with the Scott County Health Department to educate
the community on the nutritional value and cost-savings associated with the use
of local produce.
    North Village Arts District Farmers and Artisans Market will use funds to
increase awareness of the market to central Columbia neighbors providing a
source of fresh local produce and products on Sundays from 9 am to 1 pm.
    The Kirksville R-III School Distract, in conjunction with the Green Thumb
Project, Truman State University, the Northeast Missouri Health Council, the
Kirksville Parks and Recreation Department and the Missouri Department of
Conservation, will improve student learning through community gardening, promote
the growth and consumption of local foods and develop a greater appreciation for
education in outdoor settings.
    The Warrensburg Farmers' Market will use funds to expand their marketing
campaign, increase community involvement and begin accepting EBT payments this
year.
    The St. Louis MetroMarket will transform a city transit bus to create a
grocery store on wheels and will make predetermined stops at regularly scheduled
times in St. Louis area food deserts and incentivize healthy eating by keeping
the high quality, local food affordable.
    Truman Medical Centers will launch the Healthy Harvest Mobile Market, a bus
wrapped in colorful food art and filled with reasonably priced fresh fruits and
vegetables, in conjunction with their partners, including The Health Care
Foundation of Greater Kansas City. The Mobile Market is expected to bring fresh
produce to urban neighborhoods without a nearby grocery store.
    Sustainable Farms & Communities, Inc. of Columbia plans to expand the Access
to Healthy Food program for low-income families with young children. The group
will use their grant to promote the existing program and educate families about
increasing their purchasing power at the farmers' market.
    Gateway Greening, in conjunction with partner the Missouri Foundation for
Health, is planning to host a Community Garden Summit. The event, which will be
the 5th annual Summit, is expected to be a regional networking and educational
opportunity for individuals focused on food production and community building.
    The Community Action Agency of St. Louis plans to their grant toward raising
3,600 pounds of vegetables through the Bel-Ridge 'Seeds of Hope' Community Farm.
The produce raised will go to low-income families in Bel-Ridge. The project also
includes a tool lending program for gardeners and educational opportunities for
youth in conjunction with Lincoln University.
    The Housing Authority of the City of Macon plans to construct ten new raised
beds and expand the existing community garden and farmers' market programs. The
project also includes hands-on educational opportunities for low-income
residents as they grow vegetables from seed and have the opportunity to be
involved with the Southside Farmers' Market.
    The City of St. Peters plans to add new raised planters to existing
community gardens. The project is set to include four new planters and use
landscape timbers made of recycled plastic.
    The International Institute of St. Louis plans to expand the International
Institute Global Farmers Initiative, which enables refugees in the U.S. to
develop agricultural skills, including raising gardens, and integrate into their
new communities.
    The Webb City Farmers' Market plans to host a Winter Production Conference
for individuals interested in developing or expanding operations growing produce
for farmers' markets year-round. The group is partnering with the University of
Missouri Cooperative Extension Service and Lincoln University Extension in the
effort.
    The Farmers Market of the Ozarks plans to use a grant to grow the market's
"Wellness Thursdays" program through cooking demonstrations and video
promotions. The existing program is a popular attraction for visitors at the
weekly Thursday evening markets, which attract visitors from four states
according to market organizers.
    The Central Missouri Foster Care & Adoption Association plans to improve
foster and adoptive families' access to healthy food resources through education
and financial assistance.
    The Columbia Center for Urban Agriculture plans to empower low-income
families to grow their own produce through the Opportunity Garden Program and a
partnership with AmeriCorps Vista.
    The University of Missouri's College of Agriculture, Food and Natural
Resources will plans to promote value added opportunities for Missouri specialty
crop producers in conjunction with ongoing efforts at the University's Bradford
Research Farm.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              895 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      Chico Enterprise-Record (California)

                           February 19, 2011 Saturday

Innovation Lab in Chico: Hatching businesses and jobs is the hope

BYLINE: By LAURA URSENY - Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS; Local

LENGTH: 800 words


EDITOR'S NOTE: This is the first story in a two-part series.

CHICO -- Great minds in this area began brainstorming on how innovation,
entrepreneurs, training and government money might come together to create badly
needed jobs.

What's hatching in south Chico is the Innovation Lab, a place that could be a
job incubator for the region.

With Butte County unemployment figures in the teens for more than a year, and
more than 14,000 people out of work, there's an urgency to uncover new jobs.

Both public and private entities are looking at the potential of renewable
resources as a job producer, spurred along by several million dollars in federal
and state grants.

Physically, the Innovation Lab is composed initially of two buildings in the
Hegan Lane Business Park. One is the new home to an existing manufacturer that
focuses on alternative energy products. The other building is dedicated to
research and development.

Behind the Innovation Lab are the usual local faces of economic development,
government and education that have penciled out business development and job
creation.

The first building   341 Huss   is now the official headquarters for Springboard
Biodiesel, which makes equipment to manufacture biodiesel fuel by gobbling up
restaurant and food service grease.

The locally grown company consolidated two Chico locations into one, and gained
room to grow. The owners   and onlookers   say it's on the brink of an expansion
with new products.

The Innovation Lab has already been dubbed a state-recognized iHub, one of 12
targeted for future funding.

Springboard Biodiesel is growing

A private business, Springboard Biodiesel has received help from the Private
Industry Council of Butte County, a nonprofit, quasi-government agency that
funnels money into work-force programs.

Springboard leases from the PIC, which has lowered the cost. Because the PIC was
able to offer "compelling" rates, Springboard co-owner Mark Roberts said, the
move to the business park made sense financially and productively.

"Now that we're face-to-face, the productivity has increased," said Roberts. It
also allows for the roll-out of new products, and the company should be in a
position this year to add employees to the 10 it had last year.

Roberts said Springboard will be announcing "fairly innovative" new products
soon that would spur that hiring.

Right now, it manufactures small biodiesel processors that produce 40, 50 and
100 gallons.

Chico State's Research Center

The other building   345 Huss   is affiliated with Chico State University's
Sustainable Manufacturing program, providing space for research and training.

"The goal is to provide room for start-ups' internal facilities and incubator,"
said Daren Otten, who heads the university program.

What will happen inside the empty building will revolve around research,
training, teaching, business mentoring and workshops. Financial guidance for
businesses through Golden Capital Network is part of that agenda.

"Testing is a big component of this. It provides value to companies that can't
do it internally. We're looking at the feasibility side of it too," Otten said.

The research could be spurred through private industry, Chico State or Butte
College.

"The focus is on scalable enterprise with growth potential," said Otten, who
believes one or more projects will be in place soon.

Seeking Green Jobs, With Green Dollars

"I was tired of going to green conferences, and I knew we needed to do something
here," said Bill Finley, executive director of the Private Industry Council of
Butte County, one of the partners in the Innovation Lab.

With an eye to this area, Finley said local efforts fueled by government grants
and private-sector efforts have identified renewable resources, such as solar,
as promising job producers.

Health care is another job producer, but with the government's attention focused
on renewable energy resources, that's been put second, Finley said.

"We tried to figure out what's the next wave of jobs and how to get there," said
Finley.

Audrey Taylor, CEO of Chabin Concepts of Chico, another partner, noted, "There's
so much innovation around here. This could be the catalyst project that gets the
area recognized."

Taylor helped Springboard Biodiesel get settled.

She noted that this area has landed a number of grants, some of which will be
dedicated to the Chico center.

Grant-getter and another partner, Northern Rural Training Employment Consortium,
announced a $4 million grant last year to help provide training for green jobs,
and a portion of another grant of $3.5 million will help, too.

Other partners include Golden Capital Network, Butte College and Chico Economic
Planning Corp., all of which have worked for years to increase jobs and train
employees.

Staff writer Laura Urseny can be reached at 896-7756 or lurseny@chicoer.com

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Springboard Biodiesel owners and brothers Matt (left) and Mark Roberts
show off one of their biodiesel processors at their new Huss Drive location.
(Bill Husa/Staff Photo) All Chico E-R photos are available here .
This building at 345 Huss Drive is affiliated with Chico State University's
Sustainable Manufacturing program, providing space for research and training.
(Ty Barbour/Staff Photo) All Chico E-R photos are available here .

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2011 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              896 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Meghalaya Times (India)

                                January 1, 2014

Venture Capital Assistance Scheme for Agripreneurs

LENGTH: 456 words

DATELINE: Shillong


Shillong, Nov. 26 -- As a part of the sixth phase of its awareness camp, Small
Farmer Agri-Business Consortium (SFAC) conducted camps at Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. The Scheme
offers Venture Capital to set up agri-business projects and Project Development
Facility (PDF) to assist producer, producer groups/organization, and units in
Agri-Export Zones and agriculture graduates in preparation of economically
viable Detailed Project Report (DPR).

These camps were conducted in 4 districts of Meghalaya, namely, East Khasi
Hills, West Khasi Hills, West Garo Hills and East Garo Hills. The camps are
being attended by Department of Agriculture, Department of Horticulture, NGOs &
SHG, Entrepreneurs, Department of Fisheries, Dept. of Forest, LDM Including
Bankers, NABARD, Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti, Finance Corporations, SFAC, AFC, and
others.

The scheme envisages single window approach while associating with banks
financing the projects, to extend venture capital, with term loan and working
capital, to agribusiness applicants. The project should be in agriculture or
allied sectors only like horticulture, floriculture, medicinal and aromatic
plants, minor forest produce (MFP), apiculture, and fisheries, and other similar
fields. The projects in dairy and poultry sectors have been excluded.

The project should be able to provide assured market to farmer/ producer
groups', catering the needs of supplier. It should create potential for
diversification of high value crop, resulting in higher incomes both at the
level of supplier and procurer, which in this case could be an agri-business
unit. Project should be viable in nature and should be accepted by bank for
grant of term loan.

According to the Managing Director, SFAC, Pravesh Sharma, "The aim is to
facilitate setting up of agri-business ventures in close association with banks.
To catalyze private investments in setting up of agri-business projects and,
thereby providing assured market to producers for increasing rural income &
employment."

The project seeking VCA from SFAC must be credit linked and currently the
financing institutions like the Nationalized Banks, SBI and its subsidiaries and
other commercial banks are eligible to recommend for VCA under the Scheme.

Thrust is given to strengthen backward linkages of agri-business projects with
producers in order to assist farmers, producer groups and agriculture graduates
to enhance their participation in value chain through Project Development
Facility (PDF).

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Meghalaya Times. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 Meghalaya Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              897 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                           October 20, 2011 Thursday

YOUNG cattle values are rising and the trend

SECTION: MARKETS; Pg. 90

LENGTH: 465 words


YOUNG cattle values are rising and the trend may continue for weeks to come as
producers hold onto their stock since the seasonal break after good rain in most
areas of the Central Tablelands, Slopes and Western Plains. However, it is
supply which will be the determining factor. Light and medium weight vealer
steers returning to the paddock sold from 240 to 255 cents a kilogram and medium
weights to the trade averaged 236c/kg according to National Livestock Reporting
Service NSW figures at the end of last week.

The values were up from about 239c/kg the week prior. Bowyer and Livermore
agent, Grant Lynch, Bathurst, said close to half of the 6531 head yarded at last
Friday's Central Tablelands Livestock Exchange (CTLX) store sale were young
cattle with the heavier end being snapped up by buyers looking at backgrounding
for the Coles and Woolworths supermarket trade markets. "The younger calves were
going back to traditional backgrounders," Mr Lynch said. At Dubbo, however,
there were only 2300 cattle yarded for last Thursday's prime market with a
limited supply of young cattle penned according to Landmark Dubbo livestock
agent, David East. "Ten- to 11-month-old Angus weaners sold up to 245c/kg, while
some Charolais/Hereford heifer calves about 320kg made 235c/kg," Mr East said.
"But the good light butcher calves just aren't here at the moment." Mr Lynch
said a lot of calves going through CTLX were just rising 12 months. "What I'm
noticing in the past couple of years is producers are taking the opportunity and
selling their cattle young as stores instead of taking them through to markets
as light feeders," he said. "That's just how the market is, it's been very
solid." Mr Lynch said a lot of people were more than happy with selling a weaner
steer for $650 to $700 without having to add any further inputs and time in
paddocks. Mr East agreed and said young cattle were too dear for fatteners to
buy at present. "With an 11-month-old steer making $750, why would a producer
grow it out for 12 months to return say $1000 and only make $200," he said. But,
he expected another flush of numbers to come through in the next month. Elders
Dubbo livestock manager, Paul Jameson, said the market in the past two to three
months has experienced a general improving trend in young cattle. "But that's on
the back of a few things," he said. "It's traditional the EYCI would normally
improve through August and September, in most years anyway. "Also there has not
been a lot of numbers in centres in the past six to eight weeks with an
exception of Dubbo, which has drawn a lot of cattle from the far west of the
State in this time. "But the change in fortunes of the seasons with the break in
the weather resulting in some decent rain falls, have tightened up supply a
bit."

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2011 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              898 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Scotsman

                            February 20, 2017 Monday

Roanne Dodds

LENGTH: 801  words


Roanne Dodds, dancer, lawyer and arts producer. Born: 16 September, 1965, in
Lima, Peru. Died: 31 January, 2017, in Glasgow, aged 52.

It's not that often that a lawyer will train to become dancer and then spend the
rest of their career inspiring a large swathe of a country's creative population
to be true to their calling.

But then, Roanne Dods was a very unusual person, described by many as visionary,
dynamic, generous and resilient.

One of her abiding skills was being able to connect creative ideas with the
resources that would bring them alive.

In her most high-profile role she was founding director of the Jerwood
Charitable Foundation, during which time she awarded £14 million in grants
across a number of art forms, and before she died she was producer of Small is
Beautiful, celebrating and inspiring microenterprises around the world, and
Imagination: Scotland's First Festival of Ideas.

Roanne Dods, the oldest of three children, was born in 1965 in Lima, Peru, where
her parents were expats working in the fabric industry.

When she was about ten her family moved to Milan, and shortly after that Dods
became a boarder at Wellington School in Ayr, where she did well academically.

She went on to study French, Arabic and moral philosophy at the University of St
Andrews, and after falling for a boy from Canada, spent a year in his home
country. On her return to Scotland she studied law at the University of
Edinburgh, specialising in family matters, and after graduating specialised in
urgent litigation around family violence.

Dods then succumbed to her more creative instincts and went to London to do an
MA in dance studies at the Laban Dance Centre, which has since merged with the
Trinity College of Music to form the Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and
Dance.

She strongly believed that dance and law balanced her practice, and both would
prove invaluable when she made her next move, becoming a founding director of
the Jerwood Charitable Foundation, a charity dedicated to funding the arts, with
a particular focus on supporting talent. Dods was not a woman who believed in
restricting herself to individual projects.

Over the years she had dozens of roles, including being director of PAL Labs;
deputy director at the Dovecot Studios; producer at the International Futures
Forum and research and projects co-ordinator for the Mindful Leadership
Foundation.

She was also vice chair of Scottish Ballet, chair of the Fuel theatre company,
chair of the Battersea Arts Centre in London and a member of the Department of
Culture, Media and Sport External Advisory Group, advising government policy for
arts and culture.

On top of this she was also a founding director of Mission Models Money a
network of thinkers and doers working to enhance the way people working in the
cultural sector used resources to create experiences of deeper public value - as
well as IC: Innovative Craft and the Work Room at the Tramway in Glasgow.

In 2004 Sir John Tusa presented Dods with an Angel Award by the International
Society for the Performing arts for "innovative and spectacular work across the
artistic spectrum in recent years", and the following year she was number 34 in
The Arts Power 100 list published by The Times.

As well as having an exceptional facility for being able to express the value of
arts and culture in a way that would convince the holders of purse strings that
they were benefiting a worthwhile cause,

Dods loved the simple pleasures of swimming, eating good food and cooking for
friends, of which she made many, collected from all parts of her life.

She loved spending time in Colonsay and Spain, being close to the water.

She also had a deep fondness for colour and craftsmanship, and had a special
appreciation for Vivienne Westwood fashions. She wore clothes well.

She met Paul in Edinburgh in the late 1990s when she was living in London.

They got married in Ullapool, then moved to Glasgow, where their son, Oscar, was
born.

Oscar's early years coincided with a demanding work load for Roanne, who was
then spreading her time between Jerwood in London and Glasgow.

The couple separated in 2004 and friends commended them on their shared care of
and dedication to their beloved boy.

Over the past seven years, she developed a wonderful relationship with Tom, Adam
and Holly, the children of her partner, Mike, and she took great comfort and
affection from her adord dogs Alfie and Roly.

Roanne Dods died at the Prince and Princess of Wales Hospice in Glasgow. She had
handled her cancer with strength and humour, never allowing it to diminish her
interest in her friends, their work and events unfolding in the outside world.

She is survived by her family and a vast network of people whose creative
ambitions would never have been realised were it not for her.

ASHLEY DAVIES

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STTS


                       Copyright 2017 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              899 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Scotsman

                            February 20, 2017 Monday

Roanne Dodds

LENGTH: 801  words


Roanne Dodds, dancer, lawyer and arts producer. Born: 16 September, 1965, in
Lima, Peru. Died: 31 January, 2017, in Glasgow, aged 52.

It's not that often that a lawyer will train to become dancer and then spend the
rest of their career inspiring a large swathe of a country's creative population
to be true to their calling.

But then, Roanne Dods was a very unusual person, described by many as visionary,
dynamic, generous and resilient.

One of her abiding skills was being able to connect creative ideas with the
resources that would bring them alive.

In her most high-profile role she was founding director of the Jerwood
Charitable Foundation, during which time she awarded £14 million in grants
across a number of art forms, and before she died she was producer of Small is
Beautiful, celebrating and inspiring microenterprises around the world, and
Imagination: Scotland's First Festival of Ideas.

Roanne Dods, the oldest of three children, was born in 1965 in Lima, Peru, where
her parents were expats working in the fabric industry.

When she was about ten her family moved to Milan, and shortly after that Dods
became a boarder at Wellington School in Ayr, where she did well academically.

She went on to study French, Arabic and moral philosophy at the University of St
Andrews, and after falling for a boy from Canada, spent a year in his home
country. On her return to Scotland she studied law at the University of
Edinburgh, specialising in family matters, and after graduating specialised in
urgent litigation around family violence.

Dods then succumbed to her more creative instincts and went to London to do an
MA in dance studies at the Laban Dance Centre, which has since merged with the
Trinity College of Music to form the Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and
Dance.

She strongly believed that dance and law balanced her practice, and both would
prove invaluable when she made her next move, becoming a founding director of
the Jerwood Charitable Foundation, a charity dedicated to funding the arts, with
a particular focus on supporting talent. Dods was not a woman who believed in
restricting herself to individual projects.

Over the years she had dozens of roles, including being director of PAL Labs;
deputy director at the Dovecot Studios; producer at the International Futures
Forum and research and projects co-ordinator for the Mindful Leadership
Foundation.

She was also vice chair of Scottish Ballet, chair of the Fuel theatre company,
chair of the Battersea Arts Centre in London and a member of the Department of
Culture, Media and Sport External Advisory Group, advising government policy for
arts and culture.

On top of this she was also a founding director of Mission Models Money a
network of thinkers and doers working to enhance the way people working in the
cultural sector used resources to create experiences of deeper public value - as
well as IC: Innovative Craft and the Work Room at the Tramway in Glasgow.

In 2004 Sir John Tusa presented Dods with an Angel Award by the International
Society for the Performing arts for "innovative and spectacular work across the
artistic spectrum in recent years", and the following year she was number 34 in
The Arts Power 100 list published by The Times.

As well as having an exceptional facility for being able to express the value of
arts and culture in a way that would convince the holders of purse strings that
they were benefiting a worthwhile cause,

Dods loved the simple pleasures of swimming, eating good food and cooking for
friends, of which she made many, collected from all parts of her life.

She loved spending time in Colonsay and Spain, being close to the water.

She also had a deep fondness for colour and craftsmanship, and had a special
appreciation for Vivienne Westwood fashions. She wore clothes well.

She met Paul in Edinburgh in the late 1990s when she was living in London.

They got married in Ullapool, then moved to Glasgow, where their son, Oscar, was
born.

Oscar's early years coincided with a demanding work load for Roanne, who was
then spreading her time between Jerwood in London and Glasgow.

The couple separated in 2004 and friends commended them on their shared care of
and dedication to their beloved boy.

Over the past seven years, she developed a wonderful relationship with Tom, Adam
and Holly, the children of her partner, Mike, and she took great comfort and
affection from her adord dogs Alfie and Roly.

Roanne Dods died at the Prince and Princess of Wales Hospice in Glasgow. She had
handled her cancer with strength and humour, never allowing it to diminish her
interest in her friends, their work and events unfolding in the outside world.

She is survived by her family and a vast network of people whose creative
ambitions would never have been realised were it not for her.

ASHLEY DAVIES

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SWTS


                       Copyright 2017 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              900 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Scotsman

                            February 20, 2017 Monday

Roanne Dods

LENGTH: 801  words


Roanne Dods, dancer, lawyer and arts producer. Born: 16 September, 1965, in
Lima, Peru. Died: 31 January, 2017, in Glasgow, aged 51.

It's not that often that a lawyer will train to become dancer and then spend the
rest of their career inspiring a large swathe of a country's creative population
to be true to their calling.

But then, Roanne Dods was a very unusual person, described by many as visionary,
dynamic, generous and resilient.

One of her abiding skills was being able to connect creative ideas with the
resources that would bring them alive.

In her most high-profile role she was founding director of the Jerwood
Charitable Foundation, during which time she awarded £14 million in grants
across a number of art forms, and before she died she was producer of Small is
Beautiful, celebrating and inspiring microenterprises around the world, and
Imagination: Scotland's First Festival of Ideas.

Roanne Dods, the oldest of three children, was born in 1965 in Lima, Peru, where
her parents were expats working in the fabric industry.

When she was about ten her family moved to Milan, and shortly after that Dods
became a boarder at Wellington School in Ayr, where she did well academically.

She went on to study French, Arabic and moral philosophy at the University of St
Andrews, and after falling for a boy from Canada, spent a year in his home
country. On her return to Scotland she studied law at the University of
Edinburgh, specialising in family matters, and after graduating specialised in
urgent litigation around family violence.

Dods then succumbed to her more creative instincts and went to London to do an
MA in dance studies at the Laban Dance Centre, which has since merged with the
Trinity College of Music to form the Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and
Dance.

She strongly believed that dance and law balanced her practice, and both would
prove invaluable when she made her next move, becoming a founding director of
the Jerwood Charitable Foundation, a charity dedicated to funding the arts, with
a particular focus on supporting talent. Dods was not a woman who believed in
restricting herself to individual projects.

Over the years she had dozens of roles, including being director of PAL Labs;
deputy director at the Dovecot Studios; producer at the International Futures
Forum and research and projects co-ordinator for the Mindful Leadership
Foundation.

She was also vice chair of Scottish Ballet, chair of the Fuel theatre company,
chair of the Battersea Arts Centre in London and a member of the Department of
Culture, Media and Sport External Advisory Group, advising government policy for
arts and culture.

On top of this she was also a founding director of Mission Models Money a
network of thinkers and doers working to enhance the way people working in the
cultural sector used resources to create experiences of deeper public value - as
well as IC: Innovative Craft and the Work Room at the Tramway in Glasgow.

In 2004 Sir John Tusa presented Dods with an Angel Award by the International
Society for the Performing arts for "innovative and spectacular work across the
artistic spectrum in recent years", and the following year she was number 34 in
The Arts Power 100 list published by The Times.

As well as having an exceptional facility for being able to express the value of
arts and culture in a way that would convince the holders of purse strings that
they were benefiting a worthwhile cause,

Dods loved the simple pleasures of swimming, eating good food and cooking for
friends, of which she made many, collected from all parts of her life.

She loved spending time in Colonsay and Spain, being close to the water.

She also had a deep fondness for colour and craftsmanship, and had a special
appreciation for Vivienne Westwood fashions. She wore clothes well.

She met Paul in Edinburgh in the late 1990s when she was living in London.

They got married in Ullapool, then moved to Glasgow, where their son, Oscar, was
born.

Oscar's early years coincided with a demanding work load for Roanne, who was
then spreading her time between Jerwood in London and Glasgow.

The couple separated in 2004 and friends commended them on their shared care of
and dedication to their beloved boy.

Over the past seven years, she developed a wonderful relationship with Tom, Adam
and Holly, the children of her partner, Mike, and she took great comfort and
affection from her adored dogs Alfie and Roly.

Roanne Dods died at the Prince and Princess of Wales Hospice in Glasgow. She had
handled her cancer with strength and humour, never allowing it to diminish her
interest in her friends, their work and events unfolding in the outside world.

She is survived by her family and a vast network of people whose creative
ambitions would never have been realised were it not for her.

ASHLEY DAVIES

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STTS


                       Copyright 2017 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              901 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Scotsman

                            February 20, 2017 Monday

Roanne Dods

LENGTH: 801  words


Roanne Dods, dancer, lawyer and arts producer. Born: 16 September, 1965, in
Lima, Peru. Died: 31 January, 2017, in Glasgow, aged 51.

It's not that often that a lawyer will train to become dancer and then spend the
rest of their career inspiring a large swathe of a country's creative population
to be true to their calling.

But then, Roanne Dods was a very unusual person, described by many as visionary,
dynamic, generous and resilient.

One of her abiding skills was being able to connect creative ideas with the
resources that would bring them alive.

In her most high-profile role she was founding director of the Jerwood
Charitable Foundation, during which time she awarded £14 million in grants
across a number of art forms, and before she died she was producer of Small is
Beautiful, celebrating and inspiring microenterprises around the world, and
Imagination: Scotland's First Festival of Ideas.

Roanne Dods, the oldest of three children, was born in 1965 in Lima, Peru, where
her parents were expats working in the fabric industry.

When she was about ten her family moved to Milan, and shortly after that Dods
became a boarder at Wellington School in Ayr, where she did well academically.

She went on to study French, Arabic and moral philosophy at the University of St
Andrews, and after falling for a boy from Canada, spent a year in his home
country. On her return to Scotland she studied law at the University of
Edinburgh, specialising in family matters, and after graduating specialised in
urgent litigation around family violence.

Dods then succumbed to her more creative instincts and went to London to do an
MA in dance studies at the Laban Dance Centre, which has since merged with the
Trinity College of Music to form the Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and
Dance.

She strongly believed that dance and law balanced her practice, and both would
prove invaluable when she made her next move, becoming a founding director of
the Jerwood Charitable Foundation, a charity dedicated to funding the arts, with
a particular focus on supporting talent. Dods was not a woman who believed in
restricting herself to individual projects.

Over the years she had dozens of roles, including being director of PAL Labs;
deputy director at the Dovecot Studios; producer at the International Futures
Forum and research and projects co-ordinator for the Mindful Leadership
Foundation.

She was also vice chair of Scottish Ballet, chair of the Fuel theatre company,
chair of the Battersea Arts Centre in London and a member of the Department of
Culture, Media and Sport External Advisory Group, advising government policy for
arts and culture.

On top of this she was also a founding director of Mission Models Money a
network of thinkers and doers working to enhance the way people working in the
cultural sector used resources to create experiences of deeper public value - as
well as IC: Innovative Craft and the Work Room at the Tramway in Glasgow.

In 2004 Sir John Tusa presented Dods with an Angel Award by the International
Society for the Performing arts for "innovative and spectacular work across the
artistic spectrum in recent years", and the following year she was number 34 in
The Arts Power 100 list published by The Times.

As well as having an exceptional facility for being able to express the value of
arts and culture in a way that would convince the holders of purse strings that
they were benefiting a worthwhile cause,

Dods loved the simple pleasures of swimming, eating good food and cooking for
friends, of which she made many, collected from all parts of her life.

She loved spending time in Colonsay and Spain, being close to the water.

She also had a deep fondness for colour and craftsmanship, and had a special
appreciation for Vivienne Westwood fashions. She wore clothes well.

She met Paul in Edinburgh in the late 1990s when she was living in London.

They got married in Ullapool, then moved to Glasgow, where their son, Oscar, was
born.

Oscar's early years coincided with a demanding work load for Roanne, who was
then spreading her time between Jerwood in London and Glasgow.

The couple separated in 2004 and friends commended them on their shared care of
and dedication to their beloved boy.

Over the past seven years, she developed a wonderful relationship with Tom, Adam
and Holly, the children of her partner, Mike, and she took great comfort and
affection from her adored dogs Alfie and Roly.

Roanne Dods died at the Prince and Princess of Wales Hospice in Glasgow. She had
handled her cancer with strength and humour, never allowing it to diminish her
interest in her friends, their work and events unfolding in the outside world.

She is survived by her family and a vast network of people whose creative
ambitions would never have been realised were it not for her.

ASHLEY DAVIES

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SWTS


                       Copyright 2017 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              902 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Scotsman

                            February 20, 2017 Monday

Roanne Dodds

LENGTH: 801  words


Roanne Dodds, dancer, lawyer and arts producer. Born: 16 September, 1965, in
Lima, Peru. Died: 31 January, 2017, in Glasgow, aged 51.

It's not that often that a lawyer will train to become dancer and then spend the
rest of their career inspiring a large swathe of a country's creative population
to be true to their calling.

But then, Roanne Dods was a very unusual person, described by many as visionary,
dynamic, generous and resilient.

One of her abiding skills was being able to connect creative ideas with the
resources that would bring them alive.

In her most high-profile role she was founding director of the Jerwood
Charitable Foundation, during which time she awarded £14 million in grants
across a number of art forms, and before she died she was producer of Small is
Beautiful, celebrating and inspiring microenterprises around the world, and
Imagination: Scotland's First Festival of Ideas.

Roanne Dods, the oldest of three children, was born in 1965 in Lima, Peru, where
her parents were expats working in the fabric industry.

When she was about ten her family moved to Milan, and shortly after that Dods
became a boarder at Wellington School in Ayr, where she did well academically.

She went on to study French, Arabic and moral philosophy at the University of St
Andrews, and after falling for a boy from Canada, spent a year in his home
country. On her return to Scotland she studied law at the University of
Edinburgh, specialising in family matters, and after graduating specialised in
urgent litigation around family violence.

Dods then succumbed to her more creative instincts and went to London to do an
MA in dance studies at the Laban Dance Centre, which has since merged with the
Trinity College of Music to form the Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and
Dance.

She strongly believed that dance and law balanced her practice, and both would
prove invaluable when she made her next move, becoming a founding director of
the Jerwood Charitable Foundation, a charity dedicated to funding the arts, with
a particular focus on supporting talent. Dods was not a woman who believed in
restricting herself to individual projects.

Over the years she had dozens of roles, including being director of PAL Labs;
deputy director at the Dovecot Studios; producer at the International Futures
Forum and research and projects co-ordinator for the Mindful Leadership
Foundation.

She was also vice chair of Scottish Ballet, chair of the Fuel theatre company,
chair of the Battersea Arts Centre in London and a member of the Department of
Culture, Media and Sport External Advisory Group, advising government policy for
arts and culture.

On top of this she was also a founding director of Mission Models Money a
network of thinkers and doers working to enhance the way people working in the
cultural sector used resources to create experiences of deeper public value - as
well as IC: Innovative Craft and the Work Room at the Tramway in Glasgow.

In 2004 Sir John Tusa presented Dods with an Angel Award by the International
Society for the Performing arts for "innovative and spectacular work across the
artistic spectrum in recent years", and the following year she was number 34 in
The Arts Power 100 list published by The Times.

As well as having an exceptional facility for being able to express the value of
arts and culture in a way that would convince the holders of purse strings that
they were benefiting a worthwhile cause,

Dods loved the simple pleasures of swimming, eating good food and cooking for
friends, of which she made many, collected from all parts of her life.

She loved spending time in Colonsay and Spain, being close to the water.

She also had a deep fondness for colour and craftsmanship, and had a special
appreciation for Vivienne Westwood fashions. She wore clothes well.

She met Paul in Edinburgh in the late 1990s when she was living in London.

They got married in Ullapool, then moved to Glasgow, where their son, Oscar, was
born.

Oscar's early years coincided with a demanding work load for Roanne, who was
then spreading her time between Jerwood in London and Glasgow.

The couple separated in 2004 and friends commended them on their shared care of
and dedication to their beloved boy.

Over the past seven years, she developed a wonderful relationship with Tom, Adam
and Holly, the children of her partner, Mike, and she took great comfort and
affection from her adord dogs Alfie and Roly.

Roanne Dods died at the Prince and Princess of Wales Hospice in Glasgow. She had
handled her cancer with strength and humour, never allowing it to diminish her
interest in her friends, their work and events unfolding in the outside world.

She is survived by her family and a vast network of people whose creative
ambitions would never have been realised were it not for her.

ASHLEY DAVIES

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STTS


                       Copyright 2017 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              903 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Scotsman

                            February 20, 2017 Monday

Roanne Dodds

LENGTH: 801  words


Roanne Dodds, dancer, lawyer and arts producer. Born: 16 September, 1965, in
Lima, Peru. Died: 31 January, 2017, in Glasgow, aged 51.

It's not that often that a lawyer will train to become dancer and then spend the
rest of their career inspiring a large swathe of a country's creative population
to be true to their calling.

But then, Roanne Dods was a very unusual person, described by many as visionary,
dynamic, generous and resilient.

One of her abiding skills was being able to connect creative ideas with the
resources that would bring them alive.

In her most high-profile role she was founding director of the Jerwood
Charitable Foundation, during which time she awarded £14 million in grants
across a number of art forms, and before she died she was producer of Small is
Beautiful, celebrating and inspiring microenterprises around the world, and
Imagination: Scotland's First Festival of Ideas.

Roanne Dods, the oldest of three children, was born in 1965 in Lima, Peru, where
her parents were expats working in the fabric industry.

When she was about ten her family moved to Milan, and shortly after that Dods
became a boarder at Wellington School in Ayr, where she did well academically.

She went on to study French, Arabic and moral philosophy at the University of St
Andrews, and after falling for a boy from Canada, spent a year in his home
country. On her return to Scotland she studied law at the University of
Edinburgh, specialising in family matters, and after graduating specialised in
urgent litigation around family violence.

Dods then succumbed to her more creative instincts and went to London to do an
MA in dance studies at the Laban Dance Centre, which has since merged with the
Trinity College of Music to form the Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and
Dance.

She strongly believed that dance and law balanced her practice, and both would
prove invaluable when she made her next move, becoming a founding director of
the Jerwood Charitable Foundation, a charity dedicated to funding the arts, with
a particular focus on supporting talent. Dods was not a woman who believed in
restricting herself to individual projects.

Over the years she had dozens of roles, including being director of PAL Labs;
deputy director at the Dovecot Studios; producer at the International Futures
Forum and research and projects co-ordinator for the Mindful Leadership
Foundation.

She was also vice chair of Scottish Ballet, chair of the Fuel theatre company,
chair of the Battersea Arts Centre in London and a member of the Department of
Culture, Media and Sport External Advisory Group, advising government policy for
arts and culture.

On top of this she was also a founding director of Mission Models Money a
network of thinkers and doers working to enhance the way people working in the
cultural sector used resources to create experiences of deeper public value - as
well as IC: Innovative Craft and the Work Room at the Tramway in Glasgow.

In 2004 Sir John Tusa presented Dods with an Angel Award by the International
Society for the Performing arts for "innovative and spectacular work across the
artistic spectrum in recent years", and the following year she was number 34 in
The Arts Power 100 list published by The Times.

As well as having an exceptional facility for being able to express the value of
arts and culture in a way that would convince the holders of purse strings that
they were benefiting a worthwhile cause,

Dods loved the simple pleasures of swimming, eating good food and cooking for
friends, of which she made many, collected from all parts of her life.

She loved spending time in Colonsay and Spain, being close to the water.

She also had a deep fondness for colour and craftsmanship, and had a special
appreciation for Vivienne Westwood fashions. She wore clothes well.

She met Paul in Edinburgh in the late 1990s when she was living in London.

They got married in Ullapool, then moved to Glasgow, where their son, Oscar, was
born.

Oscar's early years coincided with a demanding work load for Roanne, who was
then spreading her time between Jerwood in London and Glasgow.

The couple separated in 2004 and friends commended them on their shared care of
and dedication to their beloved boy.

Over the past seven years, she developed a wonderful relationship with Tom, Adam
and Holly, the children of her partner, Mike, and she took great comfort and
affection from her adord dogs Alfie and Roly.

Roanne Dods died at the Prince and Princess of Wales Hospice in Glasgow. She had
handled her cancer with strength and humour, never allowing it to diminish her
interest in her friends, their work and events unfolding in the outside world.

She is survived by her family and a vast network of people whose creative
ambitions would never have been realised were it not for her.

ASHLEY DAVIES

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SWTS


                       Copyright 2017 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              904 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Variety

                            April 8, 2004, Thursday

Homeland Security

BYLINE: BRIAN LOWRY

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 696 words


(Movie; NBC, Sun. April 11, 9 p.m.)

Filmed in L.A. by Paramount Network Television. Executive producers, Christopher
Crowe, Kerry McCluggage; co-executive producer, Daniel Sackheim; producers, Ron
Binkowski, Clayton Townsend; co-producers, Regis Kimble, Eddie Williams;
director, Sackheim; writer, Crowe; camera, Jonathan Freeman; production design,
Ida Ransom; editor, Kimble; music, Scott Gilman; casting, Robert J. Ulrich, Eric
Dawson, Carol Kritzer. 120 MIN.

Admiral

Theodore McKee .... Tom Skerritt

Bradley Brand .... Grant Show

Joe Johnson .... Scott Glenn

Sol Binder .... Leland Orser

"Jungle Jane" Fulbar .... Marisol Nichols

After ordering two promising pilots tied to 9/11 that it chose not to turn into
series, NBC should perhaps save itself trouble and stick to "Law & Order"
spinoffs. Though awkward in places, as its fictional characters brush up against
reality, "Homeland Security" proves a compelling, well-made prototype that the
network is essentially dumping with little fanfare on Easter Sunday, having
previously punted on the foreign correspondent drama "War Stories."

Although designed as a series springboard (meaning the "movie" has no real
ending), "Homeland Security" does feel timely in chronicling the formation of a
Homeland Security Dept. before, during and after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. As
a result, the pilot explores some of the finger pointing and lack of
coordination that prevented the plot from being uncovered --- precisely the
issues currently being mulled over by the 9/11 commission.

By virtue of that approach, "Homeland Security" is more realistic and engaging
than a similarly themed series, "Threat Matrix," which ABC scheduled last fall
to mediocre results, though comparisons between the two pretty well end there.

Tautly directed by Daniel Sackheim from Christopher Crowe's script, the
multipronged story traces FBI and CIA operatives in the prelude to the attacks,
from mystery men taking flight lessons to heightened intelligence "chatter" in
which the numbers "9" and "11" keep repeating. The hard-bitten roster includes
Tom Skerritt as Theodore McKee, the admiral who brings the department together;
a craggy Scott Glenn as a CIA veteran pressed back into service, pursuing Osama
bin Laden; and "Melrose Place's" Grant Show as another agent operating in
Afghanistan.

The most sobering voice, however, belongs to national security expert Sol Binder
(Leland Orser), who refers to "stovepiping" --- that is, the failure of
disparate agencies to share information --- and the value of a joint department
to assemble "all the dots ... just waiting to be connected."

"Homeland Security" becomes a bit soapy and routine in the second hour, which
sees McKee's daughter whining about her Arab boyfriend's detained father.
There's also a fairly conventional chase-the-bad-guy plot involving a terrorist
played by Nicholas Guilak --- an actor whose dance card is busier due to
post-9/11 priorities, previously starring in NBC's movie "Saving Jessica Lynch."

Crowe captures the bellicose mood after Sept. 11, as an agent who had struggled
to find probable cause tells a colleague, "Today, I think we can get a warrant
on Nancy Reagan." Yet his characters also cite the need to safeguard civil
liberties, another ongoing concern since the attacks.

Admittedly, it's hard to foresee precisely where a series would have gone.
Blurring fiction and reality (including a sequence where the fictional agents
watch President Bush's 2002 State of the Union address), the pilot ends having
assembled a team to thwart terrorism, manned by some talented actors. Moreover,
two able grownups, Skerritt and Glenn, are on board to preside over the harder
bodies tailored to younger demos.

Both "Homeland Security" and "War Stories" might have been deemed to slice too
close to the bone, though that's clearly debatable, based on the horrors endured
on "24" this season and the more fanciful threats dished out by "Alias."

Either way, it's a battle NBC apparently thought better of fighting, leaving
behind only this exercise in cost amortization as a somewhat tantalizing taste
of the series that might have been.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2004 Reed Elsevier Inc.


                              905 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              906 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              907 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              908 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              909 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              910 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              911 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              912 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              913 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

NMDC board OKs bike trail, food waste probe

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: CARIBOU


- The executive board of Northern Maine Development Commission has given the
green light to two projects seeking funding, one which looks to reduce food
waste in the region and another that would identify a federally designated
bicycle route from Bangor to the St. John Valley.


Meeting Dec. 8, in Caribou, the board approved a solid waste management grant
proposal for $86,000 to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development.


"Grant funds will be used to stimulate review of food waste in restaurants,
institutions and other businesses," said NMDC Senior Planner Jay Kamm. "The goal
is to reduce food waste before it actually becomes a waste. A second goal is to
determine where unused nonperishable food could be reused."


According to Kamm, roughly 50 percent of all produce in the United States is
thrown away -- some 60 million tons (or $160 billion) worth of produce annually,
an amount constituting one third of all foodstuffs. Wasted food is also the
single biggest occupant in American landfills, the Environmental Protection
Agency has found.


Another component of the project would be to create an online backyard
composting training program. Kamm indicated that previous NMDC composting
classes were popular in the region, and by incorporating online training more
people could take part. He said if participants successfully finish the online
training they would be able to print out a certificate for a free backyard
composter, while supplies last.


Kamm also introduced another potential project, which would identify a federally
designated bicycle route in Aroostook and Penobscot counties.


"We [NMDC] have been asked to submit an application for the planning involved in
designating the bike route," said Kamm.


The Maine Department of Transportation is proposing a $100,000 contract for a
two-year project beginning in early 2017. NMDC would be responsible for
identifying the region's assets and potential routes, developing a stakeholder
group, facilitating the conversation with municipalities on where the route
should be located and working to link nearby communities to the proposed U.S.
bike route, as well as developing and submitting the federal application.


Also at the meeting the board received the final report on a recently completed
Rural Business Development Grant project which looked at agriculture
distribution opportunities for Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties.


Recommendations included encouraging further development of food value chain
networks, providing technical assistance to promote food hubs and distribution
channels, and working to expand marketing opportunities and lending programs to
assist producers.


Also as part of the project, the Maine Food Atlas was populated with producers
from Aroostook, Washington and Piscataquis counties. The Maine Food Atlas is a
local food asset mapping project, which provides essential baseline information
necessary for rebuilding community food systems, assuring greater food security
for all, and improving the social, economic, environmental and health impacts of
our food.


The next board meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 at NMDC in Caribou at 12:30 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Bangor Daily News


                              914 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday

Pakistan: WB approves Sindh Agricultural Growth Project

LENGTH: 399  words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD


ISLAMABAD, July 9 -- The World Bank's (WB) Board of Executive Directors approved
the Sindh Agricultural Growth Project in the amount of US$ 76.4 million. The
project aims to improve the productivity and market access of small and medium
producers in important commodity value chains, said WB press statement issued
here on Tuesday adding the project would benefit approximately 112,000 farmers
covering over 66,000 hectares. The project intends to achieve this objective by
investing in knowledge and technology for producers and sub-sectors of crops and
livestock, and strengthening public sector institutions to enhance the enabling
environment for sustained sectoral growth.

"The project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive
growth by prioritizing support to small and medium sized producers who are
trying to compete in horticulture markets", said Rachid Benmessaoud, World Bank
Country Director for Pakistan. "Investing in horticulture offers the best
potential for increased small producer incomes, new employment opportunities in
production and processing, improved resource productivity, and enhanced
micronutrient availability in the market," Benmessaoud added. The project
focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small farmer focus,
have significant involvement of women in production and processing, and, from a
national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest competitive advantage in these
pro-poor production value chains. Capacity building, technical assistance and
strategic planning for sector growth will also be provided through this project.
The project will also promote the private sector participation in the
agricultural development and sector growth through public-private models for
agribusiness development and support services. The federal government and Sindh
government have both highlighted commercial agriculture and market linkages as
priority investments for the sector. The credit is financed from the
International Development Association (IDA), the World Bank Group's grant and
low-interest arm. It will be on standard IDA terms, with a maturity of 25 years,
including a grace period of 5 years, the statement added

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              915 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              China Business News

                     December 14, 2013 Saturday 6:30 AM EST

US approves anti-dumping, countervailing probe against China's refrigeration
product

LENGTH: 235  words


Beijing: Adding to a string of trade protectionist measures launched against
China, the US International Trade Commission (USITC) on Friday approved to
initiate countervailing and anti-dumping probes against refrigeration products
imported from China, the state media reported.

The products which will fall under the investigation are refrigeration products
mainly used in automotive air conditioning systems, with the technical name 1,
1, 1, 2-Tetrafluoroethane, Xinhua reported.

There is a logical suggestion of material injury done to the US industry by
imports of 1, 1, 1, 2- Tetrafluoroethane from China, that are supposedly
subsidized and sold in the US market at less than fair value, the USITC
commissioners said.

All six USITC commissioners voting in the affirmative resulted in the US
Commerce Department continuing the investigations, and the latter is likely to
make preliminary determinations separately on countervailing and antidumping
duties on January 15 and March 31, 2014.

At the request of Louisiana-based refrigerant producer Mexichem Fluor Inc, the
US Commerce Department on December 3 initiated the anti-dumping and
countervailing duty investigations.

The company had alleged that the refrigeration products imported from China were
sold in the US below the fair value with a dumping margin of 198.52%, while
Chinese producers as well as exporters also received inappropriate government
subsidies.


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2013 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              916 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                             August 24, 1990 Friday
                                  Late Edition

FORD UNVEILS ITS REFORM VISION

BYLINE: MICHAEL LYNCH

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 376 words


Ford Australia yesterday unveiled a blueprint for motor industry reform that it
claims will ensure the existence of the domestic carmaking sector and boost
export capacity.

However, Ford's vision tips the scales heavily in favour of the existing
carmakers, particularly Ford, and freezes out the stand-alone importing
companies almost completely.

It also appears aimed at putting pressure on manufacturers like Toyota, whose
export performance and investment record is poor compared with companies like
Ford.

Ford's president, Mr Jac Nasser, said the industry could improve efficiency,
profitability and investment levels by implementing a"value-added" manufacturing
framework.

This would provide a meaningful incentive for producers to make substantial
investments in capital equipment and local value-added production, rewarding
those who did by giving them access to up to 140,000 duty-free imported cars and
light commercial vehicles - all of which are now subjected to tariff rates of
18-40 per cent.

The keystone of Ford's submission to the Industry Commission inquiry is its
value-added concept, which calls for the Car Plan producers (Ford, Toyota,
Mitsubishi, Nissan and GMHA) to achieve 80 per cent Australian value-added in
their production. In return, they would be allowed to import 20 per cent of
their components and other vehicles duty free. They can now import 15 per cent.

The Ford plan gives little hope to the import companies like BMW, Mercedes and
Jaguar unless they are prepared to invest money on becoming manufacturers or
arrange high-value export deals of Australian-produced componentry which could
earn them export credits. Ford argues that only auto companies that export goods
from Australia should be entitled to import automotive products.

Under Ford's scenario, the measurement for added value is not just the value of
production, local componentry and wages. It also includes the value of exports
and Australian product and technological investment.

Mr Nasser said the blueprint was a route to structural reform which eschewed
tariffs and rewarded companies prepared to invest in Australian manufacturing
capacity.

He also said reports of Ford seeking a $1 billion government subsidy for the
industry had come "from a misinformed leak".

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1990 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              917 of 998 DOCUMENTS



            The Daily Mercury and Rural Weekly (Mackay, Queensland)

                             May 10, 2012 Thursday

Winner looks to alter public perceptions

SECTION: Pg. 6

LENGTH: 427  words


NOT happy with the public perception of agriculture in recent times Western
Australia's RIRDC Rural Women's Award winner Catherine Marriott decided to do
something about it.

Catherine organised last week's Influential Women's Forum in Broome, Western
Australia.

The forum brought together 50 rural women across Australia to celebrate the role
women play in agriculture and learn how to collaborate between rural industries
and to communicate and engage with consumers.

"With global food security and competition for land use, understanding and
building relationships between producers and consumers is becoming increasingly
important," Catherine said.

"Primary producers need the support of consumers and consumers need primary
producers, but it's impossible to support something you don't understand, so
primary producers need to become better at communicating and engaging with
consumers."

United States Centre for Food Integrity CEO Charlie Arnot addressed the
workshop.

"Charlie Arnot has a very powerful and important message for Australia's
producers. His research has conclusively demonstrated that building confidence
and shared values with consumers is up to five times more effective than
demonstrating your scientific or economic credentials," Catherine said.

"That is why the forum was held - to give rural people the skills and tools to
communicate effectively and to build their confidence to get out there and
advocate on behalf of agriculture."

As a result of the Rural Women's Award Catherine will roll out Influential
Women's Forums across Australia.

Kununurra-based Catherine is involved in the northern Australian beef industry
and consults in pastoral training and leadership capacity to build relationships
in Australia and in Asia with companies and private clients. Catherine is a
recent graduate of the Australian Rural Leadership Program, a committee member
of RRR Network, an active member of the Country Women's Association and a
volunteer ambulance office with St John's Ambulance Australia.

The RIRDC Rural Women's Award is Australia's pre-eminent award for rural women.
The award supports women with demonstrated leadership capabilities who have the
desire and commitment to make a greater contribution to their industries and
communities.

State winners receive a $10,000 financial bursary to implement their award
vision with state winners and runners up getting the opportunity to undertake
the Australian Institute of Company Directors Company Directors Course and 12
months' facilitated individual strategic leadership support.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MBT


                    Copyright 2012 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              918 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The Economic Times

                             March 28, 2017 Tuesday

Amul, BigBasket among firms getting government approval to set 101 cold chain
projects

SECTION: AGRICULTURE

LENGTH: 391 words


NEW DELHI: Indian dairy marvel Amul and online grocer Big Basket are among the
companies that have got the federal approval to set up 101 integrated cold-chain
projects, signaling big investments in a sector considered crucial to reducing
farm output losses in Asia's third-biggest economy.

These projects, allocated by the Food Processing ministry, would help in the
storage of perishable produce such as fruits and vegetables, dairy, fish, meat,
marine, poultry, and the ready-to-eat products. The cold chains, to be set up
across the country, would streamline the agricultural supply chain, and create
huge employment opportunities for surplus farm hands.

"These 101 new integrated cold chain projects will leverage total investment of
Rs 3,100 crore for creation of modern infrastructure for the food processing
sector. The total expected grant-in-aid to be released to these projects is Rs
838 crore," Harsimrat Kaur Badal, the Minister for Food Processing, told the
media.

Among other big names winning such projects is the Haldiram Group that makes
ready-to-eat Indian snack-foods. The new projects will create additional
capacity of 2.76 lakh tonnes of cold storages, including controlled atmosphere
and frozen storage, 115 tonnes per hour of individual quick freezing (IQF)
capacity, 56 lakh litres per day of milk processing, 210 tonnes per batch of
blast freezing, and 629 refrigerated and insulated vehicles, she said.

"India is one of the largest food producers in the world and is the second
largest producer of fruits and vegetables, yet only 2.2% of our fruits and
vegetables are processed. While existing cold storages are concentrated in a few
states and roughly 80 to 90% are used for potatoes, India has a long way to go,"
said Badal.

The minister added that the cold chains will help provide better prices to
farmers. "The infrastructure will also reduce the wastage of perishables, add
value to the agricultural produce, and create huge employment opportunities
especially in rural areas," she said.

The ministry is focusing on building a national cold chain grid in the country
so that all food producing hubs are connected to cold storages and processing
industries. The cold-chain and value-addition infrastructure programme provides
financial assistance of up to Rs 10 crore to entrepreneurs.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              919 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright (c) 1993 Yeshiva University
                    Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law Journal

                                      1993

                          13 Cardozo Arts & Ent LJ 414

LENGTH: 13235 words

FRONTIER ISSUES: PITFALLS IN DEVELOPING AND MARKETING MULTIMEDIA PRODUCTS

NAME: Michael D. Scott *

BIO:



   * Of Counsel, Steinhart & Falconer, San Francisco, California. Mr. Scott was
formerly Vice-President and General Counsel for Sanctuary Woods Multimedia,
Inc., in San Mateo, California. He is the author of Multimedia: Law & Practice
and Scott on Computer Law.

 LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ...  In principle, licensing for a multimedia production is no different than
licensing for a film or television show. ...  As multimedia projects generally
consist of a combination of text, audio, video, graphics, and computer software,
a license or release will be needed for all copyrighted works used in the
project, unless the work is owned by the producer, is in the public domain, or
its use can be classified as a "fair use." ...  Licensing arrangements must
carefully and unambiguously set forth the rights granted to the multimedia
producer. ...  When a multimedia project is created from many generic elements,
these elements may be acquired on a non-exclusive basis which means that others
can also license the same content for use in their multimedia work. ...  When
licensing fictional texts, a multimedia producer probably will be negotiating
with the copyright holder through a literary agent and/or publisher. ...  These
fees, royalties, and residuals must be factored into the cost of licensing a
film or video clip. ...  A multimedia producer may want to shop around to find a
stock agency willing to license a volume of images on a royalty basis. ...  When
licensing the use of a film clip, the owner of that clip may or may not also be
able to grant the right to use the music on that clip. ...

TEXT:
 [*414]

   I. Introduction


    In principle, licensing for a multimedia production is no different than
licensing for a film or television show. However, the operative phrase is in
principle. As a practical matter, there are two significant differences in
licensing for multimedia. The first is the sheer volume of licenses that must be
negotiated. It is not uncommon for a multimedia developer to negotiate over a
hundred separate agreements.

    The second difference is the lack of a "track record" for pricing multimedia
licenses. Content owners are almost unanimously asking top dollar for licenses -
amounts that may make sense in the world of feature films or network television,
but not in today's multimedia projects.  n1 There are no winners when the costs
are so high that there is no market for the content.

    The following sections provide an overview of licensing practices, including
an analysis of various contract terms common to all forms of licensing,  n2
followed by specific information required by those licensing particular types of
materials for use in multimedia works, including: text;  n3 moving images;  n4
still images;  n5 music and sound;  n6 and computer software.  n7

    In appropriate instances, it may be possible to obtain a license directly
from the artist or copyright owner. In many cases, however, it will be necessary
to negotiate with a guild, union, or trade association that represents the
artist or copyright owner, further complicating the process.  [*415]


   II. Copyright Licenses


    As multimedia projects generally consist of a combination of text, audio,
video, graphics, and computer software, a license or release will be needed for
all copyrighted works used in the project, unless the work is owned by the
producer,  n8 is in the public domain,  n9 or its use can be classified as a
"fair use."  n10

    Care must be taken to ensure that the rights to all necessary elements of
the work have been obtained. For example, if the producer is licensing a video
clip that contains music along with the pictorial content, the producer should
not merely assume that the person from whom it is licensing the video also
controls the rights to the music. The producer of the video may have only the
limited right to use the music in the video, and, therefore, cannot grant the
right to use the music in another medium, such as multimedia.

    In this situation, the producer should try to protect itself by requiring
that either (1) the licensor provide written documentation establishing its
right to license the music or (2) the licensor include specific warranties and
indemnification provisions in the license to protect the producer from any third
party infringement claims. In addition, the licensee should perform, if
possible, a copyright search of each element of the work.

    Of course, where all of the elements are authored or owned by one party,
there is no reason to license each element separately - a single license that
specifically covers all elements will be sufficient.


   III. Dealing with Content Providers


    With the advent of multimedia producers, there are now new licensees telling
content owners that the rules are changing. However, the content owners still
control the copyrights and other  [*416]  rights to the content. Many of these
owners refuse to acknowledge that the rules are changing, and are trying to
apply the traditional rules to multimedia. Other owners recognize that the
business is changing, but are not willing to proceed until they understand the
rules better and can control the business.


   A. Locating Content


    It is not just the rules, but the business itself that is changing. The
enormity of this change will begin to reveal itself when system compatibility
becomes irrelevant and information delivery becomes ubiquitous. Information
indexing and retrieval systems design is entering a new phase where discrete
parts of images and other types of information can be accessed via the audio or
visual value of the desired information, not just the text. For example, without
knowing the name of the Eiffel Tower, a system user will be able to retrieve
pictures and information about the Paris landmark just by drawing its form with
a mouse or pen on a tablet or screen. By humming a tune, the user will be able
to obtain the name of the song being hummed.

    Current systems catalog information by title, author, and
general-to-specific subject categories, and cross-reference those tags with key
internal terms. If the user knows only the author and the subject, for example,
Freud and dreams, it is possible to find a title, The Interpretation of Dreams,
the date of the book, and other identifying terms, such as "symbols."

    Film indexing works similarly, with the director serving as the author. The
American Film Institute (AFI) catalogues films in such a way that a researcher
can find an entry by genre and subgenre, for example, western and western
musical. Once a specific entry is located, all credit information is available.
However, only key actors and other key data are cross-referenced.

    Historical photographs and other visual information and music conform to the
standard cataloguing procedures. Generic images, film, music, and sound found in
most stock houses, libraries, and production archives are even more meticulously
cross-referenced to permit quick delivery of the requested materials.  n11


   B. Obtaining Clearances


    It is often difficult to locate the many creative people who hold the
copyrights and other rights in the pre-existing material to  [*417]  be used in
a multimedia project. It is generally believed by most designers that easy
access is the key to keeping people honest. In other words, people will do the
right thing if doing so is not too terribly complicated.

    Today the sheer number of agents, lawyers, publishers, licensing societies,
unions, and guilds increases the frustration of trying to create new products in
a new market because these players are necessary absent an infrastructure or
workable set of standards.


   IV. Content Licensing Practices


    While licenses for different types of content will vary, there are certain
terms common to all license agreements. The most important of these terms is
discussed below.


   A. Scope of Rights Granted


    Licensing arrangements must carefully and unambiguously set forth the rights
granted to the multimedia producer. A typical, broad "grant of rights" clause
might state: The Licensor grants to the Licensee the right to use, modify,
adapt, reproduce, and distribute the Work, or any portion thereof, throughout
the world during the full term of the copyright as part of and in connection
with the multimedia work titled X.

    This language is extremely broad and not specific as to what subsidiary
rights are granted, if any. If read literally, the grant only applies to
reproduction and distribution of the work and does not apply to other rights,
such as incorporating the work in a film or broadcasting the work on television.
To avoid potential problems, the grant should be specific and the agreement
should also contain a "reservation of right" clause in favor of the licensor,
such as:




    All rights in the Work not specifically granted to the Licensee, now or
hereafter known, developed or in existence and whether or not competitive with
the rights granted herein, are reserved to the Licensor in all forms of media
throughout the world for the Licensor's use or disposition at his sole
discretion, without obligation to the Licensee.


    If properly drafted, these clauses will prevent any disagreement between the
parties as to which rights were granted by and which were reserved to the
Licensor.


   B. Exclusivity


    When a multimedia project is created from many generic elements, these
elements may be acquired on a non-exclusive basis -  [*418]  which means that
others can also license the same content for use in their multimedia work. When
an item is essential to the success of a project, however, then it is important
to obtain an exclusive license to the material. Indeed, many projects would have
no value unless they involved an exclusive license.

    Licensors are naturally reluctant to give exclusive licenses to their works,
since it ties up the work, and makes the licensor totally dependent on the
quality of the product and the marketing expertise of the multimedia producer.
It also precludes the licensor from entering into more lucrative projects that
might come along in the future.

    One way of ameliorating the problems associated with exclusive licenses is
for the licensor to insist on certain provisions in the license:

    1. an automatic conversion of the license from exclusive to non-exclusive if
the licensee fails to meet certain sales or revenue goals;

    2. a large up-front payment, which may either be a flat fee or an advance
against royalties;

    3. a minimum guaranteed royalty per quarter or year, which may increase over
time, and which must be paid regardless of actual sales;

    4. the right to terminate the license entirely if sales or royalty goals are
not met; and/or

    5. limiting the exclusivity to a specific term, medium, territory, platform
or other market, and reserving all other markets to the licensor.


   C. Limited Versus Unlimited Rights


    A grant of unlimited rights to a work, like a song or book, means that the
producer has the right to use the work in a multimedia product without any
limitation on the market, term, or territory. A limited rights clause, on the
other hand, will specify the product, platform, market, term, and/or territory
in which the work can be exploited.

    A limited rights clause is one way to reduce licensing costs, which enables
the multimedia producer to complete a specific project within budget and with
the required content. If a particular licensee does not need certain rights, the
licensee should not be required to pay for them, unless those rights will have
no value independent of the rights granted. The limited rights granted can be
either exclusive or non-exclusive. The content owner retains  [*419]  the right
to license the remaining rights as he or she deems appropriate - even to the
competitors of an existing licensee.


   D. Adaptation and Moral Rights


    The right to adapt pre-existing material for a multimedia project should be
expressly stated in the license. The multimedia producer will want no
restrictions on the kinds or number of changes it can make to the licensed
materials. The artist and/or copyright holder may disagree and seek to limit the
adaptation rights granted.

    If any adaptation rights are granted, they should also include a waiver of
moral rights held by the creator in the licensed properties, particularly if the
producer plans to market the resulting product outside the United States. While
some jurisdictions do not permit a contractual waiver of moral rights, the
waiver should be included for those jurisdictions in which such waivers are
permitted.  n12


   E. Marketing Rights and Obligations


    All license agreements should provide the right to distribute the product
once it has been completed. To make sure that the product receives the exposure
necessary to succeed in its intended markets, the producer should contractually
identify its right to use the licensed content in the promotion of the product.
It may be necessary to acquire other rights in the content, like merchandising
rights, in order to achieve the desired level of exposure. In today's
marketplace, cross-merchandising schemes are important strategies for increasing
product awareness.


   F. Fees and Royalties


    Whether licensing text, still images, moving images, or music, there are no
rules for pricing of material. The price is whatever a willing licensor and
willing licensee agree upon.

    Even if the material is in the public domain, a producer may nonetheless
have to license the use of source material of sufficient quality, and may have
to pay a high fee to do so. While it is generally less expensive to obtain
public domain feature film clips, for example, than similar materials still
under copyright, any per [*420]  former appearing in those clips may still
demand a substantial fee for the use of his or her distinctive image or voice
("persona").

    Even the search necessary to determine the public domain status of a work
will add to the budget of a multimedia project. Consequently, it is not just the
cost of the license itself which should be factored into the project's budget,
but the entire process of obtaining clearance of all rights.

    Payments for the use of materials may be made in the form of a fixed fee, a
royalty, or a combination of both. The type of arrangement and the amount and
form of payments will depend upon many factors including: the popularity of the
pre-existing materials; the popularity of the multimedia developer; the type of
rights granted and the use to be made of the materials; and the amount of
material being used.

    A fixed fee, as the name implies, is a set fee paid for the use of the
materials - usually paid at the execution of the license.  n13 It may be paid,
however, in installments over a period of time. A fixed fee is neither tied to
the total revenues earned by the producer nor the total number of units sold.
Under a fixed arrangement, the licensor shares neither the risk nor the profits
in the new work.

    Royalties are fees based either on the earnings received by the producer
from the sale or licensing of the work, or on the number of CD-ROMs sold. The
amount of royalties can be based upon the value of the content to the producer
(i.e., the value received for the use of the content). In other instances, where
sales of the multimedia work will displace other revenues, the content owner
might receive upon the diminished value of the content to the content owner.
Royalties are an accepted method of sharing the risks and the profits of a new
work.

    Unlike a fixed fee arrangement, which is a short term relationship that
terminates upon payment, a royalty arrangement is more akin to a "marriage."
Such an arrangement may last as long as the work is being sold.

    A third possibility, and one that is common in multimedia projects, is a
combination of the two forms of payment - an upfront payment and future
royalties as well. Content providers often demand upfront payments:




    1. to cover costs (administrative and attorneys' fees) incurred in
negotiating the license and providing the source materials;  [*421]

    2. to ensure that the multimedia producer is serious about developing the
product; and

    3. to ensure that it recovers something for the content even if the project
is never completed or is unsuccessful.


    The license should specify whether the initial payment is an advance against
royalties, which the producer is permitted to recoup from royalties otherwise
due to the licensor, or whether it is a payment in addition to future royalties.

    The amount of royalties will generally depend upon the relative bargaining
strengths of the parties. One issue that may arise when dealing with licenses is
whether the royalties should be granted for a flat percentage of revenues,
should be based on a per-unit-sold basis, or possibly a combination of both.
Other issues the parties will have to address include whether the basis for
royalties will be the retail price or the wholesale price of the product, and
the possibility of withholding a percentage of royalties in anticipation of
customer returns.


   G. Term and Termination


    In most cases, the length of a license ("term") will depend upon the
relative bargaining power of the parties. A licensee generally will seek the
longest term possible in order to recover its investment and maximize its
profit.

    The licensor likely will want to keep the term shorter than the licensee
desires. In this manner, the licensor can increase the license fees or royalties
if the product is successful, or relicense the content at a higher price after
the license expires.

    Termination provisions also may deal generally with a party's failure to
comply with the terms and conditions of the contract, or may specify the
particular acts or omissions that will trigger a right of termination.
Termination might occur either with or without notice and allows the party an
opportunity to cure the breach.

    Of course, termination does not have to be the sole remedy. Other remedies
may include a contraction of granted rights (e.g., converting an exclusive
license to a non-exclusive license), an increase in license fees and/or costs,
or other negotiated modifications in the license terms.

    The parties also may agree to arbitrate a dispute so that minor problems and
misunderstandings do not result in termination.


   H. Markets, Territories, Media, and Platforms


    When licensing content for use in a multimedia project, it is  [*422]
essential to define: 1. the types of markets to be exploited; 2. the territories
in which the product may be sold; 3. the platforms on which the products will
operate; and 4. the types of media on which it can be distributed.

    Under consideration at this time are not only the commodity or disk-based
products, but interactive television as well. With licensing it is possible to
define a narrow market such as a CD-ROM product to run on an Apple Macintosh
computer in the non-broadcast educational market.

    It might not be important to obtain the international rights if the domestic
rights are sufficient. Conversely, it may be critical to widen the territorial
base to fully exploit a product before it becomes obsolete.

    Licenses are most desirable for the life of the copyright. However, term
limitations are common in the publishing business and may become the norm in the
multimedia market. For example, photographs or illustrations are commonly
licensed for magazine articles or covers on a one-time-and-use basis. A licensee
should not assume that music, text, or imagery licensed for use in a particular
product for a particular market can be reused for another product or market
without a specific license grant to that effect.

    In the traditional entertainment industry, a territorial grant for the
United States is usually interpreted to include Canada, Mexico, and U.S.
military installations anywhere around the world.  n14 Other territories are
negotiated on a region-by-region basis, usually defined by the scope of the
distributor's ability to distribute the product into these different regions of
the world. In the computer field, however, this is not the case.

    Therefore, the agreement should be specific as to the territory and the
rights granted to avoid misunderstanding in the event that multiple distributors
are used.


   I. Warranties and Indemnification


    The terms of the contract that provide for warranties and indemnification
are an extremely important aspect of any license agreement. A typical warranty
and indemnification clause may read as follows:



   The Authors jointly and severally represent and warrant that the  [*423]
Authors have the power and authority to enter into this Agreement as the owner
and copyright holder of the work; that the work is original except for material
in the public domain and such excerpts from other works as may be included with
the written permission of the copyright owners; that the work does not contain
any libelous material or injurious instructions; that the work does not infringe
any trade name, trademark, trade secret, or copyright; and that the work does
not invade or violate any right of privacy, personal or proprietary right, or
other common law or statutory right.

    The Authors shall jointly and severally indemnify the licensee and hold it
or its assigns, harmless from any and all losses, damages, liabilities, costs,
charges, and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, arising out of any
breach of any of the Authors' representations and warranties contained in this
section.


    Generally, the courts will strictly construe these clauses  n15 and, in some
cases, may only find liability if there has been reliance on the clause by the
other party.  n16 It is therefore imperative that the warranty and
indemnification clauses be carefully drafted.


   J. Title/Non-infringement


    Unless specifically disclaimed in writing, there is an implied warranty that
"the title conveyed shall be good, and its transfer rightful."  n17 This
warranty arises by operation of law and requires no specific statement in the
contract. This is important because the licensee may have a claim against the
licensor for breach of this warranty if the license is used by a third party
claiming ownership of all or a portion of the title to the work.


   K. Authority to Grant Rights


    In the entertainment industry it is common for distribution agreements to
grant the distributor the exclusive right to distribute the work on "any device
now known or later developed."  n18 Major distributors will not permit a
specific carve-out of multimedia rights. Therefore, the question is whether this
language prohibits  [*424]  the copyright owner from licensing the multimedia
rights to another. Currently there is no case law directly addressing this
issue.


   V. Licensing Text


    Text may be incorporated as an integral part of the multimedia work itself,
or it may be included to give the user assistance in using the work. Of course,
rights to text that are written by the multimedia producer or its employees do
not have to be obtained. However, if other copyrighted text is to be included,
the owner of the rights must grant the producer a license or assign the
necessary rights in the text to permit its incorporation into the new work.


   A. The Publishing Industry


    Many large publishing companies are extending their traditional paper
publishing into the multimedia arena. High-level undertakings among corporate
executives are increasing and some impressive relationships between computer
firms and publishing companies have already developed. However, these
relationships are strategically no different than emerging deals between the
worlds of publishing and entertainment. For the most part, both the owners of
media manufacturing and distribution networks and their authors/copyright owners
have like-minded strategies. Publishers control the infrastructure upon which
the represented copyright holders depend for artistic and economic survival.
Many publishers also control the copyrights through contractual relationships
with their authors.

    One area in which the strategies of publishers and copyright holders differ
fundamentally is non-fiction. Non-fiction is different because the consumption
of information in the global business, government, academic, and scientific
communities depends upon the free flow of that information. Our global culture
would be immobilized without these various groups having access to research and
new developments to meet their expected levels of transactions and advancement.


   B. Licensing and Distribution


    There are two practical means today for distributing large quantities of
text. A CD-ROM containing text can be distributed like any other CD-ROM. Text
can also be distributed online using computer networks.

    The computer networks which now serve the business, government, academic,
and scientific communities reflect a continuing  [*425]  effort toward a global
information infrastructure. When accomplished, this will change the very
foundation of communication and education. These networks operate on a
subscription basis with users paying a fee gauged by the kind of use (e.g.,
searching, copying, excerpting) executed or by the number of users at a site.

    Many publishers are seeking financial arrangements with these networks to
offset the effect this form of information access will have on their revenue
from traditional publishing. In the future, however, it will be possible for a
writer to eliminate the publisher entirely by licensing text directly to the
network provider.

    New media systems will not displace traditional publishing. Instead, they
will stimulate the creative process used for publishing in traditional forms and
will increase literacy and traditional readership.

    When licensing fictional texts, a multimedia producer probably will be
negotiating with the copyright holder through a literary agent and/or publisher.
Non-fiction writers are less likely to have agents, but the publisher may
control the rights, especially in particular markets. Many possible combinations
of ownership and control make licensing of text difficult.

    The primary fact to consider is that neither the writer nor the writer's
agent will jeopardize the relationship with the publisher, who is actively
exploiting the writer's work in printed form. This situation will change when
the CD-ROM or network infrastructure make it possible to license text directly
from the writer.


   C. Pricing


    There are no rules for pricing text. The price is whatever the party
controlling the text and the party seeking to license the text agree upon. There
are some general factors, however, that the parties should consider in
negotiating the price for a license.

    The pricing of text normally will be based upon the volume and popularity of
the text used. Fiction is usually more costly than non-fiction. A popular
non-fiction book in its twentieth printing, however, may cost considerably more
than some unknown fictional work.

    Securing the rights to use, adapt, and distribute the text in a multimedia
product through its primary and secondary markets can occur through a straight
purchase agreement or through an arrangement known as an option. An option is a
contractual arrangement whereby payment is made toward the purchase of a  [*426]
property in order to secure the right to exploit it for a given and usually
limited period of time (the option period).

    This option period allows the producer to arrange the financing and license
any additional content required for the project before committing to the full
license fee. Only text which is essential for a new media project will justify
this kind of expenditure. Securing the rights to text should be considered an
essential part of the development cost.

    Royalties may be part of the payments made to a copyright holder for its
text, particularly if it is central to the project. Yet it is questionable
whether a small portion of text justifies more than a flat fee. Any royalty
structure should permit the producer to recoup its production costs before
royalties become significant. In arrangements where an advance is paid against
royalties, the producer will recoup the advance before any additional royalties
are paid.

    Royalties can be a fixed amount per unit sold or a percentage of revenues or
profits; they are usually paid quarterly or semi-annually. Because of the
entertainment industry's reputation for creative bookkeeping, royalties are
almost always based on gross profit or revenue.  n19

    Although most licenses are granted for the duration of the copyright, any
limitation on the term of the grant will give the copyright holder the
opportunity to renegotiate the license as the multimedia market matures.

    Licensors should be given a reasonable right to audit the books of the
multimedia developer if royalties are involved. Because of the cost of tracking
and calculating royalties, a licensee may want to negotiate a buyout of rights.


   D. Property and Marketing Rights


    The holder of a license does not become the copyright owner. Instead, the
licensee merely purchases the permission to use the material.

    If the work is central to the project, the purchase, option, or license
should be for the exclusive rights to the story, the title, the characters, and
any concepts of plot or theme which are unique to the telling of that story in
the multimedia market. Non-exclusive rights to text are appropriate where the
marketability of the project  [*427]  will not be compromised. If the project
revolves around a particular printed work (e.g., a CD-ROM game based upon a
current novel), however, the possibility of another multimedia project adopted
from that same work could substantially impair the profitability of the first
project. To protect against these concerns, exclusive rights should be demanded.

    The writer will often be willing to license only limited rights - the right
to use the text only in a specific product category and/or market - for a
particular time period, and/or within a specified geographic region or
territory. This means that the license may be limited to, but exclusive for,
CD-ROM or other disk-based products, their platforms, and primary markets. The
writer may reserve rights for the interactive television market for later
licensing.

    Since multimedia is often considered a new form of publishing, any license
should carefully stipulate whether any display of the text or any publication,
like a manual will accompany the new media program. Any reprint rights should be
included in the adaptation rights. It is also prudent to acquire sequel rights
to subsequent episodes of a story including the principal characters.

    In purchasing the rights to any story, the producer should try to secure the
Right of First Refusal or Last Refusal to any sequel. Under the Right of First
Refusal, the writer must first offer the rights to the multimedia producer, who
can refuse to buy them at the price offered. Nonetheless, if the writer then
sells the rights to another producer, the writer is obligated to prove that the
sale was for a greater price than the one first offered. The Right of Last
Refusal allows the multimedia producer to match any other offer for the rights
to the sequel property.


   VI. Licensing Moving Images


    Licensing film or television clips requires understanding the process of
making film and television, the hierarchy of skill categories involved, and the
unions which represent these skilled workers. The hierarchy or stratification
within each union can be understood if one understands the Star System, which
functions to give over-scale benefits to those actors, directors, writers,
cinematographers, and other professionals who are considered indispensable to a
motion picture project.  n20

     [*428]  The same system pays a minimum union wage to the other members of
each union. Many members in the upper levels of the unions and guilds collect
royalty and residual payments on their work in addition to production fees.
These fees, royalties, and residuals must be factored into the cost of licensing
a film or video clip.


   A. Properties


    It is standard entertainment industry practice to license materials used in
original film or television productions for the duration of the owners'
copyrights for use in other types of products. Unfortunately, this does not mean
that the original agreements authorize the film/television producer to license
clips for a new media production. In fact, most of the agreements do not even
contemplate multimedia or interactive products. Therefore, it is unclear whether
the producer has any rights to license such clips for multimedia use.


   B. Right of Publicity


    Another aspect of the clip that must be cleared is the actors' persona. Each
performer owns his distinctive image and voice, if the clip uses only a narrator
without the image.  n21 It is an established right for a performer to profit
from his persona's use (and reuse). This property right is established by the
right of publicity. The unions have contractually established the Rule of Reuse
with those signatory motion picture companies which have signed the unions'
basic agreements.

    A multimedia producer must get clearance from any recognizable actors or
actresses who appear in the clips. Such clearance is independent of the clip
itself and is necessary regardless of the copyright status. Even if the clip is
in the public domain, clearance may still be required for any reuse of the
performer's persona. Locating and contacting performers is often difficult. The
first step is to determine whether the production was originally done on film or
videotape.

    When the clip is from a film, the union in the United States is the Screen
Actors Guild (SAG); if it originated on videotape, the appropriate union is the
American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (AFTRA). If, however, the
production originated in the industrial or educational category, both SAG and
AFTRA can  [*429]  claim jurisdiction over videotape, and the multimedia
producer must decide which union to contact. Many performers belong to both
unions.

    The unions can also be used to locate a performer's heirs or estate
executor, who may be the agent, to negotiate any required fee. Some established
actors may not want to bother negotiating a fee, but would rather have a
finished copy of the final project. Actors with small parts or non-speaking
parts seen in older films may be difficult to trace if they are neither credited
nor listed in the American Film Institute's catalogue of films. This may occur
especially if the actor is deceased. In such cases, the multimedia producer must
decide whether the risks of possible claims by such actors or their heirs
outweigh the desirability of using that particular clip.


   C. Literary Materials


    Original material from which any motion picture or television program or
series was adapted requires clearance. When the composition is a literary
source, such as a book, magazine or newspaper article, play, or other text, a
multimedia producer must obtain a license to use and adapt the material for the
new media.

    Although the script is considered an intrinsic part of a movie and its clips
and, therefore, does not require separate licensing, the writer may have
retained rights in the work. This could mean, for example, that the multimedia
producer must obtain a clearance to publish or display any part of the script on
the display screen and/or to print the text in a manual accompanying the
finished product. It is also possible that certain separate rights may also
require clearance, such as the Radio Rights (the aural broadcasting rights). The
Writer's Guild of America (WGA) is the conduit to screenwriters and television
writers.


   D. Animation


    A license of any cartoon or animation will probably include all the discrete
parts of the animation, that is, the characters and the story on which the
animation was based. Nevertheless, should the material exist prior to the
production (e.g., a newspaper comic strip turned into an animated film), the
cartoonist, animator, animation house, or licensing organization may hold the
rights to the material from which the production was adapted. These rights
holders are usually listed in the credits of the derivative motion picture.
[*430]


    E. Licensing Considerations


    Many of the licensing provisions for video or film material are identical to
those of other types of licenses. However, there are certain provisions in video
licenses that deserve special consideration.

    There are three main categories of film and television archives. The first
are major corporate holdings, like Ted Turner's vast collection, which includes
the acquisition of older studio libraries. Turner's corporation, based in
Atlanta, owns the Warner Brother's collection up to 1950. Warner Brother's, a
division of Time-Warner, still owns the rest of the collection. There are
intercorporate relationships and intracorporate relationships which have an
impact on the licensing of collections and their clips.

    An outside multimedia producer desiring to use some of Warner Brother's film
clips would submit a written request, which defines the project, for the clips.
After submitting the written request and gaining approval from Warner's
corporate channels, the producer would be asked to pay $ 4,000 per minute for
video clips and $ 250 each for still pictures (stills). If the prices are not
discouraging enough, there may be limitations on the number of clips that can be
licensed.

    Another type of major organization which has holdings to license is the
academic archive, like those at UCLA and the Library of Congress.

    The last type of organization which can license film and video clips is the
smaller specialty company. These companies generally carry public domain
material. They also act as agents for copyrighted collections on either an
exclusive or nonexclusive basis. They carry vintage (older and classic film and
video), as well as generic, contemporary stock footage. Most of these smaller
companies carry public domain material which is generally superior quality to
that which can be found in a video store. Often these companies have purchased a
pristine 16mm or 35mm print (copy) of a film to assure the best transfer (to
video) possible.

    Licensing video rights is closely related to licensing rights to text. One
factor that is different, however, is that if there is music on the soundtrack
of the video clip, those rights must be licensed separately.


   1. Term, Territory and Markets


    The smaller film libraries will continue to be the primary source for many
multimedia producers. The way most of these libraries  [*431]  work is by
charging each production and its market category for the use to be made and the
territory in which it will be distributed. In other words, each category -
theatrical film, network or cable television program, industrial film or video,
or music video - is priced differently and is also priced by the minute or units
of minutes used in a single production.

    In addition, these libraries will charge a research fee for making
selections to assemble a demo tape with a time code window (editing numbers at
the bottom of the video image). Depending upon the volume of the purchase
(number of clips and the total running time), the research fee may be included
in the overall price. Generally, a fee covers the cost of searching by title,
director, genre, and subject through a collection for the desired items. The
total price may also include a lab fee covering the cost of transferring the
film to the type of tape format required by the multimedia producer.

    Once the multimedia producer has chosen footage from the demo tape, that
footage is then copied onto another tape (master tape), and the producer is
billed for the amount of footage ordered. These tapes can cost from $ 100 to $
300 and up to $ 1,500 for twenty to thirty minutes of film clips.

    These fees are based on the use of the material in only a single multimedia
production. This fee could be in the form of a royalty, although that is not
currently done.


   2. Property and Reuse Rights


    While a clip license is generally for the life of the copyright, this is not
always the case. Most of the big, and many of the smaller, film and video
libraries keep close track of the copyright status of their collections as part
of their service. Occasionally, someone fails to review a copyright properly.

    Although anyone can go to the video store and obtain a copy of a public
domain film, an archive will usually have a better copy of the film, as well as
information about the copyright. The archive license is for the use of a copy of
their master print of the film. Because they also keep the documentation on the
public domain status, they can tell whether the film is in the public domain
only in the U.S., or if it is in the public domain worldwide.

    In addition to issues concerning territorial rights, the use of a clip from
a public domain movie may also require permission from any identifiable actors
and actresses, the owner of the underlying screenplay, background music, etc.
This requires paying whatever  [*432]  fees can be negotiated, plus potential
additional fees to the appropriate union(s). All feature film clips and clips
from television programs are complex in the layers of information they contain.

    There will be cases where a feature film will provide most of the
characters, story, and action needed to dramatize the multimedia title. In such
a situation, the underlying literary material on which the film (or video) is
based, the rights the screenwriter may still control in the material, the
actors' rights, the music rights, and any other preexisting material integrated
into film must be licensed or cleared.

    Another problem is identifying all of the uncredited elements of the film
image. Credited parts of the image that may require clearance are clips from
other films or videos, music, animation, and other preexisting works of art.
However, it is the occasional element in an image, such as the copy of the
Rembrandt painting hanging on the wall in the movie Harvey, which may be missed.
Film and television historians, especially those with art history backgrounds,
are indispensable to projects with a density of underlying rights.

    Any fee paid to a freelance, non-union performer, writer, or other rights
owner is as open to negotiations as the fee paid to a union performer, writer,
cartoonist or animator. Although price logically might be predicated on the
volume or amount of the image seen, voice heard, or text used in the multimedia
project, the lack of guidelines throws logic to the wind.


   3. Market Rights


    The multimedia producer must secure the adaptation rights to all of the
materials to be used in the new product. The grant of rights should stipulate
that the material being licensed can be changed in any way appropriate for the
new media product and its marketability.

    Owners of underlying rights, like actors and musicians, who are concerned
with maintaining their marketable image may have some objections to adaptations.
The producer should be prepared to assure owners that the modifications to the
work will not reflect negatively on their image.

    Writers, on the other hand, may have different objections to adaptations
which may dismantle the plot and rupture the flow of the drama. If the
multimedia work is being planned for foreign markets, it is imperative to obtain
a waiver of moral rights, by which  [*433]  the right to object to any changes
in the material is waived, from the writer(s) and the director(s).

    When a fairly substantial investment is made to obtain the rights to
materials for use in a multimedia project, it may be in the best interest of the
producer to obtain exclusive rights to the materials. For example, exclusive
rights to the text and any sequel(s), a cartoon or animated series which is
episodic in nature, or serial which has an ongoing story like soap operas should
be obtained. Exclusive rights prevent others from undermining the original
producer's investment. Any material which also carries with it some part of a
grand conceptual schemata should also be licensed, if possible. Any material
whose use by others would not compromise the development of the multimedia
project can be acquired for use on a nonexclusive basis.

    The grant of exclusive rights may be limited to the multimedia market. The
grant can be limited to just one kind of multimedia, such as CD-ROM and/or on
specified platform(s); or can extend to interactive television. The rights can
be further restricted to a specific territory, such as the United States. They
can even be restricted to a particular time period.

    Unlimited rights would allow the multimedia producer to exploit both
domestic and international territories in some commodity-based product, such as
a CD-ROM, or other platform-based system like CD-I, as a Primary Market, while
reserving other markets, like interactive television, to the licensor. Rights
are generally acquired by territories and by markets.


   VII. Licensing Still Images


    Still pictures for use in multimedia can be divided into two main
categories: photography and graphic arts. Although these two main categories
began as separate entities, there has always been a partnership of sorts between
the photographic side and the more figurative side of still pictures, especially
within the domain of painting and the graphic arts.

    Currently, photojournalists resist licensing their work for use in any
digital medium where editorial practices may compromise the integrity of the
work. Photojournalists regard any digital medium to be a threat to the veracity
of the photographic image. While photojournalists do have an important and
extremely valid point with their campaign to control the boundary between
photofiction and photoreality, their position seems to disregard a practice
which has been going on almost since the origin of photography.  [*434]  This
practice involves the interplay between photography and illustration.

    Graphic artists also share this fear, and not without justification. The
fear is compounded by image-hungry multimedia producers who want sizable
discounts for volume licenses. Naturally, there is tremendous resistance to what
artists see as a something-for-nothing attitude which is impervious to the risk
and investment they have made in developing skills, buying equipment, and
delivering their trade to the consumer. Indeed, there is something about
licensing imagery that negates the individuality of each image carefully
composed and painstakingly produced.

    Photographers or graphic artists may feel a competitive squeeze from the
clip market. In fact, many new media producers compare the prices of film and
video footage (which are essentially a series of still pictures) with the prices
for still pictures. For example, when a photograph is priced at $ 300, a
producer figures its price is very high compared with that of a generic film
clip of the same subject, which goes for half the price and includes fifty or
sixty "pictures." This kind of calculation ignores the photographer's practice
of seeking, capturing, and reproducing only the most dramatically composed
moment.

    Each category of still image production must be recognized for its own
unique practices and the value it delivers. At the same time, there will be
increasing pressure for photographers and graphic artists to change their
practices to meet the needs of producers.

    The first half of the 1990s has been, and continues to be, a transition
period from traditional distribution systems for still images to online systems
with high speed and high resolution delivery. However, contact with most graphic
artists and photographers is still made through the artist's representative,
professional society, publisher, or stock agency. Graphic artists or
photographers who work for a publisher probably will not own the stills they
have produced. The publisher will set the licensing fees and conditions for
their use, if it grants rights at all.

    By locating the freelance graphic artist or photographer and dealing with
him directly, depending upon the type of artist-agency relationship, there may
be some room for negotiating fees. However, most freelance professionals have
exclusive relationships with agencies. This means that the artists cannot cut
the agency out of the negotiations. In the future, online network fees should
reflect the reduced expenses that agencies will incur in adequately representing
[*435]  their artists and delivering their work to the many different types of
user-clients.


   A. Pricing, Purchasing and Royalties


    Many collections which are in the process of changing over to online access
are offering CD-ROMs to multimedia producers as a first step in the transition.
The process of licensing pictures on CD-ROM works much like it traditionally
has, but with the notable exceptions of cost, handling and speed. After
reviewing a catalogue (or CD-ROM) of low-resolution images, the licensee selects
images from the collection. These images are made available in high-resolution
form after the licensee pays a fee which is based upon product and market use,
territory, and term of license. Royalties may also be required in connection
with any broad license rights, such as a license period of longer than five
years.

    These conditions basically have not changed. What has changed is:

    1. The volume of materials in the catalogue for review;

    2. The publishing and distribution costs of the catalogue; and

    3. The cost of providing the selected (high-resolution) images for both the
agency and producer. Traditionally, slides or some other costly medium was used
to provide the image to the licensee. Now, customizing the master CD-ROM with
the selected images is faster and considerably cheaper, not to mention easier to
handle, than all those individual slides. Kodak's Photo CD is quickly becoming a
standard for catalogues prepared by collections.


   B. Property and Market Rights


    Freelance photographers and graphic artists traditionally retain the
copyrights to their work. Only artists in a work-for-hire situation are unlikely
to control the copyright to their work. In such cases, the multimedia producer
will be dealing with the publisher for a license.

    When dealing with stock agencies, the company will be the exclusive agent
for its artists, and will have the right to license images for them. The
territory of that exclusivity may, however, vary. There will seldom be an
opportunity to negotiate directly with the artist without an intermediary
involved.

    Photographers and graphic artists must agree if a multimedia producer is to
have the right to adapt a work for new media, that is, digitize it, change it,
or transform it in a manner appropriate to the medium. If there are to be limits
on adaptation rights, for example,  [*436]  with resizing by cropping (shrinking
by trimming edges) or reverse cropping (expanding to add elements), these
limitations should be specified. By agreeing to grant unlimited adaptation
rights, the artist essentially waives his or her moral rights in the image. The
new media producer should have a written waiver of moral rights if the product
is to be marketed internationally.

    The other moral right sought by artists is the right of attribution, which
means that the artist must be correctly identified as the artist of the work.

    If the license is international, you should expect to pay more than you
would for domestic territorial rights. If the term is for the life of the
copyright or in perpetuity, then also expect to pay accordingly. A multimedia
producer may want to shop around to find a stock agency willing to license a
volume of images on a royalty basis. This type of arrangement is only possible
when a sizable number of images comes from a single source. Otherwise, paying
royalties on thousands of individual images is simply not feasible due to the
accounting costs involved.

    Seldom will images be licensed on other than a nonexclusive basis. Only when
a second license would jeopardize the marketability of the product is there a
basis for negotiating an exclusive license. The costs can be controlled by
setting limits on the exclusive rights to certain territories, products, and
markets. The license provisions can detail the product, the platform on which it
can be used, and whether the product is strictly for the educational market; or,
it might be limited to interactive multimedia, but unrestricted as to disk-based
and interactive television systems. There are numerous ways in which the product
and market can be limited.

    The alternative is to obtain unlimited rights for all territories, markets
and products, although this can be a nonexclusive license. Certainly the initial
cost will make limited and nonexclusive rights the norm for still images, as it
is for other content licensing.


   VIII. Licensing Music/Audio


    Licensing the multimedia rights to audio in the form of speaking or
background sounds is similar to licensing text. For example, the reading of a
copyrighted work will require obtaining the rights to use the underlying work.
Any audio or sound that is original to the producer of the multimedia work, or
is a work made for hire, can be included in the work without obtaining a
license. For the use of any other sound or sound effects owned by another,
including  [*437]  the use of lyrics from a copyrighted song, a license must be
obtained.

    The music business is complex because there are many entities which control
different elements of music.  n22 First there are songwriters, performers, and
instrumentalists, the creators of the music. Second, there are the songs which
consist of (1) the composition (the notes) and (2) the lyrics (the words sung to
the notes). The vocal and instrumental performance of a song make up the third
aspect of music. Each of these elements must be cleared for reuse in a new
production.

    It is important to determine which type of license is appropriate for a
particular multimedia work, because there are many different forms of music
licenses:

    1. Mechanical license. If only the song is to be played without being
synchronized to video, the developer only needs to obtain a mechanical license.
n23 Since virtually all multimedia works will consist of both audio and video,
mechanical licenses will normally be inapplicable. However, some CD-ROM titles
permit the user to use the disk either as a CD-ROM, with both audio and video,
or to play only the music on a typical CD player. There exists the issue,
therefore, of whether the developer will require a mechanical license to permit
the disk to be played in a solely audio mode.

    2. Synchronization license. Where the music is to be synchronized with
video, a synchronization license is needed.  n24

    3. Videogram license. This form of license is used when music is
synchronized with video and distributed on a tape or disk. Many multimedia
projects are being developed using this form of music licensing.  n25

    4. New media license. This form of license is specifically directed at new
forms of music distribution, including CD-ROMs.

    It is unclear which of these licenses will be required for the use of music
in a multimedia work, particularly one that will not be disseminated (broadcast)
over a computer network or "performed" in a public place. It would seem that
synchronization rights and/or performance rights will be necessary.  [*438]

    When licensing the use of a film clip, the owner of that clip may or may not
also be able to grant the right to use the music on that clip. If not, the
multimedia producer must obtain the music rights separately.

    In addition, if any of the music is to be changed, adaptive rights may have
to be obtained directly from the copyright owner. Many copyright owners do not
grant permission for any adaptation of the music,  n26 and those that do are
often very particular about any changes that will be made, requiring written
approval of any changes before they can be used.

    Since music is performed by singers or instrumentalists, there are also
unions which represent these artists, ensuring that they are treated fairly and
paid for their work by those who want to use their material. The unions oversee
the contractual relationships which their members establish with producers and
other entities.

    Other groups which must be acknowledged are the performing rights societies,
which collect fees for small performing rights on the broadcast of the music in
a public place (also called broadcast rights), and other agencies or societies
which collect other rights fees.

    Music will be a significant part of multimedia in the future as it is now.
Certain kinds of virtual reality may even redefine the music business concept of
grand rights, that is, the dramatic rights associated with the usage and
performance of music on a stage or in a motion picture.  n27 Theme parks, modern
museums, entertainment mini-cities, shopping centers and malls where people can
walk through and experience live performances taking place elsewhere on the
planet are bound to modify many current licensing concepts.

    Most licenses for pre-existing music are negotiated through the societies,
the publishers' agents, or directly with the publishers. Contracts can be
arranged directly by the multimedia producer or through a licensing agent, whom
the producer may prefer to hire to obtain the necessary clearances. There are
many agencies which specialize in music clearances, as well as freelance
specialists and boutique agencies, which clear all kinds of rights for producers
.

    The performing rights societies which license dramatic and public performing
rights in the United States are ASCAP (American Society of Composers, Authors &
Publishers), BMI (Broadcast  [*439]  Music, Inc.), and SESAC (Society of
European Stage Authors & Composers).

    Mechanical and other rights are licensed by national societies and other
organizations such as SDRM in France, STEMRA in the Netherlands, NCB in the
Scandinavian countries, and the Harry Fox Agency, a subsidiary of the National
Music Publishers' Association in the United States.

    Each society or agency is built on a different set of alliances and,
subsequently, upon a different marketing strategy. For example, even though both
ASCAP and BMI license broadcast rights, ASCAP is owned by the songwriters and
publishers, while BMI is owned by radio and television broadcasters. To
successfully travel the way through the labyrinth of music licensing, one must
know these alliances and their strategies and what to avoid as much as what to
do.

    Skilled clearance specialists know how to clear the necessary rights without
overclearing, that is, without paying more than necessary for the material.
These specialists have access to artists, their publishers, and any
subpublishers who may be involved in licensing arrangements. The clearance
issues are complex and can grow exponentially as the number of entities involved
in the licensing process grows.

    Access to copyright holders can be made through any one of the licensing
entities or through U.S.-based unions such as AFTRA, the AFM (American
Federation of Musicians), and the Songwriters Guild of America (which is
actually a trade association). AFTRA covers the singers and the AFM covers the
instrumentalists, many of whom are also songwriters. Easy access to inexpensive
production music, ambient sound, and sound effects can be obtained through
music/sound libraries. The music/sound is bought on a one-time, fixed-fee basis,
is royalty-free, and is available on CD, CD-ROM, and other formats for use in
multimedia productions.


   A. Pricing, Purchasing and Royalties


    Generic production music and sounds can be fairly inexpensive for projects
intended for the non-broadcast market. The pricing changes, however, when the
products are targeted for other markets, such as broadcasting. For example,
CD-ROMs which work on both Macintosh and PC-based systems and can be used in
perpetuity for non-broadcast purposes, containing music and sounds are currently
available for approximately $ 100 each. Since most of the vendors of these
products also own the music, they can  [*440]  be flexible on licensing its use
in multimedia projects, even beyond the non-broadcast categories of today's
markets.

    Licensing copyright-protected music and popular arrangements of music in the
public domain can be expensive. Additionally, there are no standards by which to
judge what is appropriate for a particular multimedia product or market. Royalty
arrangements are either scheduled for payment when the products are sold or are
paid in advances against back-end royalties, meaning that the producer can
recoup the advances from royalties otherwise due. However, sometimes the
copyright owner will require a fixed upfront fee which is not recoupable against
future royalties. Such fees are often justified as required to cover attorneys'
fees, the costs of creating the disk or tape containing the licensed music, etc.

    A royalty rate is usually based upon (1) a fixed royalty per unit sold; (2)
a pro-rata percentage of the wholesale price per unit sold; or (3) a combination
of both.  n28 Since royalties are problematic for everyone, it is often more
cost-effective simply to buy out all use rights - that is, pay a flat fee for
the right to exploit the song in connection with a specific multimedia work
without any future royalties. By setting limitations on the type of product and
platform, the specific market, the territory, and perhaps even the term of the
license, it is possible to keep the upfront fees within reasonable limits.

    In any negotiation, it is important to recall that licensing royalties on
music evolved in the early part of this century from the displacement of
musicians by recording and playback technologies, which denied the musicians
revenues from live performances. Now, toward the end of the century, technology
is once again sending shock waves through the creative community for the same
reasons.

    Where the music comprises a significant portion of the creative material or
where the music is critical to the project's success, there must be a
relationship founded on an understanding that profit-sharing involves both risk
and investment-sharing.


   B. Property and Market Rights


    Since interactive multimedia is an audiovisual medium, sorting through the
issues associated with music property rights requires, to some degree, an
understanding of the process of combining music and sound with visual material.
In other words, it  [*441]  is important to understand that most film and
television program music is added to the image at the stage of production known
as post-production, although some videotaped shows have live, on-screen music
performances.

    The combined audiovisual rights are called sync rights.  n29 A multimedia
producer must get permission from the music publisher and/or the songwriter(s)
to use the sync rights (even if the music is non-synchronous with the image) in
connection with any pre-existing work. Sync rights are usually paid for in flat
fees, as are reuse fees paid to the performer's unions. For any singers
appearing in connection with the clips, contact AFTRA; for any instrumentalists,
contact the American Federation of Musicians.

    The same performer's unions are involved with master rights or the master
use license. The term comes from the process of making a recording in a studio;
this is called mastering.  n30 Controlled by record companies, these rights
cover the reproduction of a record or portion of a record in a multimedia
project. In other words, if the producer wants to take a song or portion of a
song off a pre-existing record by the process known as a "needle drop"
(accomplished by dropping the needle on a record to play the section), then
master rights are required to cue or align the song to an image.

    There is some overlapping with respect to the mastering process, since a
master is also created for the soundtrack (actually, music track) of a movie or
television program, just as it serves to create the records, CDs, and audiotapes
that popularize the songs found in movie and video productions. Consequently,
there are cases where clearing both sync and master rights are required for the
music in an audiovisual work. The music publisher or the publisher's agent can
inform the producer as to the types of clearances necessary for the project.

    For most multimedia projects presently in production, clearing the sync
and/or master rights may be all that is needed to reproduce the desired music in
a new media work. However, there are many exceptions. For example, if a
multimedia project involves the reproduction of music contained on CDs,
audiotapes, or  [*442]  records for use in the product, then mechanical rights
will be needed.

    Another exception is the use of audiovisual material from a film, television
show, or music video which has dramatized a song or used its title - as
Hollywood musicals have done throughout the years. In such a case, the
multimedia producer must secure the grand rights, that is, the dramatic
performing rights, to reuse clips of the production which elaborated the story
expressed in the lyrics of the song. The producer will also need to secure the
sync rights to use the image and music together in the project.

    If the multimedia product is then broadcast into a public place via
interactive television, the producer will also need to have small performing
rights. In the United States these are licensed by ASCAP, BMI and SESAC. The
public performing rights, also called small performing rights, cover both the
broadcasting of radio and television into public places and the non-dramatic
performance of music on a concert stage, in a night club, bar, or similar
environment.  n31

    When a multimedia product is intended for use in a bar, an arcade, or other
public gathering place, where the music might be broadcast through a sound
system, the consensus is that the best method of clearing music for this type of
use is with a blanket license.  n32 Such a license requires an annual fee, with
pricing based on the square footage of the site(s) and the type of business,
i.e., whether the business established is a hotel, bar, arcade, or other. There
may be other methods for evaluating the cost, but none of the societies has made
any determinations for this type of multimedia usage at the present time.

    Any license to use music in a multimedia project should include adaptation
rights to permit appropriate modifications to the music. The distribution rights
(the right to distribute the manufactured product) should also be acquired. If
the product is intended for international markets, a waiver of the artist's
moral rights should also be obtained.

    In the future, multimedia products will be more widely advertised;
therefore, it is important to license the music for use in the advertising of
the product in any and all venues.

    Licenses are traditionally made on a nonexclusive basis in the  [*443]
music business. Although it is common to obtain limited rights for specific
markets, terms, and territories, a term that is less than the life of the
copyright can be problematic when trying to renew an expired license. It may be
desirable to pay the cost of a long-term license, rather than risk not being
able to renew the license on reasonable contract terms when the initial term
expires if the music is of great value to the multi-media product.

    It may also be valuable to obtain worldwide territorial rights. However,
there are many contingencies to consider, especially when there are continuing
royalties. In many cases, subpublishers have the right to license in specific
territories; a large number of these subpublishers are government-controlled.
Yet, the failure to secure international rights at the outset of the
relationship, when there is an opportunity to do so at a reasonable cost, may
invite escalated fees and royalty conditions at a later date. To buy out
unlimited rights to exploit the product in all territories and markets in
perpetuity may initially cost more, but will more than likely save long-term
headaches and offer flexibility in essential marketing decisions.


   IX. Licensing Computer Software


    A multimedia work may contain a variety of software in addition to the
audiovisual content. Some of this software will undoubtedly be developed by or
on behalf of the producer. The ownership of this software is governed by the
same rules as ownership of text. However, many multimedia works will contain
software that was developed by third parties and must be licensed for inclusion.

    This software may be a tool used to develop the multimedia work or perhaps a
"runtime" package, specifically designed for incorporation into multimedia works
in order to perform some common functions often required by multimedia
developers.

    Licensing software is not much different than licensing text. In many ways a
program resembles a novel. But because software requires testing and has special
problems in end-user licensing, software requires careful consideration in
licensing.

    In situations where an independent developer is used, a work-made-for-hire
agreement should be prepared. The software developer should also execute a
copyright assignment agreement.

    Because the multimedia producer may have to disclose its proprietary or
trade secret information to an independent software developer in connection with
the preparation of multimedia  [*444]  software, the independent developer
should be required to sign a confidentiality agreement.

    Once the software is completed it will need to be tested to make sure that
there are no bugs or programming errors. This is known as beta testing and is
done by sending the software to various computer literate people who agree to
test the software for the developer.

    After final testing of the multimedia software and complete integration of
its parts, the final work is ready for distribution. Although many people
believe that when they go to a computer store and purchase a piece of
off-the-shelf software they own it, in fact, they are usually only licensing it
from the manufacturer. It is unclear whether the multimedia industry will adopt
shrink-wrap licenses for use with its products, or whether it will distribute
the products without licenses, relying solely on copyright law for protection.


   A. Shrink-wrap Licenses


    Most mass-marketed software is distributed through retail stores,
bookstores, and by mail. It is not feasible to obtain individually signed
license agreements in these situations. As a result, vendors usually include a
pre-printed "license" in the package. It may be a separate document placed
loosely in the box, it may be printed in the manual, or it may be printed on an
envelope containing the magnetic media on which the software is stored. The idea
is that by opening the envelope and using the software, the purchaser has agreed
to abide by the terms of the license. There is serious doubt as to whether these
shrink-wrap licenses are enforceable, although most software vendors continue to
use them.  n33

    Many of the software tools used in developing multimedia works are
distributed with shrink wrap licenses. It is important to review the license to
determine what rights are available with regard to the software. When the
package will be used to create the work, but none of the copyrighted expression
of the software package (e.g., computer programs, display screens) will be
contained in the final multimedia work, there is little concern. However, in
situations where some of the copyrighted materials from the software tool will
be included in the final work, the developer must determine  [*445]  whether
such incorporation is permitted at all, and if so, whether an additional license
fee will be required.


   B. Run-time Licenses


    In many situations, it will be necessary for a multimedia developer to
include some third-party code or display material in the final multimedia work
so that it can operate on all computers of a particular type.

    For example, for a work developed for the Apple Macintosh, which uses the
latest version of Quicktime for movie clips, any user of the work may need a
copy of that particular version of Quicktime on his computer. To the extent that
end users have an earlier version of Quicktime that cannot run the movie clips,
they will be very disappointed with the work. Therefore, the multimedia
developer will want to include at least the "playback" (also called "run-time")
portion of the particular version of the Quicktime program on the disk in
addition to its multimedia title. This is necessary to insure that any Macintosh
user with System 7 will be able to use the work, even if he has an out-of-date
version of Quicktime on his computer. Since Apple Computer, Inc., is the owner
of the Quicktime program, the developer needs to determine whether it can
incorporate a run-time version of Quicktime on its CD-ROM, and if so, whether an
additional royalty is required.

    When run-time licenses are required, they may be royalty-free; require a
single, lump-sum payment for unlimited distribution; or more commonly, require a
per-unit royalty payment.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Copyright LawCivil Infringement ActionsRemediesCosts & Attorney FeesCopyright
LawConveyancesLicensesGeneral OverviewCopyright LawConveyancesState Regulation

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  See Steven Rappaport, Translating Digital Age Language, Billboard, Jan. 8,
1994, at 6.




n2.  See generally infra part IV.




n3.  See infra part V.




n4.  See infra part VI.




n5.  See infra part VII.




n6.  See infra part VIII.




n7.  See infra part IX.




n8.  Where the producer personally creates the materials, there is no question
of ownership. However, where the producer hires others to create the materials,
there may be a question as to ownership. Unless the creator is clearly an
employee of the producer, the producer should obtain a written agreement from
the creator to insure that the producer owns all copyright rights in the work.
This agreement can be a "work-made-for-hire" agreement, see 17 U.S.C. 101
(1988)(definition of "work-made-for-hire"), a copyright assignment, or a
combination of both.




n9.  While the term public domain is widely and loosely used to mean "free to
use without infringement," it is important to determine why a work is considered
to be in the "public domain." Certain materials that are in the public domain
can be used freely and distributed worldwide without concern. Other materials
may only be in the public domain in the United States, but still protected by
copyright elsewhere in the world. Thus, the mere fact that something is
generally considered to be in the "public domain" does not obviate the need to
determine whether it is protected by copyright in any territory in which the
multimedia work is to be distributed, and to obtain the necessary licenses or
releases for those territories.




n10.  See 17 U.S.C. 107 (1988) (fair use provisions).




n11.  See, e.g., Elizabeth Whisnant and Mary Ann Skinner, The Power Inside:
Creating and Using In-House Databases in the Newsday Library, Editor & Pub.
Mag., Sept. 5, 1992, at 24.




n12.  See P. Geller and M. Nimmer, Int'l Copyright Law and Practice 6[2]-6[3]
(1989); Paul Edward Geller, French High Court Remands Huston Colorization Case,
Ent. Law Rep., Aug. 1991, at 3.




n13.  A front-end fixed fee payment is called a buy out.




n14.  For more on licensing and installations, see Champaign-Urbana News Agency,
Inc. v. J.L. Cummins News Co., 632 F.2d 680 (7th Cir. 1980); see also Thomas W.
Hazlett, Duopolisitic Competition in Cable Television: Implication for Public
Policy, 7 Yale J. on Reg. 65 (1990).




n15.  See, e.g., Loews v. Wolff, 101 F. Supp. 981 (S.D. Cal. 1951).




n16.  Columbia Broadcasting Sys. v. Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., 553 N.E.2d 997
(N.Y. 1990).




n17.  U.C.C. 2-312(1)(a) (1994).




n18.  See Michael Madow, Private Ownership of Public Image: Popular Culture &
Publicity Rights 81 Cal. L. Rev. 125 (1993); see also Kenneth R. Corsello, Note,
The Computer Software Rental Amendment Act of 1990: Another Bend in the First
Sale Doctrine, 41 Cath. U. L. Rev. (1991); Fred Cate, Cable Television and the
Compulsory Copyright License, 42 Fed. Comm. L. J. 191 (1990).




n19.  For greater analysis on "gross profits' and "revenue', see Alois Valerian
Gross, Annotation, Measure of Damages and Profits to which Copyright Owner is
Entitled under 17 U.S.C.S. 504(b), 100 A.L.R. Fed. 258 (1994).




n20.  There is a great deal of literature devoted to the "star system' and its
image in Hollywood. See, e.g., Hollywood's Movie Star System: An Historical
Overview in the American Movie Industry: The Business of Motion Picture 79,
84-85 (G. Kindem ed. 1982); Richard Griffith & Arthur Mayer, The Movies 46-47
(1957); Daniel J. Boorstin, The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America 57
(1967).




n21.  See Madow, supra note 18.




n22.  A detailed discussion of the music business is beyond the scope of this
Article. For an excellent analysis of the music business and music licensing,
see A. Kohn & B. Kohn, The Art of Music Licensing (Prentice Hall Law & Bus. eds.
1992).




n23.  A mechanical license is a license that authorizes one to make
reproductions of musical compositions for distributing them to the public for
private use. A. Dean Johnson, Music Copyrights: The Need for an Appropriate Fair
Use Analysis in Digital Sampling Infringement Suits, 21 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 135,
164 n.201 (1993).




n24.  Kohn & Kohn, supra note 22, at 46.




n25.  Id.




n26.  It remains a mystery why many contemporary artists have an aversion to
permitting the use of their music in commercial advertising. Id. at 501.




n27.  Id. at 744.




n28.  Id. at 566-67.




n29.  A "sync" right is the right to control whether the copyrighted music is
incorporated in the soundtrack of a pre-recorded program prior to the broadcast
of the program. United States v. American Soc'y of Composers, Civ. No. 13-95,
1993 U.S Dist. LEXIS 2566 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 26, 1993).




n30.  When a sampling artist wishes to make copies of a recording containing the
sampled sound recording of another, permission will be required from the
copyright owner of the sound recording. the permission, if granted without
further conditions, will normally be in the form of a master use license. Kohn &
Kohn, supra note 22, at 824.




n31. " Rights of public performances" means the right to perform a copyrighted
musical composition publicly for profit in a non-dramatic manner, sometimes
referred to as "small performing rights." United States v. ASCAP, 1950 Trade
Cas. (CCH) 62,595 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 14, 1950).




n32.  See generally Kohn & Kohn, supra note 22, at 637.




n33.  State "shrink-wrap" laws attempt to protect software publishers' property
interest in their software by making "shrink-wrap" license agreements
enforceable. The copyright owner gains several advantages from licensing
software rather than selling it. Page M. Kaufman, Note, The Enforceability of
State "Shrink-wrap" License Statutes in Light of Vault Corp. v. Quaid Software,
Ltd., 74 Cornell L. Rev. 222 (1988).


                              920 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                              April 1, 2007 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

A PUSH TO "BUY WISCONSIN, BUY LOCAL"

BYLINE: Jenny Price

SECTION: CAPITAL REGION BUSINESS JOURNAL; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 750 words


Most of the food we eat in Wisconsin travels hundreds or even thousands of miles
to get to grocery stores where we shop and the restaurants where we dine out.

There's a growing push at the state Capitol to change that, including
legislation to create and fund a statewide program called "Buy Wisconsin, Buy
Local." The bill, sponsored by Sen. Julie Lassa, D-Stevens Point, aims to make
10 percent of food spending each year in Wisconsin go toward locally grown and
made products. The program would get $550,000 a year to promote food and culture
tourism trails and provide grants to help develop regional food networks.

Supporters contend the effort would contribute nearly $2 billion a year to local
economies by 2010. Less than 1 percent of all Wisconsin agricultural products
are currently sold directly to consumers, despite the fact that food
expenditures top $19 billion a year in the state, according to the program
proposal.

Backers of the idea also argue consumers will see benefits from buying food
closer to home.

Food travels an average of 1,500 miles from producer to consumer, according to
the Crossroads Resource Center, a nonprofit organization in Minneapolis. The
farther food has to travel, the more preservatives required, the more
nutritional value is diminished and the more energy costs result, supporters of
local food initiatives argue.

The goal is to capitalize on a growing national trend among restaurants, grocery
stores, hospitals and universities to rely on local food producers rather than
sources halfway across the country or around the world. A recent survey
conducted by the National Restaurant Association identified local produce as one
of the top 20 culinary trends for 2007.

The concept for Wisconsin's program emerged from discussions among farmers,
industry groups and state agriculture officials looking to increase
opportunities for products grown and produced locally in Wisconsin.

Participants in the planning effort identified some obstacles impeding the sale
and distribution of locally grown food, including:

A limited number of processing facilities that provide smaller run or batch
processing.

The small number of U.S. Department of Agriculture-approved meat processing
facilities.

Barriers to accessing institutional and state buying systems.

Lack of producer marketing expertise; and uncertainty about how to reach food
buyers and "buy local" consumers.

The proposed program is designed to develop and expand marketing, distribution
and processing networks between food producers and potential customers --
distributors, grocery stores and consumers. Another objective is increasing
consumer awareness and access to diverse, high quality local foods.

Supporters say the program would help the state enhance existing programs
including SavorWisconsin.com -- which connects producers with consumers,
retailers and restaurants -- and Something Special from Wisconsin, a labeling
program that tells shoppers they are buying a Wisconsin product. It could also
build on local efforts like Madison Area Community Supported Agriculture
Coalition, a nonprofit promoting a locally based food system by promoting member
farms that serve south and southwest Wisconsin.

There's evidence a buy local program could help Wisconsin seize an opportunity
to grow its agricultural economy.

A study from the Midwest Agribusiness Trade Research & Information Center at
Iowa State University predicts per capita expenditures on fruits and vegetables
will have the highest increases among all types of foods through 2020. And the
center reported most consumers will prefer locally grown foods as they grow
increasingly concerned about nutrition, safety, variety and convenience.

At least eight other states have enacted buy local programs with similar goals.

New York's "Pride of New York" program just marked its 10th anniversary and has
more than 1,700 members, including growers, food processors, retailers, wineries
and trade associations that support the state's agriculture.

And in Vermont, the state began distributing free promotional materials,
including stickers, to farmers, grocers and other retailers so they could
trumpet their local origins to consumers. State agriculture officials there
estimate that if Vermonters shifted 10 percent of their food spending to buying
local, it would add $100 million to the state economy.

There are signs the effort is working; a recent survey of participating farmers
said they saw an increase in sales in the campaign's first three years.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Jenny Price is a Madison freelance reporter. She can be reached at
jenny.price@gmail.com.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              921 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Mail Tribune (Medford, Oregon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 11, 2012 Tuesday

Growing pains for Southern Oregon wines

BYLINE: Janet Eastman, Mail Tribune, Medford, Ore.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1142 words


Sept. 11--The busiest time of the year at wineries is now. Whether that will
translate into the best of times is still up in the air.

Locals and summer tourists are still crowding Southern Oregon tasting rooms and
special events. Wine -- babied and aging over months and years -- is being
bottled or released. And everyone's watching this year's crop as it ripens in
the last weeks before what may prove to be the biggest and best harvest in
years.

In between the optimism and activity, however, is the lingering concern about
future sales.

If some projections are correct, an overproduction of Southern Oregon wine from
the past three vintages, beginning in 2009, could reach 250,000 cases, according
to Chris Martin, owner of Troon Vineyard in Grants Pass and president of the
Southern Oregon Winery Association.

"It isn't all going to be sold here," says Martin, who is applying for a
$300,000 federal grant to promote Southern Oregon wine, increase wine tourism
and perhaps create a wine cave-themed information center near Britt Gardens.

Exporting wine to other states and countries also is part of the plan, as is
selling more bottles to Portland retailers, restaurants and consumers.

On Sunday, Sept. 16, a few dozen Southern Oregon wine producers will be pouring
more than 100 wines, from albarino to viognier, at the Savor Southern Oregon
event in Portland's Director Park.

"We need to put Southern Oregon on a larger scale," says Martin, "and not try to
just sell to the already interested local consumer."

Michael Donovan, director of national sales for RoxyAnn Winery in Medford and
chairman of the Oregon Wine Board, agrees.

"There is a point at which this local regional market has a limit," says
Donovan, who will accompany Gov. John Kitzhaber on a 10-day trade mission to
China and Japan in October to promote Oregon products, including wine. "It's
really necessary for wineries making more than 5,000 cases a year to expand
beyond the region because that's where the growth is."

To sell mounting inventory, Southern Oregon has to move out of the shadow of the
Willamette Valley. Some people think a signature grape, such as the Willamette's
pinot noir or Napa Valley's cabernet sauvignon, could help distinguish the
southern part of the state, where currently more than 70 different grapes are
grown. The most widely planted grape in Southern Oregon is pinot noir, but it is
mostly sold to wineries in the north.

Martin, Donovan and others invested in the local wine industry also have been
hoping for years that a significant, outside wine producer will buy a stake in
Southern Oregon and give it instant acclaim, as respected French wine company
Maison Joseph Drouhin did when it opened Domaine Drouhin in Dundee in the 1980s.
A large retailer with national distribution also could help spread the region's
reputation.

The biggest factor to success here, as in any emerging wine region, still
remains in the hands of growers, winemakers and producers, who need to continue
to improve the quality of the grapes and wine, says Linda Donovan, who owns
Pallet Wine Co., a custom crush facility in Medford that makes wine for small-
and mid-size producers.

"We all need to be in it to make the best wine possible, a standout product at a
great value," says Linda Donovan, who is not related to Michael Donovan.

The majority of the excess bottles that are in storage units are priced at $15
or more.

She sells some bottles of her L. Donovan Wines for $13 to $16 and is debuting
her Late Bloomer label with a $9 gewürztraminer.

Last year, Linda Donovan's company became one of the top 20 wine producers in
the state, representing Southern Oregon along with Bridgeview Winery and Foris
Vineyards, both in Cave Junction.

Helping to boost production this year and last year were new vineyard plantings
and high yields on existing vines. Last year, 6,000 tons of grapes grown in
Southern Oregon were crushed, a 50 percent increase over the dismal,
weather-beaten harvest of 2010.

Linda Donovan notes that many local producers are successful at selling the bulk
of their wines, ranging from established veterans such as South Stage Cellars in
Jacksonville to new producers such as Irvine Vineyards, which is planting 25
more acres of pinot noir in Ashland and building a downtown tasting room and
hotel.

Small producers, who can't get much of a foothold outside the area, sell their
limited cases of wine directly to customers. To boost their presence, they band
together and organize "wine trail" events.

On Saturday and Sunday, Sept. 15-16, each of the eight members of the Bear Creek
Boutique Winery Association in Ashland, Talent and Medford is waiving tasting
fees, hiring musicians, laying out food and pouring wines to people who have
purchased a $20 pass to the Wine & Vine Adventure weekend event.

"Group advertising is a huge advantage to smaller wineries," says Laura
Lotspeich of Trium Wine, whose steady tasting-room traffic has made it necessary
to restrict the number of bottles sold per person to stretch out her inventory
until the end of the season. "Established wineries also help by sending
customers this way and teaching about marketing."

Two new tasting rooms -- Red Lily Vineyards in the Applegate Valley and Dancin
Vineyards just east of Jacksonville -- have drawn hundreds of wine fans on
weekends. To bolster its inventory and round out its tempranillo offerings, Red
Lily started selling Madrone Mountain Artisanal Dessert Wine. Dancin added
Velocity Cellars' malbec to its pinot noir and chardonnay lineup.

But, Martin cautions, with about 75 local labels and 45 tasting rooms in the
area with more under construction, sales out of the area need to increase
dramatically. Otherwise, "facilities will be robbing from each other," he says.
"Taking business from neighbors doesn't up the profile of Southern Oregon."

Valley View Winery, which built the first tasting room in the Applegate Valley,
could once count on a visitor buying a half case of wine or more, says Mike
Wisnovsky of his family's business. Today, people buy less because they are
stopping at other tasting rooms. The Wisnovskys act as their own distributor and
now sell to Costco and other retailers in Oregon and Washington.

To compete, wineries have to offer more than a nice vineyard view, Troon
Vineyard's Martin says. It comes back again to quality. Positive reviews and
ratings from respected experts help the label and the region.

Southern Oregon has been largely ignored by wine critics, but there are signs
that's beginning to change.

"What we need more of is Robert Parker of Wine Advocate rating seven of Cowhorn
Vineyard's wines 91 or better," Martin says. "That will generate positive energy
outside of Southern Oregon."

___ (c)2012 the Mail Tribune (Medford, Ore.) Visit the Mail Tribune (Medford,
Ore.) at www.mailtribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120911-ME-Growing-pains-for-Southern-Oregon-wines-0911-20120911

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ME


                          Copyright 2012 Mail Tribune


                              922 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             August 8, 2016 Monday

Moncton a 'gateway city' for illegal tobacco

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 625 words


In the contraband tobacco trade, Moncton is considered "a gateway city."

For illegal tobacco to get into the Maritimes, it has to go through Metro
Moncton from Ontario or Quebec, says Gary Grant, spokesman for the National
Coalition Against Contraband Tobacco. The contraband is then transferred to
distributors who move it to other major Atlantic Canadian cities.

Much like with legitimate business, Moncton is the ideal meeting spot between
producer and distributor, he said, because of its location.

"Moncton, being a fairly big city that's centrally located, [is] right on the
trail between Halifax going westward into Quebec and Ontario."

To avoid losing a large amount of their product to police raids, producers tend
to opt for smaller shipments into the province, said Grant.

"Contraband tobacco is making its way through New Brunswick and Nova Scotia
aggressively ... I've met with [community leaders] to make them aware of the
problem before it gets to a level like Ontario [which loses an estimated $1
billion annually in tax revenue to illegal tobacco]."

Tax revenue losses to contraband tobacco in New Brunswick are now an estimated
$13 million each year, said Paul Bradley, communications officer for the
Department of Justice and Public Safety.

"These are funds that could be used for health care, our highways and important
social programs," he said in an email.

In February, Justice Minister Stephen Horsman announced the creation of a
contraband enforcement unit to help contain the problem.

The nine-member unit is part of the inspection and enforcement branch of the
department, and are public sector employees with a background in law
enforcement.

Between April 1 and June 30 of this year, the unit made five seizures -
including ones in Fredericton, Saint-Jacques (north of Edmundston on the Quebec
border) and Miramichi - confiscating more than 354,000 illegal cigarettes with
at an estimated street value of $212,000, Bradley said.

The price of 200 illegal cigarettes is equal to the price of a movie ticket,
Grant said - about $13. That's a similar price to a pack of 25 legal cigarettes.

The illegal product comes into the Maritimes from major operations in Ontario or
Quebec, such as the First Nations community of Akwesasne, near Cornwall, Ont.,
and just west of the Quebec border, Grant said.

These operations can produce 10,000 illegal tobacco products a minute, he said,
calling the eastern Ontario city of Cornwall the national capital of the
contraband tobacco industry.

He said the RCMP estimates there are 50 illegal factories in the country which
produce contraband tobacco, mostly in Quebec and Ontario. Quality usually isn't
a concern for their production lines.

Lab analysis has shown human feces, mould, insect eggs and dead flies in illegal
cigarettes.

But for the smugglers, it's a low-risk, high-reward product, Grant said.

"Illegal tobacco products are neither subject to standards nor inspections," he
said. "Young people are particularly vulnerable as potential customers."

While some illegal tobacco products do come in through ports, that's more of a
concern on the West Coast than it is in the Maritimes, he said.

"There is some contraband that comes in via ports," he said. "The product is
usually counterfeit tobacco products that comes from Asia and are brought into
the West Coast ports.

There is no real evidence of activity at Maritime ports."

The coalition is supported partly by the tobacco industry and convenience
stores, both of which have large financial stakes in the legal cigarette market.

*?Anyone with tips and wish to remain anonymous can contact Crime Stoppers at
1-800-222-8477, by texting TIP212 and your message to CRIMES (274637) or online
at crimenb.ca. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Times &; Transcript (Moncton)

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              923 of 998 DOCUMENTS



               South Burnett Times and Rural Weekly (Queensland)

                                 March 26, 2010

MSA field days offer tasty education

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 656  words


BEEF and sheep producers in south east Queensland can learn how to boost the
eating quality of the meat they produce when AgForce joins forces with Meat and
Livestock Australia to host free MSA days in April.

AgForce Cattle president Grant Maudsley and Sheep and Wool president Brent
Finlay said MSA was a valuable tool for beef and sheep producers, processors,
retailers and consumers.

More than one million cattle are graded each year under MSA certification, and
although MSA-grading sheep is a relatively new concept, with just 120,000 sheep
graded annually, it is increasing in popularity with producers.

"With the historical highs that the sheepmeat industry has been experiencing
over the last 12 months, more sheep producers are looking at increasing on-farm
revenue through sheepmeat production, which correlates with the increasing use
of MSA grading in the sheep industry," Mr Finlay said.

"AgForce Sheep and Wool encourage all members to seek out as much information on
MSA as possible to see its relevance to their enterprise, and the best way for
producers to do this is attend these field days".

AgForce Cattle president Grant Maudsley said AgForce had a long standing policy
of promoting MSA to all parts of the supply chain and saw the increases in MSA
accreditation and production in Queensland as vital.

"The continuing uptake of MSA is the only way to improve awareness of meat
eating quality and avoid costly and counter-productive legislatory approaches
such as those under development in New South Wales," he said.

"Increasing the supply of Eating Quality Assured/MSA graded cattle is a crucial
step if we are to genuinely grow consumer satisfaction with beef quality because
the best way to get retailers to push MSA-backed brands is for these brands to
have a good continuity of supply.

"By increasing supply of Eating Quality Assured/MSA cattle we allow better
differentiation and hopefully lead to better choices for consumers about beef
brands underpinned by MSA.

"Producers in this program understand and are paid for livestock management
decisions which improve the quality of beef.

"This is a big part of the future for the industry and the strong growth of
Eating Quality Assured/MSA and its adoption in Queensland grass fed production
is an important way for us to grow the value of our industry," Mr Maudsley said.

Eating Quality Assurance/MSA, truth in labelling and grading legislation will be
an important issue politically in April when the Primary Industries Minister
Council (PIMC) meets in Darwin to discuss the potential for national
legislation.

In early March, Mr Maudsley met with Queensland Primary Industries Minister Tim
Mulherin who has a good understanding of the need for an industry-led approach
to meat grading.

"AgForce will oppose any move to make New South Wales-style legislation to be
adopted nationally.

"We believe that derogatory terms in labelling legislation will damage the
industry, and that research from a recent Galaxy poll confirms that government
interference in labelling of beef is not required," he said.

More information on grading is available on the AgForce website -
www.agforceqld.org.au

FREE MSA WORKSHOPS:

All producers and livestock agents are invited to attend these information
sessions: Register attendance for any session to AgForce Brisbane on 3236 3100
or fax 3236 3077 by the listed date.

Sheepmeat MSA days

Inglewood:8.30am Tuesday, April 13, Inglewood Civic Centre. RSVP by April 9.
Morning tea provided.

Warwick:2pm Tuesday, April 13, Warwick Golf Club Inc. Hawker Road, Warwick. RSVP
by April 9. Afternoon tea provided.

Beefing up Performance

Warwick:8.30am Wednesday, April 14, Warwick Golf Club Inc. Hawker Road, Warwick.
RSVP by April 6. Lunch provided.

Jandowae:8.30am Wednesday, April 15, Jandowae Hall. RSVP by April 9. Morning tea
and lunch provided.

Booubyjan:8.30am Wednesday, April 16, Booubyjan Hall. RSVP by April 9. Morning
tea and lunch provided.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TRW


                    Copyright 2010 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              924 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Economic Times (E-Paper Edition)

                            January 23, 2015 Friday
                                Kolkata Edition

NOW & THEN Unleash Captive Mining

BYLINE: Jaideep Mishra

SECTION: THE EDIT PAGE

LENGTH: 770 words


Cases concerning impropriety in mines and minerals, as they wind through the
courts, continue to make news, albeit in the inside pages. In the spate of
recent Ordinances, a disproportionate number pertains to the harried minerals
sector, seeking to bring much-needed transparency not just in the award of
mining lease but also when it comes to reconnaissance permit and prospective
licence.

However, the fine print does seem to suggest that the more things change, the
more they remain the same. And the scope for routine opacity would mean
suboptimal results and continuing rigidities for key segments like iron ore and
bauxite. It would impinge downstream sectors like steel and metals, and other
manufactures across the board.

Consider, for instance, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Ordinance, 2015. Some new sections and clauses do incorporate
unexceptionable ideas, including ones floated by the previous government. But
there are sections in the new law that would encourage discretionary powers and
perhaps shore up arbitrariness as well, and both by the central and the
concerned state government.

The Ordinance mandates a District Mineral Foundation, to keep the `interest and
benefit of persons, and areas' affected by mining activity .The United
Progressive Alliance did make the suggestion, albeit in the coal sector, and the
initial idea was to earmark a share of company profits for social uplift and to
compensate the manifold externalities of mining operations and resultant
evacuation.

But profits are variable and can be a very unreliable yardstick, and this
newspaper has instead called for allo cating a share of royalty for more tar
geted development delivery mechani sm in mining areas, which, inciden tally,
happen mostly to be the very areas with high poverty ratios. And the Ordinance
has duly decided in fa vour of mineral royalty accruing to the states to provide
resources for the mineral foundations, `not exceeding one-third of such
royalty'.

The seeming big change proposed is that, henceforth, mining lease for both
ferrous and non-ferrous ore wo uld be awarded via auction and comt petitive
bidding, and the notion of captive mining for metal producers or cement
producers would be done away . The fact of the matter is that captive mining
represses ore prices and leads to untoward repercussions like the lack of value
addition in steel products and metal-making.

So, broadly speaking, captive mini ng does distort incentives and market design
and needs to be phased out, al though for metal producers, propos ing greenfield
investments in areas lacking in infrastructure and connec tivity , there may be
a case for sourc ing ore from dedicated mines on a time-bound basis, until, say
, the plant

and machinery are fully depreciated and capital costs duly recouped, say , in
seven or eight years.

Note, however, that the amended law now says in section 8A(5) that lease for
captive purpose would be deemed to be extended up to March 31, 2030, or a period
of 50 years from the grant of such lease, whichever is later. Mining lease would
now be deemed to be valid for half a century! It needs to be asked why such a
long phase-out period is warranted, especially as the lease holder would anyway
have the right of first refusal following the auction, as and when it happens.

We need to eschew the status quo and proactively reform the minerals economy .
True, while internationally traded prices of, say , iron ore did shoot up in the
boom years 2005-09, they are much more subdued now as the Chinese economy begins
to slowdown and, in any case, domestic ore needs to be auctioned and the prices
linked to scarcity value.

Meanwhile, reports say that state governments like that in Odisha are miffed
that the Ordinance apparently precludes captive mines for steel plants in the
pipeline. But does it really? A new clause 1(b) in section 6 does seem to grant
the central government the power to change and modify prospecting licence and
mining lease in any particular area, `in the interest of the development of any
mineral or industry'. It can be invoked for questionable discretion and bias.
There's also more discretion proposed for state governments.

A new section 12A(4) equips states to summarily disapprove prospecting
licence-cum-mining lease. So, again, there's built-in provision for
subjectivity, and delays. The point remains that in the high-growth potential
minerals economy , with its umpteen linkages to the Make in India project,
reform that is essentially non-reform simply makes no sense. The Ordinance needs
to be reworked.jaideep.mishra@timesgroup.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              925 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Economic Times (E-Paper Edition)

                            January 23, 2015 Friday
                                 Mumbai Edition

NOW & THEN Unleash Captive Mining

BYLINE: Jaideep Mishra

SECTION: THE EDIT PAGE

LENGTH: 770 words


Cases concerning impropriety in mines and minerals, as they wind through the
courts, continue to make news, albeit in the inside pages. In the spate of
recent Ordinances, a disproportionate number pertains to the harried minerals
sector, seeking to bring much-needed transparency not just in the award of
mining lease but also when it comes to reconnaissance permit and prospective
licence.

However, the fine print does seem to suggest that the more things change, the
more they remain the same. And the scope for routine opacity would mean
suboptimal results and continuing rigidities for key segments like iron ore and
bauxite. It would impinge downstream sectors like steel and metals, and other
manufactures across the board.

Consider, for instance, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Ordinance, 2015. Some new sections and clauses do incorporate
unexceptionable ideas, including ones floated by the previous government. But
there are sections in the new law that would encourage discretionary powers and
perhaps shore up arbitrariness as well, and both by the central and the
concerned state government.

The Ordinance mandates a District Mineral Foundation, to keep the `interest and
benefit of persons, and areas' affected by mining activity .The United
Progressive Alliance did make the suggestion, albeit in the coal sector, and the
initial idea was to earmark a share of company profits for social uplift and to
compensate the manifold externalities of mining operations and resultant
evacuation.

But profits are variable and can be a very unreliable yardstick, and this
newspaper has instead called for allo cating a share of royalty for more tar
geted development delivery mechani sm in mining areas, which, inciden tally,
happen mostly to be the very areas with high poverty ratios. And the Ordinance
has duly decided in fa vour of mineral royalty accruing to the states to provide
resources for the mineral foundations, `not exceeding one-third of such
royalty'.

The seeming big change proposed is that, henceforth, mining lease for both
ferrous and non-ferrous ore wo uld be awarded via auction and comt petitive
bidding, and the notion of captive mining for metal producers or cement
producers would be done away . The fact of the matter is that captive mining
represses ore prices and leads to untoward repercussions like the lack of value
addition in steel products and metal-making.

So, broadly speaking, captive mini ng does distort incentives and market design
and needs to be phased out, al though for metal producers, propos ing greenfield
investments in areas lacking in infrastructure and connec tivity , there may be
a case for sourc ing ore from dedicated mines on a time-bound basis, until, say
, the plant

and machinery are fully depreciated and capital costs duly recouped, say , in
seven or eight years.

Note, however, that the amended law now says in section 8A(5) that lease for
captive purpose would be deemed to be extended up to March 31, 2030, or a period
of 50 years from the grant of such lease, whichever is later. Mining lease would
now be deemed to be valid for half a century! It needs to be asked why such a
long phase-out period is warranted, especially as the lease holder would anyway
have the right of first refusal following the auction, as and when it happens.

We need to eschew the status quo and proactively reform the minerals economy .
True, while internationally traded prices of, say , iron ore did shoot up in the
boom years 2005-09, they are much more subdued now as the Chinese economy begins
to slowdown and, in any case, domestic ore needs to be auctioned and the prices
linked to scarcity value.

Meanwhile, reports say that state governments like that in Odisha are miffed
that the Ordinance apparently precludes captive mines for steel plants in the
pipeline. But does it really? A new clause 1(b) in section 6 does seem to grant
the central government the power to change and modify prospecting licence and
mining lease in any particular area, `in the interest of the development of any
mineral or industry'. It can be invoked for questionable discretion and bias.
There's also more discretion proposed for state governments.

A new section 12A(4) equips states to summarily disapprove prospecting
licence-cum-mining lease. So, again, there's built-in provision for
subjectivity, and delays. The point remains that in the high-growth potential
minerals economy , with its umpteen linkages to the Make in India project,
reform that is essentially non-reform simply makes no sense. The Ordinance needs
to be reworked.jaideep.mishra@timesgroup.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              926 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        Economic Times (E-Paper Edition)

                            January 23, 2015 Friday
                               Bangalore Edition

NOW & THEN Unleash Captive Mining

BYLINE: Jaideep Mishra

SECTION: THE EDIT PAGE

LENGTH: 770 words


Cases concerning impropriety in mines and minerals, as they wind through the
courts, continue to make news, albeit in the inside pages. In the spate of
recent Ordinances, a disproportionate number pertains to the harried minerals
sector, seeking to bring much-needed transparency not just in the award of
mining lease but also when it comes to reconnaissance permit and prospective
licence.

However, the fine print does seem to suggest that the more things change, the
more they remain the same. And the scope for routine opacity would mean
suboptimal results and continuing rigidities for key segments like iron ore and
bauxite. It would impinge downstream sectors like steel and metals, and other
manufactures across the board.

Consider, for instance, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Ordinance, 2015. Some new sections and clauses do incorporate
unexceptionable ideas, including ones floated by the previous government. But
there are sections in the new law that would encourage discretionary powers and
perhaps shore up arbitrariness as well, and both by the central and the
concerned state government.

The Ordinance mandates a District Mineral Foundation, to keep the `interest and
benefit of persons, and areas' affected by mining activity .The United
Progressive Alliance did make the suggestion, albeit in the coal sector, and the
initial idea was to earmark a share of company profits for social uplift and to
compensate the manifold externalities of mining operations and resultant
evacuation.

But profits are variable and can be a very unreliable yardstick, and this
newspaper has instead called for allo cating a share of royalty for more tar
geted development delivery mechani sm in mining areas, which, inciden tally,
happen mostly to be the very areas with high poverty ratios. And the Ordinance
has duly decided in fa vour of mineral royalty accruing to the states to provide
resources for the mineral foundations, `not exceeding one-third of such
royalty'.

The seeming big change proposed is that, henceforth, mining lease for both
ferrous and non-ferrous ore wo uld be awarded via auction and comt petitive
bidding, and the notion of captive mining for metal producers or cement
producers would be done away . The fact of the matter is that captive mining
represses ore prices and leads to untoward repercussions like the lack of value
addition in steel products and metal-making.

So, broadly speaking, captive mini ng does distort incentives and market design
and needs to be phased out, al though for metal producers, propos ing greenfield
investments in areas lacking in infrastructure and connec tivity , there may be
a case for sourc ing ore from dedicated mines on a time-bound basis, until, say
, the plant

and machinery are fully depreciated and capital costs duly recouped, say , in
seven or eight years.

Note, however, that the amended law now says in section 8A(5) that lease for
captive purpose would be deemed to be extended up to March 31, 2030, or a period
of 50 years from the grant of such lease, whichever is later. Mining lease would
now be deemed to be valid for half a century! It needs to be asked why such a
long phase-out period is warranted, especially as the lease holder would anyway
have the right of first refusal following the auction, as and when it happens.

We need to eschew the status quo and proactively reform the minerals economy .
True, while internationally traded prices of, say , iron ore did shoot up in the
boom years 2005-09, they are much more subdued now as the Chinese economy begins
to slowdown and, in any case, domestic ore needs to be auctioned and the prices
linked to scarcity value.

Meanwhile, reports say that state governments like that in Odisha are miffed
that the Ordinance apparently precludes captive mines for steel plants in the
pipeline. But does it really? A new clause 1(b) in section 6 does seem to grant
the central government the power to change and modify prospecting licence and
mining lease in any particular area, `in the interest of the development of any
mineral or industry'. It can be invoked for questionable discretion and bias.
There's also more discretion proposed for state governments.

A new section 12A(4) equips states to summarily disapprove prospecting
licence-cum-mining lease. So, again, there's built-in provision for
subjectivity, and delays. The point remains that in the high-growth potential
minerals economy , with its umpteen linkages to the Make in India project,
reform that is essentially non-reform simply makes no sense. The Ordinance needs
to be reworked.jaideep.mishra@timesgroup.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              927 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                 Ottawa Citizen

                   September 21, 2002 Saturday Final Edition

A day after slagging media coverage, arts benefactor defaults on his deals

SOURCE: The Ottawa Citizen

BYLINE: Doug Fischer

SECTION: News; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 578 words

Ouch.

Just a day after complaining to an Ottawa conference that bad journalism keeps
rich people from donating to the arts, the press socked the world's No. 1 arts
benefactor for defaulting on two funding commitments.

The New York Times reported Thursday that Alberto Vilar, a U.S. money manager
who has given $225 million U.S. to cultural organizations in the past decade,
failed to deliver $1.7 million that was to be used as prize money in music
competitions in New York and Washington.

The Times said the value of Mr. Vilar's multi-billion-dollar Amerindo Technology
Fund has been dropping dramatically since 1999, fuelling speculation he would
eventually have to pull back on several of his lavish pledges.

An Amerindo spokesman said Mr. Vilar was travelling yesterday and would not be
available to comment on the story. However, he did acknowledge to the Times he
was out of touch with some of his payments and would have to check to see if he
had overlooked any of his promises.

Mr. Vilar also described the suggestion he was backing away from his commitments
as an ugly effort by the media to hurt a generous man.

That remark was similar in tone to statements he made Wednesday in Ottawa during
a roundtable discussion on arts philanthropy organized by the National Arts
Centre's fundraising foundation.

"The biggest single negative force in philanthropy is bad journalism," Mr. Vilar
told the assembly, made up of some of Canada's most prominent donor families,
including the Bronfmans, Aspers, Meighens, Fountains and Potters.

Too often, he said, donors get falsely accused in the media of trying to meddle
in the affairs of the arts groups they are funding. So, instead of receiving
positive recognition for their generosity, donors are slagged for
self-aggrandizement, he said. And that, in turn, scares away other potential
benefactors.

Although Mr. Vilar has been giving large sums of money to the arts since 1992,
he has risen to the top of the donations list in the past three years through a
$30-million gift to New York's Metropolitan Opera, $18 million in funding to
London's Royal Opera and $14 million for the Kirov Opera in St. Petersburg,
Russia.

According to the Times story, Mr. Vilar's failure to provide $700,000 to the New
York Philharmonic forced the organization's music director to put up some of his
own money and approach other sources to cover the costs of a conductors'
competition scheduled for Carnegie Hall next week.

Further, the Vilar-Domingo Young Arts Program at the Washington Opera has
removed Mr. Vilar's name from the program because he has not yet paid $1 million
he promised last year. Mr. Vilar told the newspaper he intends to pay.

Although Mr. Vilar has occasionally run up against the media in the U.S. -- he
has not donated money to the arts in Canada -- most of his unhappiness with the
media is in Europe, where there is more of a tradition of public funding for the
arts. "Journalists in Europe have been culturally raised to believe that
supporting the arts is the express responsibility of government," he told the
Ottawa conference. "Hence, many unfounded charges arise ... that the private
patron will interfere artistically."

Of course, that kind of thinking is unfair to givers, but it especially
insulting to recipients, who are portrayed as willing to compromise their
artistic integrity to get money, he said. "How pathetically insulting can it
get."

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News

               Copyright 2002 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              928 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday

WB approves $76.4m for Sindh agricultural growth project

SECTION: Vol. XXVIII No. 132

LENGTH: 350  words


The World Bank's Board of Executive Directors has approved the Sindh
Agricultural Growth Project in the amount of $76.4 million, as project aims to
improve the productivity and market access of small and medium producers in
important commodity value chains.

The project would benefit approximately 112,000 farmers covering over 66,000
hectares.

The project intends to achieve this objective by investing in knowledge and
technology for producers and sub-sectors of crops and livestock, and
strengthening public sector institutions to enhance the enabling environment for
sustained sectoral growth.

"The project is envisaged to be a significant investment towards inclusive
growth by prioritising support to small and medium sized producers who are
trying to compete in horticulture markets", said Rachid Benmessaoud, World Bank
Country Director for Pakistan in a statement.  "Investing in horticulture offers
the best potential for increased small producer incomes, new employment
opportunities in production and processing, improved resource productivity and
enhanced micronutrient availability in the market", he added.

The project focuses on horticulture and milk production as they have a small
farmer focus, have significant involvement of women in production and processing
and from a national perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest competitive advantage
in these pro-poor production value chains. Capacity building, technical
assistance and strategic planning for sector growth will also be provided
through this project.

The project will also promote the private sector participation in the
agricultural development and sector growth through public-private models for
agribusiness development and support services.

The Government of Pakistan and Government of Sindh have both highlighted
commercial agriculture and market linkages as priority investments for the
sector.

The credit is financed from the International Development Association (IDA), the
World Bank Group's grant and low-interest arm. It will be on standard IDA terms,
with a maturity of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              929 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 2, 2014 Monday

Utah: Beginning Farmers and Ranchers and the Agricultural Act of 2014

LENGTH: 946  words

DATELINE: Salt Lake City


Department of Economic Research Service, The State of Utah has issued the
following news release:


Support for beginning farmers and ranchers can be found throughout the
Agricultural Act of 2014. The Act provides increased funding for beginning
farmer development, facilitates the transfer of farmland to the next generation
of farmers, and improves outreach and communication to military veterans about
farming and ranching opportunities. Among the provisions, the Act reauthorizes
and increases funding for the Conservation Reserve Program Transition Incentives
Program to $33 million (available until expended) during 2014-18 to assist
retired or retiring farmers transfer their land to beginning farmers or ranchers
and other targeted groups of farmers. The Act reauthorizes and increases funding
to a total of $100 million over 2014-18 for the Beginning Farmer and Rancher
Development Program, establishes a Military Veterans Agricultural Liaison to
provide information to returning veterans about beginning farmer training
programs, and provides ways for these veterans to connect with the program. The
Act also makes a technical change that alters the acreage limit in the
definition of a "qualified beginning farmer or rancher"; under the new
definition, more producers may qualify for the USDA Farm Service Agency's Direct
Farm Ownership loan program as beginning farmers and ranchers.

In sum, the Agricultural Act of 2014 contains beginning farmer and rancher
provisions in nearly every title. This article discusses major provisions
affecting beginning farmer and ranchers, but is not an exhaustive list. Readers
are encouraged to consult Beginning Farmers and Ranchers, in Agricultural Act of
2014: Highlights and Implications for a complete list of provisions.
Addressing Demographic Trends and a Need for Beginning Farmer Development

In 1982, based on Census of Agriculture data, 38 percent of principal operators
had less than 10 years of experience farming; by 2007, only 26 percent had such
experience. Today, beginning farms--farms headed and completely operated by
farmers with 10 or fewer years of experience--make up just 17.2 percent of
family farms (362,470 farms). Further, not all beginning farmers are young
people. On average, the principal operator of a beginning farm is 49 years old.
However, with the aging of the overall farm operator population, the average
beginning farmer is still 11 years younger than the average principal operator
of an established farm (60 years old). Beginning farmers are also more likely to
be female than established farmers; nearly one in five principal operators of a
beginning farm is female (69,957 beginning farms are headed by a female
operator).

In the face of declining farming entrance, encouraging and supporting new
farmers is a priority of the Agricultural Act of 2014. The Beginning Farmer and
Rancher Development Program received a cumulative $100 million for 2014-2018 to
provide funds, training, education, outreach, and technical assistance to
beginning farmers and ranchers. This represents a continuation of the program
established by the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 and a 33-percent
increase in its funding.

The Agricultural Act of 2014 also includes other provisions that could build and
support new and growing markets. Beginning and socially disadvantaged farmers
and ranchers who wish to enter value-added activities may find assistance from
the Value-Added Agricultural Market Development Grants program. The program
assists producers with creating new products and market opportunities, as well
as expanding their market reach. In addition, proposed projects by beginning and
socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers, among certain other operators, are
given priority. Funding for this program has been increased by $48 million and
is now $63 million in total.

The Specialty Crop Block Grants program is available to help farmers become
competitive producers of fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, dried fruits,
horticulture, and nursery crops (including floriculture). Under the Farm Act,
the program's funding was increased to $72.5 million for each of fiscal years
2014-17 and $85 million per year thereafter. As a way of assisting engagement in
local food markets, the Act expanded and renamed the Farmers' Market Promotion
Program. The program, now known as the Farmers' Market and Local Food Promotion
Program, assists farmers, including growers of specialty crops, with access to
local food markets. The program's scope has been expanded to include assistance
to intermediaries--local and regional food enterprises that process, distribute,
aggregate, store, and/or market locally or regionally produced food products.

Beginning farmers and ranchers may wish to operate organic farms or handle
organic produce, and the 2014 Farm Act included increased support for organic
agriculture. The National Organic Certification Cost-Share Program is available
to assist with certification costs, and funding has more than doubled from the
2008 Farm Act's mandate, to $57.5 million over the lifespan of the Act. Funding
for organic research has also increased, and conservation practices related to
organic production and transition continue to be eligible for payments under an
Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) provision added in the 2008 Farm
Act.

Together, these programs, in many cases expanded in terms of scope and available
funding, may address obstacles that beginning farmers and ranchers face when
establishing an operation, growing their farm businesses, and participating in
local and regional food markets.

For further information please visit: http://ers.usda.gov/

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              930 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                             August 9, 2015 Sunday

Sivaganga coconut farmers prepare to form company

SECTION: MADURAI

LENGTH: 454 words


Sivaganga: Coconut farmers in the district are getting ready to form their own
coconut producer company (CPC) that plans to bring farmers from across the
district under a single umbrella and to give them a better say in matters like
pricing.

According to Sivaganga deputy director of agriculture G Soundarajan, the company
was bein formed under the orders of district collector S Malarvizhi.

Each company would have 1,000 farmer shareholders, each of who will invest Rs
1,000 as share capital. At the end of 12 months, the government will carry out
an audit, and if the performance is found to be sustainable and profitable, the
Tamil Nadu Small Farmers Agri Business Consortium will provide a grant of Rs 10
lakh as equity share assistance.

The company will have to register as per the rules of the Companies Act. It
would have a 12-member board of directors, which would hold regular meetings.
The company would have the discretion of deciding the price of coconuts.

"While the farmers now sell the coconuts at about Rs 8 to the merchants, the
company would be able to fix it at around Rs 12," Soundarajan said.

He added that there were plans to form a farmers' federation by integrating the
four coconut farmer producer companies that they plan to establish in the
district. A federation will be eligible for a Rs one-crore grant given by the
Cochin Coconut Development Board.

Sivaganga district has about 3,500 hectares under coconut cultivation. Of these,
1,130 hectares are in Singampunari, which boasts of the best coconuts in the
district. So far, 200 farmers have expressed willingness to join the CPC
bandwagon.

Many farmers are certain that the formation of the company would enhance their
cultivation and pave way for better livelihood.

K Sevuga Perumal, a farmer from K Kallapur in Singampunari Union, said CPCs were
being formed by the government to enhance coconut cultivation.

"There is a vision to establish 2,000 companies and to the best of my knowledge,
nine have been formed (in Tamil Nadu)," he said.

Terming the initiative as "unique", he said it would unite the farmers beyond
communal, caste and political differences.

"If this happens, nothing can put us on the back foot. Even the prices of
coconuts can be fixed by us, not the merchants," he added.

P Pandian, another farmer, is looking forward to the formation of the company.
Coconuts in the region are of superior quality and value-added items like
coconut milk and virgin coconut oil can be produced through this company, he
said.

Sevuga Perumal said the task that now lay ahead was to co-ordinate with the
officials to bring the 1,000 members together. Even if there are just 999
farmers, there won't be any grant, he said.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              931 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 28, 2014 Wednesday

Missouri: More than $125,000 Awarded to Missouri Value-Added Agriculture
Projects

LENGTH: 424  words

DATELINE: Jefferson City


Department of Agriculture, The State of Missouri has issued the following press
release:

The Missouri Department of Agriculture today announced the awarding of more than
$125,000 of grants for agricultural businesses. The funding comes from the
Missouri Value-Added Grant Program, which provides grants for projects that
advance the development of Missouri agricultural products while aiding the
economy of a rural community.

"As Missouri agriculture moves forward, we will continue to lead the way in
supporting our farmers' innovations in production and processing technology,"
said Director of Agriculture Richard Fordyce. "Value-added agriculture is a
growing area in our state and an outstanding way for producers to diversify
their operations."

The Missouri Agricultural and Small Business Development Authority (MASBDA)
awards the value-added grants to promote the development, processing and
marketing of new or expanded uses of Missouri agricultural products that will
also aid rural economic development. The grants are funded from the sale of tax
credits and can be used for business planning purposes, such as feasibility
studies and marketing plans.

The maximum individual grant is $200,000, with the applicant required to provide
a 10 percent cash match toward the eligible expenses. This year's grants ranged
from $20,900 to $49,500, for a total of $128,665 awarded. The four grants were
awarded to:

o Hamra Farms, Sikeston - Development of a business plan supporting the growth
of a hydroponic greenhouse operation which markets produce such as lettuce,
tomatoes, cucumbers, and peppers primarily to schools, restaurants and local
grocery stores.

o Midwest Aquaculture, LLC, Montgomery City - For a feasibility study, marketing
analysis, and business plan to determine the viability of a commercial-scale,
zero-discharge, modular, indoor shrimp production and processing facility.

o Sunrise Farm, LLC, Bland - For a marketing plan, business plan and legal
services to evaluate the viability of a local meat processing plant.

o Eco Tec Surfaces, LLC, Kansas City - To fund a revised business plan,
marketing analysis and legal services for a new "green" solid surface building
material containing soybean-based urethane resin and recycled glass filler.

MASBDA, housed at the Missouri Department of Agriculture, awarded the value
-added grants to foster new enterprises that will aid rural economic
development. Applications for the 2014 grants were due to MASBDA in late 2013.

For further information please visit: http://agriculture.mo.gov/

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              932 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               South Wales Argus

                           September 21, 2015 Monday

Farmers: don't miss out on value-adding funding scheme, says specialist
accountant

BYLINE: Jo Barnes

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 398 words


Farmers and other primary producers in the Welsh agricultural sector have a week
to act if they are not to miss out on a major European funding pot which could
help them achieve their ambitions to invest in projects which will add value to
their businesses.

Mike Fenwick, director of grants with professional advisors Broomfield &
Alexander, which has an office in Newport, said the Welsh Government's £8m Food
Business Investment Scheme is a valuable one, and farmers would be losing out if
they did not consider an application before the cut off date at the end of
September.

"This programme represents a significant investment into the sector and
downstream activities under the new European Funding structure," he said, "and
for the first time, it's open to large companies as well as small operators,
which the previous programme was not.

"It's designed to support projects which will increase the customer base, appeal
and competitiveness of the sector, and stands to really benefit farmers because
it's aimed specifically at helping to add value directly or indirectly to their
activities - a key business objective for many."

The Food Business Investment Scheme was launched earlier this year by the Welsh
Government as part of its Action Plan to boost sales in the food and drink
industry in Wales by 30 per cent to £7bn by the year 2020.

It hopes farmers and producers will respond by putting forward initiatives with
an emphasis on sustainable land management, efficient use of natural resources,
and climate action to safeguard the environment which will respond to consumer
demand and identify, exploit and service new emerging and existing markets, thus
encouraging diversification and improving the performance and competitiveness of
businesses.

"The scheme covers capital investments in processing equipment along with some
associated costs and supports projects that offer clear and quantifiable
benefits to primary producers, either directly or indirectly, in the
agricultural sectors providing the raw materials," said Mike.

"With a total budget of £8m available for distribution and support ranging from
anywhere between £2,400 and £5m, this is clearly not an initiative to be
by-passed. As with all these schemes, the application process can seem daunting,
but I would urge farmers not to let that put them off, but seek professional
guidance to help them through the process."

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2015 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              933 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 17, 2013 Monday

South Carolina: Secretary's Column: A Food Farm and Jobs Bill to Grow Local and
Regional Markets

LENGTH: 446  words

DATELINE: Columbia


Department of Agriculture, The State of South Carolina has issued the following
news release:

This week, the U.S. Senate acted in bipartisan spirit to approve the Agriculture
Reform, Food and Jobs Act - a balanced, comprehensive bill that will drive
continued growth in rural America.  The House of Representatives now has another
important opportunity to stand with rural America and pass their version of a
bill.

People often call this the Farm Bill - but it's much more than that. This is a
conservation bill. It's a trade promotion bill. It's an innovation bill. It's a
jobs bill.

And it's a bill that will help continue a tremendous increase in markets for
locally-grown foods. This includes creating more farmers markets, building
additional regional food hubs and strengthening farm-to-institution programs.

In recent years, USDA has carried out a very successful Farmers Market Promotion
Program that has increased the number of farmers markets by 67% since 2008.  The
Senate bill expands these efforts through its Farmers Market and Local Food
Promotion Program.

This would continue to help producers sell their product directly to consumers
through farmers markets, but it would also help farmers who are ready to scale
up and sell to local grocery stores or other institutions. Regional food hubs,
which connect farmers to these larger-volume markets, would have a new tool to
expand and grow.

Passage of a Food, Farm and Jobs Bill would help farmers develop new value-added
products for local or regional sale, creating new income opportunities in rural
America. In recent years, the Value-Added Producer Grant Program has already
helped more than 285 projects directly related to local markets for agriculture.

It would continue efforts to provide healthy, locally-grown food in schools -
building on our work to serve 3,200 schools and 2 million students through USDA
Farm-to-School projects across the country.

And it would provide investments in the infrastructure that locally-oriented
producers can use to grow a better crop. This includes support for new cold
storage facilities, hoop houses to extend the growing season, and access to
credit to start or expand an operation.

The Food, Farm and Jobs Bill isn't just needed by America's farmers and ranchers
- it's important for all of us who enjoy fresh, local foods at a farmers market.
It's important to ensure our nation's youngsters have access to healthy, fresh
foods. It's important to help create new economic opportunity in rural America.
These are all good reasons why Congress must get a Food, Farm and Jobs Bill
passed as swiftly as possible.

For further information please visit: http://ric.nal.usda.gov/.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              934 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                   The Mirror

                              May 24, 1999, Monday

LIGHTS, CAMERA, ACTION;
 IT'S NOT HOLLYWOOD YET, BUT WALES IS BECOMING A BIG HIT WITH FILMMAKERS MAP
GUIDE TO MOVIE HOTSPOTS

BYLINE: Christian Fraser

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 2, 21

LENGTH: 504 words


IT might not be Beverly Hills - but Wales is now such a hit with filmmakers that
tourists are being given maps to guide them round the hottest locations.

The list is growing at such a pace the South Wales Film Commission has produced
the guide so fans can visit the scenes of some of their favourite films. In the
last 12 months more than 50 movies have been shot in the country. And there were
more than 100 other inquiries for locations.

Films like Up 'n' Under, starring Samantha Janus and Neil Morrissey, and High
Grant's The Englishman Who Went Up A Hill But Came Down A Mountain, have paved
the way to bigger and better contracts.

Locations vary from the streets of Cardiff, to the shoreline of Pembrokeshire
and the mountains of Snowdonia. Five feature films are currently being shot in
Wales.

The arrival of the big Hollywood and Pinewood producers is largely down to three
Welsh Film Commissions, set up in 1994 to encourage film makers to look at Welsh
locations.

They are generating inquiries for everything from commercial television dramas
through to three-hour feature films.

With the help of the map fans can pick their way through a century of movies
from a 1913 production of Ivanhoe filmed at Chepstow Castle, to more recent hits
like Restoration starring Meg Ryan, which includes scenes from Caerphilly
Castle.

Wales has featured in other popular films. The Llanberis Pass doubled up for the
Khyber Pass in Carry on Up The Khyber.

Llanberis was also used as the setting for Dragonslayer, starring Ralph
Richardson and Kate Lynne. Merthyr Mawr sand dunes became the Arabian desert for
the 1962 film Lawrence of Arabia.

And the controversial first World War movie The Monocled Mutineer was set at
Ynys Las and Arthog.

Some producers and directors get so attached to Wales they never leave. David
Ball who was based at Pinewood studios first came to Cardiff to shoot Up 'n'
Under.

But he relocated to the city before shooting his next film, The Last Reduction
2, in Wales.

The production teams tend to bring their key personnel with them - the director
of photography, the producer and director - but regularly employ local staff for
other roles.

Location fees start from pounds 2,000 but largely depend on the size of the film
and how the location is changed.

And more and more Welsh people are cashing in. Houses or buildings used in
feature films can sometimes grow in value after being on screen.

Yvonne Cheal, commissioner for the South Wales Film Commission, said: "The
locations are new, they are cheap and they are varied. We use all sorts of
locations from a two up two down terrace to a 16th century manor house.

"The production company normally take the venue for a week, but it can be longer
depending on how prominently it features in the film. When they get there they
might make changes so it fits the film.

"Whatever they do they always put it back to how it was. In fact sometimes the
locations look better for the attention."

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: 12; Tony Slattery, right, starred in rugby league comedy Up 'n' Under
in 1997;; Hugh Grant and Tara Fitzgerald in The Englishman Went Up a Hill; 3456;
Sir; Anthony Hopkins, left, and Gawn Grainger in August; ON LOCATION; Sid James
camps it up in Carry On Up The Khyber in 1968; The Monocled Mutineer starred
Paul; McGann and was filmed at Ynyslas; 13; 17; 14; From Russia With Love had
Sean; Connery as Bond in 1963; Prestatyn was used in 1974 as the location for
Holiday; On; The Buses with Stephen Lewis; 18; Cult show The Prisoner was filmed
at; Portmeirion; 14; Richard Gere starred in the fantasy First Knight; 15; 8;;
(Clockwise from the top) 13: Under Milk Wood with Richard Burton was filmed at;
Fishguard in 1973. 14: Richard Gere starred in First Knight in 1994. 15:;
Restoration created 17th century England at Caerphilly Castle and starred Meg;
Ryan. 16: Llanberis was used to film fantasy adventure Willow with Joanna;
Whalley Kilmer. 17: An American Werewolf in London starred Jenny Agutter; 16;;
Heaven on Earth for Neil Pearson; 10; Ingrid Bergman starred in Inn of the
Sixth; Happiness at Capel Curig in 1958; Timothy Spall, left, and Kenneth
Cranham in; BBC series Our Mutual Friend; Hayley Mills and Horst Buccholz in
Tiger Bay in; 1959

                            Copyright 1999 MGN Ltd.


                              935 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 2, 2015 Wednesday

Grant to expand regional food businesses, increase food access

LENGTH: 515  words

DATELINE: Atlanta


Georgia Institute of Technology has issued the following news release:

The MSU Center for Regional Food Systems has received a $450,000 grant from the
Kresge Foundation to expand the Michigan Food Hub Network, a statewide learning
community that helps food hubs become profitable while supplying healthy food to
low-income communities in Michigan.

Food hubs are an answer to challenges that can make it difficult for small
producers and value-added food businesses to succeed. Michigan is the first
state with a state-level food hub network.

"With this renewed award, MSU CRFS will build on Michigan Food Hub Network's
collaboration infrastructure, which gathers food hub managers and business
partners throughout Michigan to develop strategies for developing business
viability, reaching new markets and increasing food security in Michigan," said
Rich Pirog, MSU CRFS senior associate director.

Pirog said CRFS also will collaborate with neighboring states to help them learn
from Michigan's Food Hub Network model.

Over the next three years, the project will increase buyer-seller relationships
and specialized business and technical assistance, emphasizing business
collaborations between food hubs and food service directors of institutions -
including schools and hospitals.

Small and mid-sized Michigan food entrepreneurs are finding that food hubs are a
boon to business viability, and Michigan food hub managers use the Michigan Food
Hub Network as a key resource for connecting with producers, processors,
financiers, funders and other food hub managers.

"The Michigan Food Hub Network has been an immensely valuable resource for our
food hub. With [the Network's] support I was able to attend the University of
Vermont's Food Hub Management Certificate Program, participate in network
meetings and collaborate with other Michigan food hubs in an IT feasibility
study," said Rita O'Brien, associate director of the Allen Market Place in
Lansing. "These experiences helped us to develop a stronger business model which
has set our hub on a path of success."

Meetings throughout Michigan gather representatives three times per year to
build peer relationships and share lessons learned. The network also
collaborates to address regional food value chain challenges.

"The Michigan Food Hub Network has been invaluable in helping us establish,
develop, and continue to grow our food hub in Michigan's Upper Peninsula," said
Natasha Lantz, co-lead of the U.P. Food Exchange. "The statewide meetings allow
us to connect with other food hubs in Michigan to share resources, get new ideas
and set the groundwork to coordinate efforts."

The Michigan Food Hub Network is part of a portfolio of Center for Regional Food
Systems initiatives that facilitate the movement for Michigan Good Food - food
that is healthy, green, fair and affordable - and the Michigan Good Food
Charter. The Network is co-led by the MSU Center for Regional Food Systems and
Morse Marketing Connections, LLC.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              936 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                            October 10, 2014 Friday

Green Jobs: Developing Ecological Restoration Services in Small Criollos
Producers Associations Impenetrable Chaco (Empleo Verde: Desarrollo de Servicios
de Restauración Ecológica en las Asociaciones de Pequeños Productores Criollos
del Impenetrable

LENGTH: 431  words


Area Of Work: Land Degradation


Operational Phase: Phase 5
Grant Amount: US$ 43,349.00


Project Description: The project objective is to improve the quality of life of
vulnerable rural populations Impenetrable Chaco through the potential recovery
of conservation and production of its native forests, promoting the development
of a Service for Ecological Restoration in the Community Association "Friends of
Guemes ".


Is expected to leave at the end of the project the installed capacities for:
Replacing another productive ecosystems degraded by favoring the "creation of
habitat" to promote the establishment of a biological community at a site and
the restoration of certain ecological functions, such as control of
desertification.
Rehabilitation of damaged ecosystems, seeking repair, and at least recover some
of the original species. Rehabilitation will focus on the dominant species that
were depleted by excessive logging.
Afforestation with native species of high value in the properties of small
producers
cropping systems that will raise the productivity of their land and decreasing
pressure of the timber economy of the native forest.
Grantee: Asociación Comunitaria Amigos de Güemes
Organisation Mission : For GEF SGP, the community-based approach is the
cornerstone for addressing local and global environmental and sustainable
development challenges. SGP provides grants to civil society organizations
(CSOs), notably national and local non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
community-based organizations (CBOs), and indigenous peoples organizations. SGP
grantees may also include other not-for-profit organizations such as
professional associations, unions and other civil society groups.
By enabling a direct connection between sustainable livelihoods and the
generation of local and global livelihoods, SGP empowers communities to act and
participate in their own development and hence ensures community ownership and
impact. Over the course of the last 20 years, SGP has provided grants to over
12,000 grantees with 64 percent of grants channeled to NGOs, 34 percent to CBOs,
and 2 percent to other not-for-profit organizations. More than 60 percent of
projects have directly benefitted communities either through direct grants to
CBOs or through other NGOs and CSOs working with communities.
Project completion date : 2016-03-31 12:00:00
Major organization : SGP THE GEF SMALL GRANTS PROGRAMME

Address : Av. J. Salguero 2424 - 1er piso

Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, C1425DEV

Country :Argentina
Financier : Global Environment Facility Small Grants Programme (SGP),

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2014 Tenders Info
                Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.(Syndigate.info)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              937 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Cotton & Grains Outlook

                            November 25, 2016 Friday
                                Internet Edition

Fiona Simson new NFF president

LENGTH: 620 words


NSW farmer Fiona Simson is the new president of the National Farmers'
Federation.

Ms Simson becomes the first female president of the NFF in its 37 year history.
She has previously served the NFF as vice president for two years and as a
director since 2011. Fiona was also the first female president of NSW Farmers,
retaining that position for a full four year term from 2011 to 2015.

Ms Simson, who is based near Gunnedah on NSW's Liverpool Plains, runs a farming
enterprise with her husband Ed and family including broadacre farming as well as
breeding commercial poll Hereford cattle.

"It is an honour and privilege to represent Australian farmers at the national
level and to be elected as the NFF's first female president," Ms Simson said.

"To me, it's a great acknowledgement that women contribute tremendously on farm,
along the value chain and increasingly as thought leaders and public advocates
for agriculture.

"My focus will be on developing and advocating for policy that makes farmers
better off - not just in terms of what they produce but also reaping the rewards
of any increases in value along the food and fibre supply chain.

"I also want to make sure that farmers, producers and rural and regional based
agribusinesses have access to communications technology that gets them better
connected to their customers and allows them to reach out to global markets.

"The NFF has a big agenda for agriculture. Issues such as transport
infrastructure, digital connectivity, tax reform, Australia's energy mix,
sustainable development and trade reform will all be issues high on my agenda as
president.

"To achieve this agenda, I will be focusing on strengthening the NFF's capacity
to provide a strong and united voice and be the sector's leader in addressing
industry challenges and creating opportunities in the new economy. I also
believe we need to work smarter and beyond our traditional alliances, and
include other stakeholders and the community in our conversation in ways that
are engaging and effective."

The NFF board for the next year was also elected with rice grower Les Gordon
becoming the new vice-president. Mr Gordon has been the NFF Water Taskforce
chair for the past eight years and served as the president of the Ricegrowers'
Association of Australia for eight years until 2015.

Two new board directors were also elected: NSW grain grower and Grain Growers
Limited president John Eastburn and NSW Farmers executive councillor and cattle
producer Tony Hegarty.

They join three directors who were re-elected to their positions: Current VFF
president, cropping and prime lamb producer David Jockinke, Queensland cattle
producer and AgForce president Grant Maudsley and sheep and cattle producer and
NSW Farmers vice president Mark Horan.

Ms Simson paid tribute to outgoing president Brent Finlay who has served in the
role for three years and been a NFF Director since 2010.

"On behalf of the entire NFF membership and broader agriculture and food and
fibre community I thank Brent for his passionate and determined advocacy," Mr
Simson said

"Brent has aggressively pursued policy outcomes that deliver a more productive,
competitive and prosperous sector. He has put the needs of farmers front and
centre in arguing for bold reforms to trade and the economy.

"He also led the initial internal soul searching and subsequent ongoing process
for the establishment of a new national agriculture sector representative
organisation - Australian Farmers - to strengthen the voice of farmers in public
policy development and the political debate.

"In all facets of the role as President, Brent leaves an enormous legacy of
achievements and a strong vision that I will pursue with as much vigour and
determination."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              938 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Queensland Country Life

                            November 25, 2016 Friday
                                Internet Edition

Fiona Simson new NFF president

LENGTH: 620 words


NSW farmer Fiona Simson is the new president of the National Farmers'
Federation.

Ms Simson becomes the first female president of the NFF in its 37 year history.
She has previously served the NFF as vice president for two years and as a
director since 2011. Fiona was also the first female president of NSW Farmers,
retaining that position for a full four year term from 2011 to 2015.

Ms Simson, who is based near Gunnedah on NSW's Liverpool Plains, runs a farming
enterprise with her husband Ed and family including broadacre farming as well as
breeding commercial poll Hereford cattle.

"It is an honour and privilege to represent Australian farmers at the national
level and to be elected as the NFF's first female president," Ms Simson said.

"To me, it's a great acknowledgement that women contribute tremendously on farm,
along the value chain and increasingly as thought leaders and public advocates
for agriculture.

"My focus will be on developing and advocating for policy that makes farmers
better off - not just in terms of what they produce but also reaping the rewards
of any increases in value along the food and fibre supply chain.

"I also want to make sure that farmers, producers and rural and regional based
agribusinesses have access to communications technology that gets them better
connected to their customers and allows them to reach out to global markets.

"The NFF has a big agenda for agriculture. Issues such as transport
infrastructure, digital connectivity, tax reform, Australia's energy mix,
sustainable development and trade reform will all be issues high on my agenda as
president.

"To achieve this agenda, I will be focusing on strengthening the NFF's capacity
to provide a strong and united voice and be the sector's leader in addressing
industry challenges and creating opportunities in the new economy. I also
believe we need to work smarter and beyond our traditional alliances, and
include other stakeholders and the community in our conversation in ways that
are engaging and effective."

The NFF board for the next year was also elected with rice grower Les Gordon
becoming the new vice-president. Mr Gordon has been the NFF Water Taskforce
chair for the past eight years and served as the president of the Ricegrowers'
Association of Australia for eight years until 2015.

Two new board directors were also elected: NSW grain grower and Grain Growers
Limited president John Eastburn and NSW Farmers executive councillor and cattle
producer Tony Hegarty.

They join three directors who were re-elected to their positions: Current VFF
president, cropping and prime lamb producer David Jockinke, Queensland cattle
producer and AgForce president Grant Maudsley and sheep and cattle producer and
NSW Farmers vice president Mark Horan.

Ms Simson paid tribute to outgoing president Brent Finlay who has served in the
role for three years and been a NFF Director since 2010.

"On behalf of the entire NFF membership and broader agriculture and food and
fibre community I thank Brent for his passionate and determined advocacy," Mr
Simson said

"Brent has aggressively pursued policy outcomes that deliver a more productive,
competitive and prosperous sector. He has put the needs of farmers front and
centre in arguing for bold reforms to trade and the economy.

"He also led the initial internal soul searching and subsequent ongoing process
for the establishment of a new national agriculture sector representative
organisation - Australian Farmers - to strengthen the voice of farmers in public
policy development and the political debate.

"In all facets of the role as President, Brent leaves an enormous legacy of
achievements and a strong vision that I will pursue with as much vigour and
determination."

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              939 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Dickinson Press (North Dakota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 11, 2009 Saturday

Tagging to keep on track

BYLINE: Beth Wischmeyer, The Dickinson Press, N.D.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 620 words


Apr. 11--Tracking cattle is made easier with technologically -advanced ear tags
and can help keep food and animals safe, a livestock and bio-security specialist
says.

And a federal bio-security grant was recently renewed, helping to ensure North
Dakota State University can continue working on its cattle tracking program. The
program features technologically-advanced ear tags that allow cattle to be
tracked via radio frequency.

"The basis for the animal ID program is that by utilizing identification of
animals you can trace back potential diseases and animal health issues to the
point of origin," said Mick Riesinger, a livestock and bio-security specialist
for the Dickinson Research Extension Center. "Then you don't have to go through
long procedures because all of that costs time and effort."

In situations of disease outbreaks, Riesinger said, an animal's location can
quickly be pinpointed because of a microchipped ear tag.

Stockmen's Livestock has hosted frequency tag demonstrations.  Larry Schnell, of
Stockmen's, said there's no doubt the tags work, but feels the value to the
cattle producer is still yet to be determined.

"There are two sides to this, some that think there is (value) and there are
those that think there isn't," Schnell said.

Eventually, Riesinger said he hopes stockyards, United States Department of
Agriculture officials and producers will be able to implement the technology in
all cattle.

"Right now it's a voluntary program and is really in its infancy," Riesinger
said.

Schnell said he believes some producers are concerned if the electronic tagging
becomes mandatory, when disease is spotted, it would be traced back to the
producer of that animal right away, even if the disease happened somewhere else
along the line.

The program, which has been around for a number of years, has evolved, Riesinger
said.

"We have developed newer technology to allow for read rates that are further
distances and a higher percentage of reads," he said. "By doing that, you
eliminate stress on the animal, time and those types of things."

Newer tags read anywhere from 10 to 30 feet. While the older tags featured a low
frequency, higher frequency allows for much greater distances.

Cost for the tags is about $2, about the same as regular cattle tags, Riesinger
said, and is relatively painless for animals.

Pilot work is done at a Kansas cattle lot, Riesinger said.

Calls for information about the program have come from all over the United
States and world, including Mexico, Brazil and Canada, he said.

Concern for a safe food supply has driven more consumer support, Riesinger said.

A concern among producers, he said, is the belief that the new tags will allow
too much information about operations to be available, such as how animals are
fed.

"It's not that case at all," Riesinger said. "All it does is, if you've got an
animal with some disease it will say that it's at a certain location, it doesn't
say what you fed it, protocols for health or anything like that."

Riesinger said electronic animal identification may be required in the future.
If that happens, he said, officials want to be ready as there are still kinks in
the program.

The program is a partnership between Dickinson Research Extension Center,
Dickinson State University and North Dakota State University.

To see more of The Dickinson Press, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thedickinsonpress.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Dickinson Press, N.D.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090411-QX-Tagging-to-keep-on-track-0411

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QX


                                 Copyright 2009


                              940 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                           December 20, 2016 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. launches probes into softwood dispute

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 282 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL


The U.S. government says it is launching investigations to determine whether
softwood lumber imports from Canada were dumped into the country and harmed the
American forestry sector.

The U.S. Commerce Department says it will work with the U.S. International Trade
Commission to examine allegations that wood was dumped at less than its fair
value and that Canadian forestry firms received unfair financial assistance from
governments.

The decision to investigate is in response to petitions filed last month from
the U.S. Lumber Coalition and could result in the imposition of preliminary
duties in the next few months.

The Commerce Department will determine whether dumping took place while the
International Trade Commission will decide if the U.S. industry was materially
injured or threatened.

If the commission determines by Jan. 9 that Canadian softwood harmed the U.S.
lumber sector, it will issue preliminary countervailing duties on Feb. 21 and
preliminary anti-dumping duties on May 4, unless those deadlines are extended.

The U.S. Lumber Coalition alleges that provincial governments, which own most of
Canada's vast timberlands, provide trees to Canadian producers at rates far
below market value, along with other subsidies. As a result, the group says
Canadian lumber is being sold for less than fair value in the U.S., hurting
mills, workers and communities.

Softwood producers in Canada dispute the U.S. Lumber Coalition's allegations.

The B.C. Lumber Trade Council has said the claims levelled by the U.S. lumber
lobby are based on unsubstantiated arguments that were previously rejected by
independent NAFTA panels. Canada exported $4.5 billion US worth of lumber to the
U.S. last year.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2016 Times Colonist
                              All Rights Reserved


                              941 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             March 11, 2011 Friday

The Journal Record Business Briefs: March 11, 2011

BYLINE: The Daily Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1585  words


Thunder challenges high school basketball teams The Oklahoma City Thunder is
challenging high school basketball coaches and players statewide to develop
community service programs. The teams performing the most worthwhile service as
part of the Thunder High School Basketball Community Service Challenge will
receive special recognition and a visit from Thunder representatives. "High
school coaches and players have an enormous impact on their communities," said
Sam Presti, Thunder executive vice president and general manager. "Our hope is
to have high school programs actively participating in their communities on a
daily basis and creating civic value at a grass-roots level," he said. "At the
end of the day, that's what it's all about, and driving these initiatives is a
big part of our organizational vision.

" Presti, head coach Scott Brooks and other representatives of the professional
basketball team recently met with a group of high school coaches to outline the
Community Service Challenge. The Thunder is now communicating statewide with
coaches, encouraging them to participate. Participating teams will report the
programs and hours of service performed to the Thunder Community Relations
Department. Teams will be judged by the number of hours they report and the
quality of the service. At the end of September, the Thunder will select one
boys' and one girls' team to each receive a Thunder-themed professional
basketball experience on the school's home court - including Thunder game night
music, player introductions, Rumble the Bison, Thunder Girls, game video
analysis by Thunder staff and a special DVD of their game night. Any team
reporting at least 25 volunteer hours will receive Thunder prizes, which could
include tickets or merchandise.

Made in Oklahoma Coalition expands membership rules The Made in Oklahoma
Coalition has expanded membership rules to include agriculture producers.
Previously, MIO Coalition membership was exclusive to Oklahoma food producers,
processors and manufacturers that process, produce and distribute a portion of
their product in Oklahoma. Under the new rules, any nonfood agricultural
producer based in Oklahoma that also packages products for retail sale is
eligible for membership. "These new rules will expand our membership base and
increase the impact of Oklahoma products on our state's economy," said Richard
Wasson, executive director of MIO Coalition. Three Oklahoma companies have
joined MIO under the new rules - Kimberly-Clark in Jenks, which manufactures
Viva paper towels, Cottonnelle and Scott toilet paper; Oklahoma Grape Industry
Council in Lexington, an association of Oklahoma wine producers; and Phatter
Milling Co. in McAlester, which produces dog food. The Made in Oklahoma
Coalition represents more than 30 Oklahoma food and agricultural manufacturers
that employ more than 20,000 Oklahomans. The coalition is supported by both
private and public money.

Business summit set in Shawnee Rural Enterprises of Oklahoma Inc. has scheduled
a "Minority and Women Business Summit" from 8:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. March 23 at the
Citizen Potawatomi Nation, Pow Wow Grounds, South Reunion Hall in Shawnee. There
is no fee, but registration is required. Lunch will be provided by Citizen
Potawatomi Nation. Registration information is at www.ruralenterprises.com.
Presenters include Terri Shook, U.S. Small Business Administration Procurement
Center representative; Vanessa Woodfork, SBA; James Ray, coordinator, Native
American Business Enterprise Center; Pam Walker, SBA Business Development
Specialist; and Barbara Rackley, REI's Women's Business Center. Co-sponsors of
the summit include Citizen Potawatomi Nation, Gordon Cooper Technology Center,
Native American Business Enterprise Center, SBA, Oklahoma State University
Cooperative Extension, Shawnee Chamber of Commerce, Shawnee Economic Development
Foundation, Pioneer Library System and REI's Women's Business Center,
celebrating 10 years of service and funded, in part, by the U.S. Small Business
Administration.

Bronco Drilling reports rig utilization Bronco Drilling's rig utilization rate
for February was 95 percent, compared with 96 percent in December. The
Edmond-based company had an average of 24 marketed drilling rigs in February.
The average dayrate on operating drilling rigs on Feb. 28 was $18,150, compared
with $17,529 on Jan. 31 and $17,296 for the fourth quarter of 2010.

Rose State College receives cyber-security grant The National Science Foundation
awarded a $562,160 grant to Rose State College to expand its cyber-security
program. Money from the grant will provide financial help to students seeking an
associate degree in cyber-security. Interviews for the cyber-positions will
begin by summer to allow enrollment for the fall semester, said Ken Dewey,
program director. Dewey said the new grant expands a program already in place.
"Our current grant has assisted nearly 100 students receive their associate's of
applied science degree with some continuing on to higher degrees through
programs with Oklahoma State University and the University of Tulsa," Dewey
said. "The grant helps those who otherwise can't afford it get a quality
education. We've also helped some displaced workers who wanted to retrain. " In
2010, the foundation joined the NSA to award $2.7 million to several Oklahoma
colleges, including Rose State College, to form a consortium of cyber-security
education. During the announcement of the award at the state Capitol, Rose State
College was singled out for being the only community college in the U.S. with
all six levels of federal cyber-security certification. Richard George,
technical director for the Information Assurance Directorate of the NSA in Fort
Meade, Md., said Rose State is being funded because its program is critical to
national defense and that Rose offers all the federal certification levels. In
2010, the NSA named Rose State College a Center of Excellence for its
cyber-security program. Dewey said there were more than 600 enrollments in the
program during the last college year. Graduates from the Rose State program have
gone on to work for the Department of Defense, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, for private companies and other security organizations.

RV dealers plan show in Tulsa The Green Country RV & Outdoors Show is scheduled
March 25 to 27 at the QuikTrip Center at the Tulsa Fairgrounds. The show
sponsored by the Green Country RV Dealers Association will include recreational
vehicles and outdoor products exhibitors. "There will be more than $50 million
of merchandise on display," said Phil Keeter, show president. The show is
scheduled from noon to 9 p.m. March 25, 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. March 26 and noon to 6
p.m. March 27. Admission is $8 with children under 12 free.

Panel to discuss women in leadership A panel discussion on women in leadership
is scheduled from 8 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. March 31 at Oklahoma City University's
Meinders School of Business. The university will present the session with the
Senior Executive Women's Networking Group, Chesapeake Energy and the Executive
Resource Center. Claudia San Pedro, vice president and chief marketing officer
for Sonic Corp., will be the moderator. The event will feature "fireside chats"
with Martha Burger, senior vice president of human and corporate resources for
Chesapeake Energy, and Colleen J. Payne, entrepreneur and author. Participants
will include Barbara Crandall, from OCU's Meinders School of Business; Robyn
Elliott, Chickasaw Nation; Debby Hampton, United Way of Central Oklahoma; Darcie
Harris, EWF; Donna Miller, Executive Resource Center; Jackie Miller, Oklahoma
Corporation Commission; Valerie Naifeh, Naifeh Fine Jewelry; Cathy O'Connor,
city of Oklahoma City; Lisa Putt, Willis Inc.; Meg Salyer, Oklahoma City Council
and Accel Financial Staffing; and Tiffany Sewell-Howard, Charles Machine Works
Inc. Tickets are $50. For information, visit www.okcu.edu/business.

Fallin to speak at ORU's commencement Gov. Mary Fallin will give the
commencement address for the Oral Roberts University class of 2011. The ceremony
is scheduled at 1 p.m. April 30 at the ORU Mabee Center.

Civil War commemoration planned The Oklahoma Civil War Sesquicentennial
Commission will commemorate the 150th anniversary of the Civil War with events
and programs planned from 2011 to 2015. Events in 2011 will include a
re-enactment of the Battle of Honey Springs scheduled April 29 to May 1. The
Honey Springs Battlefield is north of Checotah. Several thousand re-enactors and
spectators are expected to attend the re-enactment. Other activities include a
teachers institute in July 2011 and a student short story writing contest.
Preservation efforts will be the focus at the five historic sites associated
with the Civil War owned by the Oklahoma Historical Society. The sites include
Honey Springs Battlefield, Fort Gibson Historic Site, Fort Towson Historic Site,
Fort Washita Historic Site and the George Murrell Home. The commission is
developing projects to preserve artifacts, archives, photos, letters and
documents. The commission is supported by an advisory council and an Oklahoma
Historical Society task force. For information, visit www.okcivilwar.org.

Wild.Flower moves to new location Wild.Flower has moved to 1751 NW 16th St. in
Oklahoma City. The boutique shop is operated by the mother-daughter team of
Margo Connell and Kaleen Ezelle. With more space, the shop has added a men's and
baby's section to the current women's boutique.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              942 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Diamond Valley Leader (Australia)

                          September 30, 2009 Wednesday
                                 1 - BV Edition

Hard road to hoe

BYLINE: Farming| Shaun Turton

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 352  words


LOW rainfall and small economic returns are placing Diamond Valley's future
identity as a gourmet food producer at risk, local growers say.

Farmers said more rain was the only silver bullet, but local and state
governments could provide more support by increasing rate subsidies and
expanding ``exceptional circumstances'' grants.

Judy Clements, the president of the Victorian Farmers Federation's Whittlesea
branch, said Nillumbik's current rate subsidy of 10 per cent needed to be
increased.

``We have really struggled in getting local councils to consider farm rates
seriously enough,'' Ms Clements said.

The region's proximity to the city meant farmers faced ``incredibly high''
rates, which were determined on land values rather the commercial value of their
business.

Nillumbik councillor Ken King, who owns a Kangaroo Ground vineyard, said the
farm rate was not giving many local producers ``a fair go''.

``I think it's very important residents are given an incentive to produce
food,'' Cr King said.

``I'll be campaigning for the farm rate discount to be increased.

``Smaller-block agriculture does have a future. We're becoming more appealing to
the people of Melbourne as a resource to get organic produce, especially with
the resurgence of farmers markets.''

Council spokeswoman Joanne Hammond said the subsidy rate was extended to 115
local farmers, and the council was not considering increasing it.

The Shire of Yarra Ranges gives farmers a 30 per cent rate subsidy.

Nutfield cattle farmer Julie Sutherland said more discounts would help but was
steady, prolonged rain was the only long-term solution.

Malcolm Smith from Rural Finance, which administers government support programs,
said although the area was declared ``exceptional circumstances'' because of
drought, most local farmers were not eligible because of the supplementary
income they earned off their farm.

Cr King said farmers were vital to maintaining the green wedge, but were not
being supported to do so.

He said incentives for farmers would be addressed in the Green Wedge Management
Plan, due out later this year.

Stories from the farmers, p11

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: DVV


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              943 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Business Line

                             April 24, 2015 Friday

AP utilities ready to buy gas-based power projects on expiry of PPAs

LENGTH: 334  words

DATELINE: Hyderabad


Hyderabad, April 24 -- Power purchase agreements that are set to end for some of
the first batch of independent power producers (IPPs) like GVK Jegurupadu,
Spectrum and Lanco Kondapalli, which were set up after the reforms initiated in
the mid-1990s, are up for buyouts by AP utilities.


 In a first such initiative, AP Transco and Discoms have written to the State
government expressing their interest to buyout GVK's 220 MW project. It is for
the State government to decide whether to exercise this option, K Vijayanand,
Chairman of AP Transco, told BusinessLine.
 According to terms of the PPA, the first batch of projects have a couple of
options. One of them is the buy-out option by utilities; the second is to
refurbish and upgrade, and get into fresh agreements for supply, Vijayanand
said.
 "We enlisted the services of consultant Grant Thornton for the process to
assess its terminal value and other issues. Based on their findings and our own
assessment, we have approached the State government with a proposal to buy the
asset out for [#x20b9]300 crore," he said.
 A CFO of a leading power company said, "It all depends on how the PPA was
drafted and various provisions in it, in terms of validity period and others.
 Normally, the first right of refusal lies with the utilities if they are being
considered for sale, and in a situation where the option to extend PPAs is not
considered." "It is to be seen if the State approves such a move as this could
be against the spirit of country's reform process, which sought to encourage
private sector participation by taking away the State's monopoly on power
generation," he said.
 Ajay Jain, Secretary (Energy), Andhra Pradesh, said, "We have recently received
a proposal with an expression of intent to buyout, by the utilities. We will
study the proposal and present it to the government."
 Vijayanand said apart from the GVK Project, Spectrum Power's 220 MW power
project and Lanco Kondapalli's 368 MW unit one will also come up for similar
consideration.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2015 Tangerine Digital Entertainment Pvt. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              944 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  Farm Weekly

                            August 11, 2016 Thursday

Semen and embryo market up for grabs

BYLINE: SHAN GOODWIN

SECTION: EARLY GENERAL NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 796 words


THE PUSH to ramp up beef and sheep semen and embryo exports is gaining momentum
with northern industry players looking to set up a ruminant genetics secretariat
to co-ordinate marketing and access efforts.

Australia's abysmal record of participation in the world trade means seedstock
producers are foregoing their slice of a very lucrative pie, warn veterinarians
and artificial breeding business owners.

Speakers at an innovative cattle industry seminar presented by the Australian
Registered Cattle Breeders Association at this year's Royal Queensland Show said
bovine semen exports were worth $90 million to Canada which has a much smaller
cattle herd than Australia.

On the sheep front, the story is even more dismal.

Greg McCann, Macquarie Artificial Breeders at Dubbo, NSW, reported Canada
exports more sheep semen and embryos than Australia "and they killed half their
flock to give me a lamb chop for brekky".

Leading geneticists have put the potential value of the market to Australia at
more than $300m a year.

Veterinarian Ced Wise, Glenisa, at Glen Alpin, is at the forefront of efforts to
turn the situation around.

He said a federal government grant of $250,000 had just been awarded to the
National Herd Improvement Association for the advancement of the ruminant
genetics industry.

Some of that grant money needed to go towards commissioning an independent study
into the best structure to promote the industry, he said.

"We have in mind a structure that would be underpinned by on-going industry
funding along with government grants and require only office space for one
person integrated in an organisation such as Meat and Livestock Australia," he
said.

"Simply having one person to provide a single desk point of contact for the
Australian industry, government departments, foreign governments and industry
would be an enormous first step."

Dr Wise described the Australian ruminant seedstock industry as hide bound.

"We have been very good hunter gatherers we have travelled the world to source
the best genetics, bought them home and moulded them to suit our environment,
measured them, multiplied them and then promptly sat on our laurels only to
repeat the whole exercise in a decade or so," he said.

"Compared to countries the United Kingdom and Canada, and even very small
countries like New Zealand, Australia's involvement in the trade, particularly
in the north, barely registers."

The ruminant genetics export industry is broadly inhibited by two factors
protocol issues and marketing, according to Dr Wise.

A good deal of country-specific protocols were not based on sound scientific
biosecurity, he said.

There was also a lack of consistent interpretation of the same protocol by
different officials.

Add to that the fact compliance costs are extremely restrictive.

There was recognition at the seminar, however, that protocols are written by
importing countries and, while we can try to negotiate with them, ultimately we
must comply with their requirements.

"On the marketing side, well it simply doesn't happen," Dr Wise said.

"We sit here and hope someone overseas will knock on our door and ask for our
genetics."

A 'genetics hub' based in Melbourne was set up to address those issues but
producers believe it has had little success.

A lot of work - to no avail - had also be put into trying to find an existing
body within the industry that could be tasked with marketing the product, Mr
Wise said.

"My persuasive powers as a self-appointed industry advocate may be poor but my
ability to whinge is unsurpassed and I have badgered all and sundry for money to
form an independent, stand-alone representative group to lift the profile of the
industry," he said.

The NHIA money was finally a bright spot on the horizon.

A secretariat would provide a permanent conduit between industry and the
government on protocol issues, Dr Wise said.

The role would look to develop an Australian Standard Protocol that would
include assured product quality and scientifically-sound disease testing to
minimise biosecurity risk but maximise market access.

It would also organise things like industry groups visiting potential foreign
markets, the hosting of foreign producer group visits to Australia and campaigns
to increase the profile of the products to Australian agencies.

Dr McCann said there was no doubt these export markets were worth targeting.

"We have arguably the world's best genetics, particularly in sheep, and zip
ability to market it," he said.

"Seedstock producers are very interested but finding it impossible to get
traction.

"One of the reasons is there are no big players but rather a lot of little ones
who don't talk to each other often.

"As a result, the artificial breeding industry here has tended to sit back and
let seedstock industry promote the genetics."

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              945 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  Farm Weekly

                            August 11, 2016 Thursday

Semen and embryo market up for grabs

BYLINE: SHAN GOODWIN

SECTION: EARLY GENERAL NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 796 words


THE PUSH to ramp up beef and sheep semen and embryo exports is gaining momentum
with northern industry players looking to set up a ruminant genetics secretariat
to co-ordinate marketing and access efforts.

Australia's abysmal record of participation in the world trade means seedstock
producers are foregoing their slice of a very lucrative pie, warn veterinarians
and artificial breeding business owners.

Speakers at an innovative cattle industry seminar presented by the Australian
Registered Cattle Breeders Association at this year's Royal Queensland Show said
bovine semen exports were worth $90 million to Canada which has a much smaller
cattle herd than Australia.

On the sheep front, the story is even more dismal.

Greg McCann, Macquarie Artificial Breeders at Dubbo, NSW, reported Canada
exports more sheep semen and embryos than Australia "and they killed half their
flock to give me a lamb chop for brekky".

Leading geneticists have put the potential value of the market to Australia at
more than $300m a year.

Veterinarian Ced Wise, Glenisa, at Glen Alpin, is at the forefront of efforts to
turn the situation around.

He said a federal government grant of $250,000 had just been awarded to the
National Herd Improvement Association for the advancement of the ruminant
genetics industry.

Some of that grant money needed to go towards commissioning an independent study
into the best structure to promote the industry, he said.

"We have in mind a structure that would be underpinned by on-going industry
funding along with government grants and require only office space for one
person integrated in an organisation such as Meat and Livestock Australia," he
said.

"Simply having one person to provide a single desk point of contact for the
Australian industry, government departments, foreign governments and industry
would be an enormous first step."

Dr Wise described the Australian ruminant seedstock industry as hide bound.

"We have been very good hunter gatherers we have travelled the world to source
the best genetics, bought them home and moulded them to suit our environment,
measured them, multiplied them and then promptly sat on our laurels only to
repeat the whole exercise in a decade or so," he said.

"Compared to countries the United Kingdom and Canada, and even very small
countries like New Zealand, Australia's involvement in the trade, particularly
in the north, barely registers."

The ruminant genetics export industry is broadly inhibited by two factors
protocol issues and marketing, according to Dr Wise.

A good deal of country-specific protocols were not based on sound scientific
biosecurity, he said.

There was also a lack of consistent interpretation of the same protocol by
different officials.

Add to that the fact compliance costs are extremely restrictive.

There was recognition at the seminar, however, that protocols are written by
importing countries and, while we can try to negotiate with them, ultimately we
must comply with their requirements.

"On the marketing side, well it simply doesn't happen," Dr Wise said.

"We sit here and hope someone overseas will knock on our door and ask for our
genetics."

A 'genetics hub' based in Melbourne was set up to address those issues but
producers believe it has had little success.

A lot of work - to no avail - had also be put into trying to find an existing
body within the industry that could be tasked with marketing the product, Mr
Wise said.

"My persuasive powers as a self-appointed industry advocate may be poor but my
ability to whinge is unsurpassed and I have badgered all and sundry for money to
form an independent, stand-alone representative group to lift the profile of the
industry," he said.

The NHIA money was finally a bright spot on the horizon.

A secretariat would provide a permanent conduit between industry and the
government on protocol issues, Dr Wise said.

The role would look to develop an Australian Standard Protocol that would
include assured product quality and scientifically-sound disease testing to
minimise biosecurity risk but maximise market access.

It would also organise things like industry groups visiting potential foreign
markets, the hosting of foreign producer group visits to Australia and campaigns
to increase the profile of the products to Australian agencies.

Dr McCann said there was no doubt these export markets were worth targeting.

"We have arguably the world's best genetics, particularly in sheep, and zip
ability to market it," he said.

"Seedstock producers are very interested but finding it impossible to get
traction.

"One of the reasons is there are no big players but rather a lot of little ones
who don't talk to each other often.

"As a result, the artificial breeding industry here has tended to sit back and
let seedstock industry promote the genetics."

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              946 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  Farm Weekly

                            August 11, 2016 Thursday

Semen and embryo market up for grabs

BYLINE: SHAN GOODWIN

SECTION: EARLY GENERAL NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 796 words


THE PUSH to ramp up beef and sheep semen and embryo exports is gaining momentum
with northern industry players looking to set up a ruminant genetics secretariat
to co-ordinate marketing and access efforts.

Australia's abysmal record of participation in the world trade means seedstock
producers are foregoing their slice of a very lucrative pie, warn veterinarians
and artificial breeding business owners.

Speakers at an innovative cattle industry seminar presented by the Australian
Registered Cattle Breeders Association at this year's Royal Queensland Show said
bovine semen exports were worth $90 million to Canada which has a much smaller
cattle herd than Australia.

On the sheep front, the story is even more dismal.

Greg McCann, Macquarie Artificial Breeders at Dubbo, NSW, reported Canada
exports more sheep semen and embryos than Australia "and they killed half their
flock to give me a lamb chop for brekky".

Leading geneticists have put the potential value of the market to Australia at
more than $300m a year.

Veterinarian Ced Wise, Glenisa, at Glen Alpin, is at the forefront of efforts to
turn the situation around.

He said a federal government grant of $250,000 had just been awarded to the
National Herd Improvement Association for the advancement of the ruminant
genetics industry.

Some of that grant money needed to go towards commissioning an independent study
into the best structure to promote the industry, he said.

"We have in mind a structure that would be underpinned by on-going industry
funding along with government grants and require only office space for one
person integrated in an organisation such as Meat and Livestock Australia," he
said.

"Simply having one person to provide a single desk point of contact for the
Australian industry, government departments, foreign governments and industry
would be an enormous first step."

Dr Wise described the Australian ruminant seedstock industry as hide bound.

"We have been very good hunter gatherers we have travelled the world to source
the best genetics, bought them home and moulded them to suit our environment,
measured them, multiplied them and then promptly sat on our laurels only to
repeat the whole exercise in a decade or so," he said.

"Compared to countries the United Kingdom and Canada, and even very small
countries like New Zealand, Australia's involvement in the trade, particularly
in the north, barely registers."

The ruminant genetics export industry is broadly inhibited by two factors
protocol issues and marketing, according to Dr Wise.

A good deal of country-specific protocols were not based on sound scientific
biosecurity, he said.

There was also a lack of consistent interpretation of the same protocol by
different officials.

Add to that the fact compliance costs are extremely restrictive.

There was recognition at the seminar, however, that protocols are written by
importing countries and, while we can try to negotiate with them, ultimately we
must comply with their requirements.

"On the marketing side, well it simply doesn't happen," Dr Wise said.

"We sit here and hope someone overseas will knock on our door and ask for our
genetics."

A 'genetics hub' based in Melbourne was set up to address those issues but
producers believe it has had little success.

A lot of work - to no avail - had also be put into trying to find an existing
body within the industry that could be tasked with marketing the product, Mr
Wise said.

"My persuasive powers as a self-appointed industry advocate may be poor but my
ability to whinge is unsurpassed and I have badgered all and sundry for money to
form an independent, stand-alone representative group to lift the profile of the
industry," he said.

The NHIA money was finally a bright spot on the horizon.

A secretariat would provide a permanent conduit between industry and the
government on protocol issues, Dr Wise said.

The role would look to develop an Australian Standard Protocol that would
include assured product quality and scientifically-sound disease testing to
minimise biosecurity risk but maximise market access.

It would also organise things like industry groups visiting potential foreign
markets, the hosting of foreign producer group visits to Australia and campaigns
to increase the profile of the products to Australian agencies.

Dr McCann said there was no doubt these export markets were worth targeting.

"We have arguably the world's best genetics, particularly in sheep, and zip
ability to market it," he said.

"Seedstock producers are very interested but finding it impossible to get
traction.

"One of the reasons is there are no big players but rather a lot of little ones
who don't talk to each other often.

"As a result, the artificial breeding industry here has tended to sit back and
let seedstock industry promote the genetics."

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              947 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Farmers Weekly

                                 June 12, 2015

Forget golden age of farming and look to the future says minister

BYLINE: Rhian Price

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 852 words


Walesâ   deputy farm minister has told farmers to plan for a future with less
public funding and to forget the â  golden age of the pastâ  to create a more
profitable, sustainable and resilient agricultural sector.Evans was speaking at
the Welsh Farming Conference in Llanelwedd, on 4 June, where she unveiled a
consultation on a Strategic Framework for Welsh Agriculture.She said the pending
European referendum, price volatility and weather all had big impacts on farm
businesses currently and highlighted a growing need for greater resilience.â  In
the future we know we canâ  t rely on single farm payments like many people do
at the moment,â  Mrs Evans said.â  We need to invest in the development of a
sustainable industry thatâ  s resilient to increasing turbulence in the Welsh
market and can be less reliant on public funding.â  Mrs Evans added that it was
critical for farmers to have their eyes â  fixed on the future, not the pastâ ,
adding that clinging to the â  golden age of the pastâ  would not move the
industry forward.â  Farms must become more profitable and financially secure. It
is about being modern-looking as well and we want to support the younger
generation through the Rural Development Programme.Mrs Evans touched on how
these aims would become a reality, revealing that she wanted to introduce a
young entrants start-up scheme to build on the success of the previous one.She
also outlined plans for a food business investment grant and support for supply
chain development.Goals for Welsh agricultureImprove sustainability â
economically, socially and environmentallyBe a producer of a diverse range of â
productsâ  with increased value that met current market demand and anticipated
market trends and embraced opportunitiesBe an efficient producer with high
standards of animal health and welfare, efficient resource use, a lower carbon
footprint and first class management of the environment (soil, water, natural
organisms) that sustains and enhances both production and the natural
environment for the long termustain production not displace that production with
the outcome of increased environmental and other problems in other countries
where standards may be lowerBe an active user of research where putting into
practice the latest knowledge and techniques is commonplaceBe an industry that
generates wealth and a range of skilled employment opportunities across
Wales.The consultation is now open for response and will close on 27 August.


Wales  deputy farm minister Rebecca Evans has told farmers to plan for a future
with less public funding and to forget the  golden age of the past  to create a
more profitable, sustainable and resilient agricultural sector.Mrs Evans was
speaking at the Welsh Farming Conference in Llanelwedd (4 June), where she
unveiled a consultation on a Strategic Framework for Welsh Agriculture.She said
the pending European referendum, price volatility and weather all had a big
impacts on farm businesses currently and highlighted a growing need for greater
resilience. In the future we know we can t rely on single farm payments like
many people do at the moment," Mrs Evans said. We need to invest in the
development of a sustainable industry that s resilient to increasing turbulence
in the Welsh market and can be less reliant on public funding,  the deputy
minister said.Mrs Evans added that it was critical for farmers to have their
eyes  fixed on the future, not the past, adding that becoming fixated on the
golden age of the past  would not move the industry forward. Farms must become
more profitable and financially secure. It is about being modern looking as well
and we want to support the younger generation through the Rural Development
Programme.Mrs Evans touched on how these aims would become a reality, revealing
that she wanted to introduce a young entrants start-up scheme to build on the
success of the previous one.She also outlined plans for a food business
investment grant and support for supply chain development.Goals for Welsh
agricultureImprove sustainability   economically, socially and environmentallyBe
a producer of a diverse range of  products  with increased value that met
current market demand and anticipated market trends and embraced opportunitiesBe
an efficient producer with high standards of animal health and welfare,
efficient resource use, a lower carbon footprint and first class management of
the environment (soil, water, natural organisms) that sustains and enhances both
production and the natural environment for the long termSustain production not
displace that production with the outcome of increased environmental and other
problems in other countries where standards may be lowerBe an active user of
research where putting into practice the latest knowledge and techniques is
commonplaceBe an industry that generates wealth and a range of skilled
employment opportunities across Wales.Launching the document she said:  Talking
to the industry and individual farmers, we very much share the same
aspirations.The consultation is now open for response and will close on 27
August.

ï»¿

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2015 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              948 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      South China Morning Post (Hong Kong)

                               February 26, 2001

Leading mills lag foreign producers despite intensive reform programme

BYLINE: Winston Yau

SECTION: BUSINESS POST; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 443 words


China will take at least five years to achieve self-sufficiency in high value
-added steel production, according to a leading metal trader.

Wellnet Holdings chairman David Chan said the country's leading steel mills had
yet to catch up with advanced foreign firms in terms of technology and price
despite a five-year reform programme intended to foster domestic substitution of
imported steel.

The domestic industry's efforts to develop new markets could be set back by
China's impending accession to the World Trade Organisation with competition
from imports intensifying, he said.

After WTO entry, the government will lose its ability to control the steel trade
using administrative measures such a granting subsidies to home-grown
industries. WTO entry will end protectionist measures such as trades quota and
selective import licences.

"They can only resort to anti-dumping measures in compliance with the WTO rules
after the accession," Mr Chan said.

China produces 110 million tonnes of steel a year, compared with domestic
consumption of more than 120 million tonnes.

The country satisfies the shortfall through imports, mainly high value-added
products for industrial purposes.

While industry leaders such as Shanghai-based Boasteel had achieved some success
by shifting product focus, the industry was still weak overall, said Mr Chan.

Most of the country's steel mills are scattered and small. In 1998, only 50 out
of 1,700 steel firms produced more than 500,000 tonnes a year, yet they
accounted for 87 per cent of national output.

The seven industry leaders, each with an annual production capacity of three
million tonnes or above, have a combined annual output of 48.72 million tonnes,
or 42.52 per cent of the national total.

Domestic producers need to alter product mixture to meet market demand given the
strong competition for high end steel from producers in the Russian federation
and South Korea. Average price of China-made steel is higher than those of
foreign products because the domestic steel industry is inefficient.

To prepare for the challenges from WTO entry, Beijing has encouraged major
industry players to boost production scale through mergers and acquisition and
force small, inefficient producers to close.

Market leaders have been told to increase the amount of high value-added
products to satisfy domestic demand and develop an export market.

A case in point is production of special steel, a high-value added product.

The product accounts for 15 per cent to 19 per cent of an advanced country's
steel product output, compared with China's 5 per cent to 6 per cent.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                  Copyright 2001 South China Morning Post Ltd.


                              949 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 BusinessWorld

                            April 20, 2011 Wednesday

CORE;
Decision making under pressure

BYLINE: Benjamin E. Diokno

SECTION: Pg. S1/4

LENGTH: 1292 words


With declining optimism across all socioeconomic classes and in all areas, and
with shrinking approval rating, President Aquino might be tempted to adopt
short-term, populist measures to address the rising oil prices. That would be a
monumental mistake. Instead, he should demonstrate strong leadership under fire
by adopting economically sound, long-term cures to a recurring problem.

Here's a list of do's and don'ts on how to address the problem of rising oil
prices.

WHAT THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD DO

First, reaffirm its commitment to oil industry deregulation. Any attempt to
tinker with the present oil industry deregulation law is counterproductive.
Filipinos' memory is short. They have forgotten their harrowing experience with
state intervention in the oil industry during the Marcos years and the early
years of Cory Aquino. State intervention has led to huge fiscal deficits and
wanton inefficiency as consumers and producers behave as if oil product prices
were cheap.

A government that cannot manage traffic properly or collect garbage on time has
no business running an oil refinery and retailing petroleum products. It has no
business running a supply depot for the purpose of influencing the retail price
of diesel and other petroleum products.

Second, amend the taxation system on oil products. The government should adopt a
flexible VAT on oil products. Once the world price of crude oil exceeds a
ceiling (say, $120 per barrel), the effective VAT rate will be cut from 12 to
10%. Once it hits a floor, say $60 per barrel, the effective VAT rate will be
raised from 12 to 14%. Another variation will be to reckon the price at the peso
value of the barrel, taking into account the peso-dollar exchange rate.

It is indefensible for the government to have a huge oil tax windfall while the
general public suffers.

The proposed flexible tax on oil and oil products may appear complicated at
first glance. In reality it's much simpler than the proposal to grant cash cards
to jeepney operators and tricycle drivers (estimated at around 750,000
nationwide). And it will not take much of the time, effort, and salaries of the
men and women of the Department of Energy (DOE), Department of Transportation
and Communications (DOTC), Department of Interior and Local Governments (DILG),
and local officials that are associated with the one-time cash grant.

Third, publish a suggested retail price (SRP) for oil products, by product and
by area. It is the government's responsibility to provide useful and timely
information to guide consumers and producers in their decisions. This maybe done
on a daily or weekly basis. The information maybe published in daily newspapers
or in the Web site of DOE and the Department of Trade and Industry.

Fourth, vigorously run after oil product smugglers. The public's perception is
that oil smuggling, rampant during the previous administration, has not been
stopped. Running after oil smugglers will restore respect for the government tax
collecting agencies and will help immensely the government in filling up its
half-empty coffers.

Fifth, run after colorum buses and jeepneys. The bus, jeepney, and tricycle
industry is an overcrowded one. Clearing the streets of illegal buses, jeepneys,
and tricycles will speed up traffic, increase turnaround rates, and save on
petroleum product consumption. This is a real challenge for DOTC, DILG, and
local officials - not the identification of recipients and distribution of cash
cards.

The government should avoid a couple of dimwit ideas.

First, avoid the grant of cash cards to jeepney operators and tricycle drivers
all over the country. The gain from this short-term, one-time program is so
small relative to its humongous direct and indirect costs.

The printing of the cash cards alone will cost around P10 million. The printing
will be paid for the by oil companies, according to DOE officials, in the guise
of the oil companies' corporate social responsibility. Really? I smell a rat
here. We, economists, believe that there is no such thing as free lunch.
Question: what would the oil companies get in return for footing the bill? How
will the bill be allocated among the big and small oil industry players? And
since private funds will be used, does it mean that there will be no public
bidding for the supply of the cash cards?

Aside from the direct cost of printing and distributing the cash cards, imagine
the time, money, and effort of a huge bureaucracy that would be required to
design the program, identify the recipients, distribute the cards to the
intended beneficiaries, and monitor things so that there is no hanky-panky in
the implementation of the program.

Add to all these the uncertainty of funding sources. Under the Constitution, no
money shall be paid out of the Treasury except in pursuance of an appropriation
made by law. What will be the funding source? Has it been approved by Congress?
If the Malampaya fund will be used, isn't the fund intended for oil exploration?

Second, avoid setting up a strategic diesel reserve presumably designed to
temper rising fuel prices. Even in the worst of times, the Philippines has not
set up a strategic diesel reserve. We should not start one. It is expensive,
risky, and prone to pilferage.

It is not clear whether the idea of setting up a strategic diesel reserve makes
sense. How can such proposal arrest the spiraling costs of oil and oil products?
A full-blown benefit-cost analysis of such proposal is needed.

The existence of such a strategic reserve for a cash-poor, small oil- consuming
country like the Philippines is not clear. What is the problem that the setting
of a strategic reserve proposes to solve? The rationale for having one must be
overwhelming. The supply of diesel is not the issue. Diesel oil is likely to be
available if one is willing to pay the market clearing price. Experts are
equally divided on the medium- and long-term direction of oil prices. It might
go up, but then it might also plummet.

Setting up a diesel reserve is not costless. One needs physical facility for
storage and the government should have the money to lease or construct such a
facility.

By the way, the situation in the Philippines is not like that in the United
States where it has the natural facility - deep and vast salt mines - to store
large amount of strategic oil reserves. And as planet Earth's biggest economy,
most powerful country militarily, and as the biggest consumer of energy, the
need for strategic reserve is justified.

The funding requirement for such a reserve is huge. One estimates that it would
cost initially around P2.25 billion for 50 million liters of diesel. But where
will the government get the money to set up the strategic diesel reserve? Won't
this require congressional approval?

Does the PNOC-Exploration Corporation have the mandate to set up the diesel
strategic reserve? The last time I checked, the mandate of PNOC-EC is to develop
alternative sources of energy.

The plan is that the strategic diesel reserve will be sold to local distributors
at subsidized rate. But who among the local oil industry players will benefit
from being able to buy diesel oil at subsidized rate? Wouldn't such government
intervention threaten the other oil industry players?

Isn't the oil industry deregulated? Why is the government now going against its
own deregulated policy? Recall that many years ago, the Philippine government
invited investors to invest in the local oil industry with the promise that the
government would leave them alone. Is the Philippines now reneging on that
promise? But doesn't that shift in policy require legislation? Goodbye, policy
consistency!

Decision-making in the public sector is hard. But this is not a justification
for coming up with half-baked ideas.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              950 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 BusinessWorld

                            April 20, 2011 Wednesday

CORE;
Decision making under pressure

BYLINE: Benjamin E. Diokno

SECTION: Pg. S1/4

LENGTH: 1292 words


With declining optimism across all socioeconomic classes and in all areas, and
with shrinking approval rating, President Aquino might be tempted to adopt
short-term, populist measures to address the rising oil prices. That would be a
monumental mistake. Instead, he should demonstrate strong leadership under fire
by adopting economically sound, long-term cures to a recurring problem.

Here's a list of do's and don'ts on how to address the problem of rising oil
prices.

WHAT THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD DO

First, reaffirm its commitment to oil industry deregulation. Any attempt to
tinker with the present oil industry deregulation law is counterproductive.
Filipinos' memory is short. They have forgotten their harrowing experience with
state intervention in the oil industry during the Marcos years and the early
years of Cory Aquino. State intervention has led to huge fiscal deficits and
wanton inefficiency as consumers and producers behave as if oil product prices
were cheap.

A government that cannot manage traffic properly or collect garbage on time has
no business running an oil refinery and retailing petroleum products. It has no
business running a supply depot for the purpose of influencing the retail price
of diesel and other petroleum products.

Second, amend the taxation system on oil products. The government should adopt a
flexible VAT on oil products. Once the world price of crude oil exceeds a
ceiling (say, $120 per barrel), the effective VAT rate will be cut from 12 to
10%. Once it hits a floor, say $60 per barrel, the effective VAT rate will be
raised from 12 to 14%. Another variation will be to reckon the price at the peso
value of the barrel, taking into account the peso-dollar exchange rate.

It is indefensible for the government to have a huge oil tax windfall while the
general public suffers.

The proposed flexible tax on oil and oil products may appear complicated at
first glance. In reality it's much simpler than the proposal to grant cash cards
to jeepney operators and tricycle drivers (estimated at around 750,000
nationwide). And it will not take much of the time, effort, and salaries of the
men and women of the Department of Energy (DOE), Department of Transportation
and Communications (DOTC), Department of Interior and Local Governments (DILG),
and local officials that are associated with the one-time cash grant.

Third, publish a suggested retail price (SRP) for oil products, by product and
by area. It is the government's responsibility to provide useful and timely
information to guide consumers and producers in their decisions. This maybe done
on a daily or weekly basis. The information maybe published in daily newspapers
or in the Web site of DOE and the Department of Trade and Industry.

Fourth, vigorously run after oil product smugglers. The public's perception is
that oil smuggling, rampant during the previous administration, has not been
stopped. Running after oil smugglers will restore respect for the government tax
collecting agencies and will help immensely the government in filling up its
half-empty coffers.

Fifth, run after colorum buses and jeepneys. The bus, jeepney, and tricycle
industry is an overcrowded one. Clearing the streets of illegal buses, jeepneys,
and tricycles will speed up traffic, increase turnaround rates, and save on
petroleum product consumption. This is a real challenge for DOTC, DILG, and
local officials - not the identification of recipients and distribution of cash
cards.

The government should avoid a couple of dimwit ideas.

First, avoid the grant of cash cards to jeepney operators and tricycle drivers
all over the country. The gain from this short-term, one-time program is so
small relative to its humongous direct and indirect costs.

The printing of the cash cards alone will cost around P10 million. The printing
will be paid for the by oil companies, according to DOE officials, in the guise
of the oil companies' corporate social responsibility. Really? I smell a rat
here. We, economists, believe that there is no such thing as free lunch.
Question: what would the oil companies get in return for footing the bill? How
will the bill be allocated among the big and small oil industry players? And
since private funds will be used, does it mean that there will be no public
bidding for the supply of the cash cards?

Aside from the direct cost of printing and distributing the cash cards, imagine
the time, money, and effort of a huge bureaucracy that would be required to
design the program, identify the recipients, distribute the cards to the
intended beneficiaries, and monitor things so that there is no hanky-panky in
the implementation of the program.

Add to all these the uncertainty of funding sources. Under the Constitution, no
money shall be paid out of the Treasury except in pursuance of an appropriation
made by law. What will be the funding source? Has it been approved by Congress?
If the Malampaya fund will be used, isn't the fund intended for oil exploration?

Second, avoid setting up a strategic diesel reserve presumably designed to
temper rising fuel prices. Even in the worst of times, the Philippines has not
set up a strategic diesel reserve. We should not start one. It is expensive,
risky, and prone to pilferage.

It is not clear whether the idea of setting up a strategic diesel reserve makes
sense. How can such proposal arrest the spiraling costs of oil and oil products?
A full-blown benefit-cost analysis of such proposal is needed.

The existence of such a strategic reserve for a cash-poor, small oil- consuming
country like the Philippines is not clear. What is the problem that the setting
of a strategic reserve proposes to solve? The rationale for having one must be
overwhelming. The supply of diesel is not the issue. Diesel oil is likely to be
available if one is willing to pay the market clearing price. Experts are
equally divided on the medium- and long-term direction of oil prices. It might
go up, but then it might also plummet.

Setting up a diesel reserve is not costless. One needs physical facility for
storage and the government should have the money to lease or construct such a
facility.

By the way, the situation in the Philippines is not like that in the United
States where it has the natural facility - deep and vast salt mines - to store
large amount of strategic oil reserves. And as planet Earth's biggest economy,
most powerful country militarily, and as the biggest consumer of energy, the
need for strategic reserve is justified.

The funding requirement for such a reserve is huge. One estimates that it would
cost initially around P2.25 billion for 50 million liters of diesel. But where
will the government get the money to set up the strategic diesel reserve? Won't
this require congressional approval?

Does the PNOC-Exploration Corporation have the mandate to set up the diesel
strategic reserve? The last time I checked, the mandate of PNOC-EC is to develop
alternative sources of energy.

The plan is that the strategic diesel reserve will be sold to local distributors
at subsidized rate. But who among the local oil industry players will benefit
from being able to buy diesel oil at subsidized rate? Wouldn't such government
intervention threaten the other oil industry players?

Isn't the oil industry deregulated? Why is the government now going against its
own deregulated policy? Recall that many years ago, the Philippine government
invited investors to invest in the local oil industry with the promise that the
government would leave them alone. Is the Philippines now reneging on that
promise? But doesn't that shift in policy require legislation? Goodbye, policy
consistency!

Decision-making in the public sector is hard. But this is not a justification
for coming up with half-baked ideas.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              951 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                        The Legal Ledger (St. Paul, MN)

                                November 3, 2008

Minnesota livestock program offering grants

BYLINE: Capitol Report Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 160  words


The Minnesota Livestock Investment Grant Program that was created by state
lawmakers earlier this year will pay $1 million to help 38 livestock producers
in the state enhance their operations.

The grants will help farmers renovate milking facilities, repair fences and
construct new buildings. The $1 million will go toward projects that have a full
value of $12.9 million.

The livestock industry in Minnesota generates $27 billion in annual economic
activity and approximately 177,000 jobs, up from $10 billion and 100,000 jobs in
2001, according to the state Agriculture Department.

Minnesota Livestock Investment Grants cover 10 percent of the first $500,000 of
investment in the purchase, construction, and improvement of facilities for
livestock production. A minimum investment of $4,000 is required. The full value
of the projects described in the approved 38 grant applications is $12.9
million.

Nearly 600 applicants requested about $11 million in grants.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Government activity

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              952 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Farmers Weekly

                                November 7, 2008

BYLINE: Lucy Busuttil

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 144 words


Farmers' money should not be used to fund the Red Tractor scheme, says the
Tenant Farmers Association.

Although the logos appear on £7.5bn worth of British produce, the TFA said
farmers had not seen much benefit from the scheme.

Greg Bliss, TFA national chairman, said there was no evidence of a producer
premium for farm-assured produce.

Farmers found the scheme's farm inspections "irritiating" and felt their produce
was being homogenised for shoppers demanding low prices.

Instead, he said grants should be given to help farmers create logos and
branding, either individually or through co-operatives.

"Producer-owned brands allow for improvements in the value of market share to be
passed to producers themselves in a way the Red Tractor logo will never do," Mr
Bliss said.

About 50% of shoppers polled by the IGD can identify the Red Tractor and what it
stands for.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2008 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              953 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             Daily News (Sri Lanka)

                           February 8, 2012 Wednesday

USAID CORE project promotes economic growth

LENGTH: 543  words

DATELINE: Sri Lanka


Sri Lanka, Feb. 8 -- The Connecting Regional Economies project (CORE) has
promoted economic growth in the Eastern, North Central and Uva provinces through
integrated strategies funded by the US Agency for International Development
(USAID).

The five year CORE project is scheduled to be completed during this year with a
fund of US $ 11.70 million.

The CORE project has promoted economic growth through development of
livelihoods, strengthening value chains, enhancing workforce skills, improving
business climate and establishing market linkages for beneficiaries. Its focal
point has been the private sector job creation and raising the income levels,
USAID Mission Director James Bednar said.

The CORE activities revolved around livelihoods, value chain competitiveness,
value chain services, workforce development and improved business climate.

The project provided food security and livelihood assistance to vulnerable
populations, increased value chain competitiveness though improved participation
in value chains to increase incomes, strengthened financial, information and
technology and business development services, engaged unemployed youth in
vocational training for job placement and provided training to value chain
participants and provided tools and convened policy discussions to promote
growth.

The project has been successful in developing expertise, public private
alliances, investor friendly environment and value chain support services. This
is a sustainable, demand driven private sector led development project, he said.

It has linked over 12,000 producer and processor beneficiaries to non-local
markets while ensuring sustainable food security and improved household incomes
for over 1,400 re-settled families. Leveraging investments, the project has
promoted investments of over Rs 500 million through incentives grants and
partnerships with private sector firms, new entrepreneurs and farmer
associations.

The project has strengthened over 20 value chains in the horticulture,
fisheries, dairy, tourism and ICT sectors. It has worked with producers to
improve products, linked to buyers, increased knowledge of food quality
standards and built private sector capacity to reach new markets. The use of
information and communication technology has improved access to agriculture
extension services and market information.

The introduction to commercial cultivation of high value crops and transferred
technology and best practices have benefited the farmer community while 860
farmers and SMEs have been linked to financial services. This has facilitated
access to over Rs 10 million and also developed mechanisms for commercial
lending to farmers.

The project while addressing improving water access and agriculture productivity
by improved basic infrastructure has also pioneered warehousing solutions to
preserve produce and secure better prices. The US Government has invested over $
2 billion to benefit the people of Sri Lanka since 1956 and USAID has provided
development and humanitarian assistance worldwide for over 50 years. Published
by HT Syndication with permission from Daily News Sri Lanka. For any query with
respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor
at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2012 The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              954 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                            November 14, 2004 Sunday

Agriculture Briefs

BYLINE: Telegraph Herald Staff

SECTION: Agriculture; Pg. b7

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: MIDDLETON, Wis.


Wisconsin group will hold meeting

The Wisconsin Farm Bureau Federation will hold its 85th annual meeting Dec. 5-7
at the Marriott in Middleton, focusing on the value of Wisconsin agriculture and
increasing activism by farmers.

A workshop on Dec. 6 will focus on legislative activism and agricultural
awareness. Linda Johnson, senior director of policy implementation with the
American Farm Bureau Federation, will spearhead a session called "Contact with
Impact" that will feature Farm Bureau's agriculture action team approach of
getting more farmers involved in contacting state and national legislators.

Dairy-herd numbers drop in Wisconsin

MADISON, Wis. - The Wisconsin Department of Agriculture has announced its latest
dairy herd count numbers, which indicate there were just under 15,400 herds
milking during the month of October.

That is a drop of just more than 40 herds from the previous month and 700 herds
from a year ago.

The number of dairy herds in the five-county region of Grant, Iowa, Lafayette,
Richland and Crawford totaled 1,664 for October. That is a drop of one herd from
the previous month and 77 from one year ago. Grant County has the most herds in
the region with 604, one less than last month and 21 less than a year ago.

Dairy summit slated

FENNIMORE, Wis. -Southwest Wisconsin dairy producers should plan now to attend
the second annual Tri-State Regional Dairy Summit from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Dec.
14 at Southwest Wisconsin Technical College in Fennimore.

Dairy Summit II, coordinated by the Southwest Wisconsin Regional Economic
Development Coalition's Dairy Modernization Team, will build on last year's
inaugural conference that provided a forum for dairy producers, their families
and/or business partners to explore options, discuss strategy, ask questions and
gain insight into modernization.

Cost for producers is $30 for one person and $10 for each additional person from
the same farm. Cost for all other attendees is $50 per person.

For more information, call Kevin Bernhardt, UWExtension farm management
specialist, 608/342-1365 or Kevin Raisbeck, agricultural instructor at Southwest
Wisconsin Technical College, 800/362-3322 ext. 2511.

Voting deadline nears

MADISON, Wis. - Farmers and rural landowners across the state have until Dec. 6
to vote in local elections for USDA Farm Service Agency county committee
members, according to Ben Brancel, FSA's state executive director.

Brancel said ballots are currently being mailed to all eligible voters. Ballots
must be filled out, signed and returned to the county FSA offices or postmarked
by Dec. 6 to be counted.

Ballots will be counted publicly by Dec. 13. Elections may be challenged by
nominees within 15 days after the results of an election are posted. Newly
elected committee members and alternates take office on Jan. 1.

Eligible voters who do not receive a ballot by Monday can acquire one from their
administering FSA county office. Eligible voters must participate or cooperate
in FSA programs.

FFA members honored

PLATTEVILLE, Wis. - On Oct. 30, nine members of University of
Wisconsin-Platteville Collegiate FFA were awarded the American Degree.

Those receiving the award from UW-P include Michelle Bader, Brenda Dahm, Heather
Anderson, Kathleen Connors, Megan Guenther, Gary McCarthy, Amanda Schaller,
Traci Palzkill and Ashley Pratt.

The award signifies the highest level of membership, with less than 0.5 percent
receiving the award each year.

Collegiate FFA is an organization dedicated to science, business and
agricultural technology, with more than 450,000 members nationwide. American
Degree winners must demonstrate leadership abilities and outstanding
achievements in agricultural business, production and service programs.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                              955 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Queensland Country Life

                                 August 9, 2016

Semen and embryo export market ours for the taking

BYLINE: Shan Goodwin

SECTION: EKKA-NEWS

LENGTH: 797 words


THE PUSH to ramp up beef and sheep semen and embryo exports is gaining momentum
with northern industry players looking to set up a ruminant genetics secretariat
to co-ordinate marketing and access efforts.

Australia's abysmal record of participation in the world trade means seedstock
producers are foregoing their slice of a very lucrative pie, veterinarians and
artificial breeding business owners said.

Speakers at an innovative cattle industry seminar presented by the Australian
Registered Cattle Breeders Association at this year's Royal Queensland Show said
bovine semen exports were currently worth a whopping $90m to Canada - which has
a much smaller cattle herd than Australia.

On the sheep front, the story is even more dismal.

Greg McCann, Macquarie Artificial Breeders at Dubbo, reported Canada exports
more sheep semen and embryos than Australia - 'and they killed half their flock
to give me a lamb chop for brekky.'

Leading geneticists have put the potential value of the market to Australia at
over $300m a year.

Veterinarian Ced Wise 'Glenisa' at Glen Alpin has been at the forefront of
efforts to turn the situation around.

He said a Federal Government grant of $250,000 had just been awarded to the
National Herd Improvement Association for the advancement of the ruminant
genetics industry.

Some of that grant money needed to go towards commissioning an independent study
into the best structure to promote the industry, he said.

'We have in mind a structure that would be underpinned by ongoing industry
funding along with government grants and require only office space for one
person integrated in an organisation such as Meat and Livestock Australia,' he
said.

'Simply having one person to provide a single desk point of contact for the
Australian industry, government departments, foreign governments and industry
would be an enormous first step.'

Dr Wise described the Australian ruminant seedstock industry as hide bound.

'We have been very good hunter gatherers - we have travelled the world to source
the best genetics, bought them home and molded them to suit our environment,
measured them, multiplied them and then promptly sat on our laurels only to
repeat the whole exercise in a decade or so,' he said.

'Compared to countries like the UK and Canada, and even very small countries
like New Zealand, Australia's involvement in the trade, particularly in the
north, barely registers.'

The ruminant genetics export industry is broadly inhibited by two factors -
protocol issues and marketing, according to Dr Wise.

A good deal of country-specific protocols were not based on sound scientific
biosecurity, he said.

There was also a lack of consistent interpretation of the same protocol by
different officials.

Add to that the fact compliance costs are extremely restrictive.

There was recognition at the seminar, however, that protocols are written by
importing countries and, while we can try to negotiate with them, ultimately we
must comply with their requirements.

'On the marketing side, well it simply doesn't happen,' Dr Wise said.

'We sit here and hope someone overseas will knock our our door and ask for our
genetics.'

A 'genetics hub' based in Melbourne was set up to address those issues but
producers believe it has had little success.

A lot of work - to no avail - had also be put into trying to find an existing
body within the industry that could be tasked with marketing the product, Mr
Wise said.

'My persuasive powers as a self-appointed industry advocate may be poor but my
ability to whinge is unsurpassed and I have badgered all and sundry for money to
form an independent, stand-alone representative group to lift the profile of the
industry,' he said.

The NHIA money was finally a bright spot on the horizon.

A secretariat would provide a permanent conduit between industry and the
government on protocol issues, Dr Wise said.

The role would look to develop an Australian Standard Protocol that would
include assured product quality and scientifically-sound disease testing to
minimise biosecurity risk but maximise market access.

It would also organise things like industry groups visiting potential foreign
markets, the hosting of foreign producer group visits to Australia and campaigns
to increase the profile of the products to Australian agencies.

Dr McCann said there was no doubt these export markets were worth targeting.

'We have arguably the world's best genetics, particularly in sheep, and zip
ability to market it,' he said.

'Seedstock producers are very interested but finding it impossible to get
traction.

'One of the reasons is there are no big players but rather a lot of little ones
who don't talk to each other often.

'As a result, the artificial breeding industry here has tended to sit back and
let seedstock industry promote the genetics.'

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              956 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2016 Dun & Bradstreet Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                         D&B Financial Analysis Reports

                               September 27, 2016

                     STONERUNNER FILM DEVELOPMENTS LIMITED

                                  FIRST FLOOR
                                ROXBURGHE HOUSE
                             273-287 REGENT STREET
                                 LONDON W1B 2HA


TRADE ADDRESS: First Floor Roxburghe House 273-287 Regent Street, LONDON W1B 2HA

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
REGISTRATION NO.: 08685737

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: September 11, 2013
JURISDICTION/PLACE OF REGISTRATION

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
DIRECTORS:

     ·    Mr Guy Stanley Collins, Film Producer
     ·    Mr Michael Patrick Ryan, Film Producer/financier
     ·    Mr Leslie Grant Bradley, Film Producer


Go To ICC Directors

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
PRINCIPLE ACTIVITIES: Other business support service activities n.e.c.
INDUSTRY TYPE:
COMPANY TYPE:  Private Limited with share capital::Private Limited with share
capital::
COMPANY SIZE:  Ceased IRL

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC:
82990

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: September 30, 2015
FISCAL YEAR END: September 30

LAST FILED ACCOUNTS:  September 30, 2015
ACCOUNTS LODGED DATE:  June 30, 2016
ANNUAL RETURN:  September 11, 2016
CREDIT LIMIT:  17,500

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS
Date of Accounts                           30/09/201 30/09/201         -
                                                   5         4
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Tangible Assets                                    -         -         -
Intangible Assets                            105,836    59,971         -
Total Fixed Assets                           105,836    59,971         -
Stocks                                             -         -         -
Debtors                                            -         -         -
Cash                                             501    86,160         -
Miscellaneous Current Assets                  39,402     3,502         -
Other Current Assets                          39,903    89,662         -
Total Current Assets                          39,903    89,662         -
Fixed Assets                                       -         -         -
Intermediate Assets                                -         -         -
Due From Group, Non Current                        -         -         -
Due From Group, Current                            -         -         -
TOTAL ASSETS                                 145,739   149,633         -



LIABILITIES
Date of Accounts                           30/09/201 30/09/201         -
                                                   5         4
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Creditors                                          -         -         -
Bank Overdraft                                     -         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Liabilities              1,800     2,520         -
Bank Loans - Current Portion                       -         -         -
Other Short Term Finance                           -         -         -
Due To Group, Current                              -         -         -
Due To Directors, Current                          -         -         -
Other Current Liabilities                      1,800     2,520         -
Short Term Loans                                   -         -         -
Long Term Loans                                    -         -         -
Long Term Bank Loan                                -         -         -
Other Long Term Finance                            -         -         -
Due To Group, Non Current                          -         -         -
Due To Directors, Non Current                      -         -         -
Other Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
Total Current Liabilities                      1,800     2,520         -
Total Long Term Liabilities                        -         -         -
TOTAL LIABILITIES                              1,800     2,520         -
Called Up Share Capital and Sundry           149,710   149,710         -
Reserves
Profit & Loss Account Reserve                  -5771     -2597         -
Revaluation Reserve                                -         -         -
Shareholder Funds                            143,939   147,113         -
Called Up Share Capital                      149,710   149,710         -
Sundry Reserves (Including Grants)                 -         -         -
Contingent Liabilities                             -         -         -
NET ASSETS                                   143,939   147,113         -


* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
Date of Accounts   30/09/201 30/09/201  -
                           5         4
                         GBP       GBP GB
                                        P
Total Sales                -         -  -
Cost of Sales              -         -  -
Gross Profit               -         -  -
Operating Profit           -         -  -
Export                     -         -  -
Nontrading Income          -         -  -
Interest Payable           -         -  -
Pretax Profit              -         -  -
Taxation                   -         -  -
Profit After Tax           -         -  -
Dividends Payable          -         -  -
Retained Profits           -         -  -
Value Added                -         -  -
Capital Employed     143,939   147,113  -
Net Worth             38,103    87,142  -
Working Capital       38,103    87,142  -
Emp. Renumeration          -         -  -
Dir. Renumeration          -         -  -
Audit Fees                 -         -  -
Non-audit Fees             -         -  -
Depreciation               -         -  -
Number of                  -         -  -
Employees

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *


GROWTH RATES
Date of Accounts        2      3      5
                    Years  Years  Years
                      GBP    GBP    GBP
Sales                   -      -      -
Pretax                  -      -      -
Total Assets         -2.6      -      -
Current Assets      -55.5      -      -
Current            -28.57      -      -
Liabilities
Capital Employed    -2.16      -      -
Employee Wages          -      -      -
Number of               -      -      -
Employees



INDUSTRY AVERAGES
Compared to 178,145 companies in the same industry
sector
(year ending 2015)
SIC Code:
74849 Other business activities not elsewhere classified



INDUSTRY QUARTILES
                                                      Lower   Median    Upper
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                      0     9.23    54.84
Pretax Profit / Total Assets (%)                          0      1.9    32.63
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                                 0      .98    27.13
Sales / Total Assets (%)                              50.95   143.84   367.16
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales) x       26.26        0        0
365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                    .79     1.13     2.24
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)            28,637.6 53,888.3 72,276.9
                                                          7        2
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees (GBP)  16,835.7 26,753.2 39,868.1
                                                          2        1        3
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                  31,518.2 84,193.5 186,740.
                                                          9        5        9
Wages / Turnover (%)                                  47.63    27.94    18.75



CREDIT RATING
Year  0  7
=        1
Year -1  2
=        8
Year -2  8
=
Year -3  -
=

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *
Date of Accounts                                    0/09/201 30/09/201 -
                                                           5         4
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                       -         - -
Pretax Profit / Assets (%)                                 -         - -
Pretax Profit / Shareholders Funds (%)                     -         - -
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                                  -         - -
Sales / Total Assets (%)                                   -         - -
Sales / Fixed Assets (%)                                   -         - -
Export / Sales (%)                                         -         - -
Working Capital / Sales (%)                                -         - -
Sales / Stocks                                             -         - -
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales ) x           -         - -
365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                   22.17     35.58 -
Quick Assets / Current Liabilities                     22.17     35.58 -
Total Debt / Net Worth (%)                                 -         - -
Shareholders Funds / Total Assets                       0.99      0.98 -
Long Term Debt / Net Worth (%)                             -         - -
Interest / Pre Interest Profit (%)                         -         - -
Current Liabilities / Stocks                               -         - -
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees (GBP)          -         - -
Employee Remuneration / Sales (%)                          -         - -
Pretax Profit / Number Of Employees (GBP)                  -         - -
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                          -         - -
Capital Employed / Number Of Employees                     -         - -
Fixed Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)                   -         - -
Total Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)                   -         - -
Pretax Profit / Value Added (%)                            -         - -
Value Added / Sales (%)                                    -         - -
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)                    -         - -
Value Added / Employee Remuneration                        -         - -
Sales / Audit Fees                                         -         - -
Total Assets / Audit Fees                                  -         - -
Creditors / Debtors                                        -         - -
Total Debt / Working Capital                               -         - -
Total Debt / Total Assets                                  -         - -

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
CURRENT SHARES OUTSTANDING: GBP 143,939

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: King & King

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2017


                              957 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         Brattleboro Reformer (Vermont)

                            October 29, 2007 Monday

Business briefs

BYLINE: Reformer.com

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 1115 words


Local real estate broker will be on national TV

BRATTLEBORO -- Marcia Trinkley, a real estate broker with Berkley & Veller
Greenwood Country Realtors will be featured on HGTV's program "My House is Worth
What?"

Trinkley was chosen by the popular national home show because of her expertise
and service to the real estate community for 26 years in both Vermont and New
Hampshire.

There are three episodes of the program, each showing a different house and
homeowner with Trinkley giving her assessment of value regarding improvements
done by the owners. The first showings are scheduled to air on Wednesday and
Nov. 14, both at 10:30 p.m. on HGTV.

New hair stylist accepting clients

BRATTLEBORO -- Starting this fall, local hair stylist Joanna Terry will be
taking clients at P'Tricia's, a salon by appointment, located at 24 Flat St.,
right above Adivasi.

With more than eight years of experience, Terry uses her skill as a visual
artist to create cuts that work with hair's specific ability and texture.

She also specializes in using color to enhance one's natural beauty and skin
tones. With talents that span from waxing to clipper cutting, she offers a wide
range of services for both men and women of all ages.

To schedule a consultation or appointment, call 802-258-7779. She is now booking
for holiday appointments.

Newfane business association to hold business expo

NEWFANE -- The Business Association will hold its first expo for Newfane-area
businesses in Newfane on Saturday from 10 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. at the NewBrook Fire
Station on Route 30.

The aim is to promote the variety of business services offered in this area and
for businesses to display their information and make new acquaintances in the
greater Newfane area.

Admission is free, everyone is welcome, coffee and brownies will be available
and there will be door prizes. There will be fun activities for children. WTSA
will broadcast live from the event from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m.

This is a new venture for the Newfane Business Association, which is known for
sponsoring the summer series of concerts and barbecue on Newfane common, the
Winterfest activites and lighting up of the common and holiday tree, providing
the village flagpole and flags, organizing the Easter egg hunt and the annual
community yard sale.

Everyone is invited to the expo. For more information, contact Chauncey Berdan
at 802-365-7288 or 365-7785.

Shriver appointed to Vermont Bar Foundation board

BRATTLEBORO -- The Vermont Supreme Court recently appointed Alexander "Sandy"
Shriver to the Board of Directors of the Vermont Bar Foundation.

Shriver has been practicing with Potter Stewart, Jr. Law Offices, P.C. since
August 1995 and currently is a counsel to the firm. He focuses on business and
real estate transactions and civil litigation.

The Vermont Bar Foundation collects the interest earned on attorney trust
(IOLTA) accounts and makes grants to organizations that provide legal services
to indigent Vermonters, advance the administration of justice or provide legal
education to the general public.

The primary beneficiaries of Vermont Bar Foundation grants are Vermont Legal
Aid, Have Justice-Will Travel and the Vermont Law School Legal Clinic. The
foundation provides approximately $1 million worth of grants every year.

As a board member, Shriver will serve on the Foundation's committee which is
urging banks to increase the interest rates paid on IOLTA accounts. He will also
advocate for a greater proportion of the foundation's funds to be spent in
southern Vermont.

Shriver graduated from Vermont Law School, magna cum laude, in May 1995. At
Vermont Law School, he was the Vermont Editor of the Vermont Law Review and a
student representative to the board of trustees. He was named a Vermont Law
School Scholar for three consecutive semesters, an honor granted to the top five
students in each class. He was also awarded the Academic Excellence Citation.

Shriver has served on the boards of the Brattleboro Union High School, the
Windham County Humane Society, the Brattleboro Walk In Clinic, the Brattleboro
Area Affordable Housing Corporation and Brattleboro Area Habitat for Humanity.
He also serves as a Brattleboro Town Meeting representative, is a member of the
Brattleboro Sunrise Rotary Club and is the treasurer of the Windham County
Democratic Committee.

USDA announces $2M in grants for energy projects

MONTPELIER -- Jolinda LaClair, state director of USDA Rural Development for
Vermont and New Hampshire, announced the award of $2,032,271 in guaranteed loans
and grants to 16 agricultural producers and small businesses, including
businesses in Dummerston and South Londonderry.

"The Renewable Energy Systems and Energy Efficiency Improvement program is a
valuable tool in helping rural businesses and agricultural producers cut energy
costs and increase their economic viability," said LaClair. "The loan and grant
recipients exhibit progressive thinking and are great examples of agricultural
producers and small businesses in Vermont."

West River Tennis & Fitness Center in South Londonderry received a $6,124 energy
efficiency grant to make energy efficient improvements to its operation.

Scott Farm in Dummerston got $15,057 loan and $15,056 grant to help with the
purchase and installation of solar photo-voltaic and wood biomass renewable
energy technologies.

USDA Rural Development's mission is to increase economic opportunity and improve
the quality of life in Rural America. To learn more, visit
www.rurdev.usda.gov/vt .

Brattleboro Rotary Christmas trees go on sale in four weeks

BRATTLEBORO -- It's never too early to think about Christmas trees.

Since 1965, the Brattleboro Rotary Club has sold Christmas trees as a fundraiser
for local community service projects and student scholarships, and this year is
no different.

Vermont-grown trees of all shapes and sizes will be sold daily in front of
Brattleboro Bowl on Putney Road. Sales will begin the Saturday after
Thanksgiving and continue through December 23, or until the trees are gone.

The Brattleboro Rotary Club, founded in 1950, is an active community service
club of 85 members who engage in community and human service projects both
locally and internationally.

Proceeds from the Christmas Tree Sale support the club's annual student
scholarship awards of $3,000 each to eight students from local high schools.

This year, the club is offering Brattleboro area businesses the opportunity to
purchase Christmas Tree gift certificates for their employees and clients. Also,
with orders of 10 or more, the trees will be delivered right to the company.

For more information or to purchase Christmas tree gift certificates, contact
Rotarian Christopher Chapman at 802-254-9400, ext. 243.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2007 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              958 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                             April 24, 2015 Friday

Boost for Scottish pig supply chain

BYLINE: Gemma Mackenzie

SECTION: BUSINESS; FARM/FOOD; Pigs; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 470 words


Improved slaughtering facilities for Scottish pigs are set to be operational
later this year.

According to Quality Pork Limited (QPL), improvement work at the Brechin pig
abattoir is well under way and scheduled for completion by the end of this year.

QPL, which is a joint venture between Scottish Pig Producers and Scotlean Pigs,
took ownership of the Brechin site from AP Jess last year.

The company is now upgrading the facilities with the help of £2.7million in
grant funding from the Scottish Government's food processing, marketing and
co-operation scheme.

Investment at the plant will see the creation of a new slaughter line, and
chilling and lorry-washing facilities to enable the slaughtering capacity at the
plant to double.

Scotland's pig slaughtering capacity was greatly reduced when the country's main
processing plant - Hall's of Broxburn in Edinburgh - was closed in 2012.

Commenting on the development at the Brechin site, Farm Minister Richard
Lochhead said: "The aftermath of the closure of Halls of Broxburn was a
difficult time for our pig industry so I'm glad to see the new plant taking
shape as it heralds a bright future for the Scottish pig supply chain.

"Scottish farms produce around £81million of pig meat a year for processing, and
the Scottish Government is actively supporting pig farming and the Specially
Selected Pork brand."

Quality Meat Scotland chairman Jim McLaren added: "The investment in additional
slaughtering capacity at Brechin is a fantastic boost for the Scottish pig
industry and we look forward to the increased capacity at the plant becoming
operational later this year.

"As well as giving our pig farmers a clear signal of confidence in the long-term
future of pig production in Scotland, we welcome the return of some of the pig
levy income which our industry has been unable to benefit from as a result of
pigs being slaughtered south of the border."

QPL said it hoped the increased slaughtering facilities would encourage
producers to expand numbers and potentially lure new entrants into the sector.

"This exciting development represents a great opportunity for new entrants to
get into the pig industry," said QPL chairman Roderic Bruce.

"Pig production is already competitive in Scotland and is unsubsidised. With
grain prices forecast to remain challenging to arable farmers, finishing pigs
provides a great opportunity for farmers to add value to their grain by
producing meat from home-grown cereals."

He said Scottish Pig Producers and Scotlean Pigs were working with a number of
banks and feed companies to develop a support programme for new pig producers in
Scotland.

The two co-operatives plan to host an event later this year for NFU Scotland's
new generation group to demonstrate practical pig farming and give an insight
into what is involved in working in the sector.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: OPPORTUNITY: It is hoped the increased slaughtering facilities will
encourage producers to expand pig numbers

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PJ


                      Copyright 2015 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              959 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 24, 2014 Monday

Washington: USDA Announces Growth of U.S. Organic Industry and Additional USDA
Support Available with New Farm Bill

LENGTH: 671  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Agriculture, The Government of USA has issued the following
news release:

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) announced new figures today that show
the organic industry continues to grow domestically and globally, with over
25,000 certified organic operations in more than 120 different countries around
the world.

Through the Agricultural Marketing Service's National Organic Program, USDA has
helped an additional 763 producers become certified organic in just 2013, an
increase of 4.2 percent from the previous year. The industry today encompasses a
record breaking 18,513 certified organic farms and businesses in the United
States alone, representing a 245 percent increase since 2002. The 2013 list of
certified USDA organic operations shows an increased rate of domestic growth
within the industry, resuming previous trends.

"Consumer demand for organic products has grown exponentially over the past
decade. With retail sales valued at $35 billion last year, the organic industry
represents a tremendous economic opportunity for farmers, ranchers and rural
communities," said Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack. "New support in the 2014
Farm Bill will enhance USDA's efforts to help producers and small business tap
into this market and support organic agriculture as it continues to grow and
thrive."

USDA has a number of new and expanded efforts to connect organic farmers and
businesses with resources that will ensure the continued growth of the organic
industry domestically and abroad. During this Administration, USDA has signed
three major trade agreements on organic products, first with Canada and then
with the European Union and Japan. Our trading partners are eager to establish
organic equivalency arrangements with the U.S. because they recognize the
strength of the National Organic Program and the value of the USDA organic
label.

USDA is also helping organic stakeholders access programs that support
conservation, provide access to loans and grants, fund organic research and
education, and mitigate pest emergencies. Funds are currently available for
research projects under the National Institute of Food and Agriculture's Organic
Agriculture Research and Extension Initiative to solve critical organic
agriculture issues, priorities, or problems. The program also funds research
projects to enhance the ability of organic producers and processors to grow and
market their products. Additional information is available online, and request
for proposals are due by May 8, 2014.

Additionally, the recently-signed 2014 Farm Bill includes provisions that are a
greater support to the organic community, including:

$20 million annually for dedicated organic research, agricultural extension
programs, and education. The Cooperative Extension System is a nationwide,
non-credit educational network. Every U.S. state and territory has a state
office at its land-grant university and a network of local or regional offices
staffed by experts that provide useful, practical, and research-based
information.
 $5 million to fund data collection on organic agriculture that will give
policymakers, organic farmers, and organic businesses data needed to make sound
policy, business, and marketing decisions
 Expanded options for organic crop insurance to protect farmers
 Expanded exemptions for organic producers who are paying into commodity "check
off" programs, and authority for USDA to consider an application for the organic
sector to establish its own check off
 Improved enforcement authority for the National Organic Program to conduct
investigations
 $5 million for a technology upgrade of the National Organic Program to provide
up-to-date information about certified organic operations across the supply
chain
 $11.5 million annually for certification cost-share assistance, which
reimburses the costs of annual certification for organic farmers and livestock
producers by covering 75 percent of certification costs, up to $750 per year


For more information please visit: http://www.usda.gov

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              960 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Times of Zambia (Ndola)

                               November 26, 2013

Emerald Miners Get 'Shot in the Arm'

BYLINE: James Kunda

LENGTH: 1347 words


ZAMBIA is a country endowed with a spectrum of God-given mineral resources.

Most of these minerals are extracted in the Copperbelt Province which is the
regional hub of mining activities in Zambia.

An emerging mineral industry in North-Western Province could, however, soon
shift the balance of power of copper mining, as expansion projects spearheaded
by First Quantum Minerals (FQM) take centre stage.

Aside from being among the world's elite producers of copper, Zambia also
produces low and high grade rough emeralds.

Gemfields - owned Kagem Mining, along with Grizzly and Miku are the three active
emerald mines currently operational in Zambia.

Zambia produces about 20 per cent of the world's emeralds, with Brazil and
Colombia topping the charts as the world's elite emerald producers and gemstone
suppliers.

The country's gemstones are much sought after due to their deep green colour
which adds beauty to products such as bracelets and necklaces.

Government is already implementing policies and projects aimed at growing and
adding value to the country's gemstone industry.

The Government through the Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines Investment Holdings
(ZCCM-IH) has released a grant of K50 million towards the development of 400
small-scale emerald miners whose mineral exploration licenses are dormant.

These funds will go towards addressing the various challenges that limit
small-scale emerald miners from undertaking full-time gemstone production.

"Government through the ZCCM-IH has since secured K50 million to help revive the
gemstone industry and programme is underway were miners with dormant exploration
licences will be grouped into forms of corporatives and accordingly, challenges
limiting their progress will be addressed.

"For instance, if the challenge is lack of drilling skills, Government will
engage a geologist with experience in drilling to offer training to the miners,"
said Mines, Energy and Water Development Minister Christopher Yaluma.

Mr Yaluma said through this process, the miners would also be sensitised on
reasons why they should not sell their gemstones to illegal emerald buyers.

Government has been losing a lot of revenue through the illegal sell of emeralds
to canning people on the street and introducing this programme is one way to
curb this trend.

The development has cheered the Emerald and Semi Precious Stones Mining
Association of Zambia (ESMAZ), with chairperson Victor Kalesha saying the grant
availed by the Government to revive dormant gemstone mining licenses will awaken
the industry and create jobs.

Mr Kalesha said there were a lot of potential gemstone mines in the country that
are lying idle due to lack of equipment and working capital.

"We would like to congratulate the Government for securing K50 million for small
scale miners".

"This will wake up the industry that has potential to diversify the economy,
earn the nation more income and create the employment opportunities which the
Government is pursuing with vigour," Mr Kalesha said.

The association is already preparing its members psychologically to treat the
grant from Government as business opportunity other than a charitable gesture.

"Our goal as ESMAZ is to make sure that our members realise their dreams and the
Government increases revenue collection from the emerald Sector".

"We have not been contributing to the economy because we are not producing and
when disbursing these funds, Government should not entertain hijackers who are
not even experienced in emerald mining," Mr Kalesha said.

Standard Gemstone Company Limited (SGCL), a firm revamped by the Government to
cut and process gemstones, recently commenced operations in Ndola with an
initial capital injection of K2 million.

The firm was re-established through the Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines
Investment Holdings (ZCCM-IH) and operations commenced with a workforce of 25
people who are graduates from the Gemstone Processing and Lapidary Training
Centre (GPLTC) in Ndola.

All the employees at the firm are trained with skills in gemstone cutting and
polishing.

"In setting up this company, Government has put in place a mechanism that is
intended for all players in the gemstone sector to participate and contribute to
its growth," Mines, Energy and Water Development Deputy Minister Richard Musukwa
says.

He said with the firm operating effectively, Zambia would have a basis for
attracting investors and the international market to buy gemstones from the
country.

Mr Musukwa added that the Government wanted more people to be trained and
acquire skills to carry out duties in gemstone processing.

With SGCL now up and running, contribution towards the value-addition chain of
emeralds in Zambia is assured and this will stimulate wealth and employment
creation for people in the gemstone sector.

Early this year, President Michael Sata directed that all emeralds mined locally
be auctioned within Zambia for continued value addition to the country's mineral
resource and maximised benefits for the Zambian people.

Presenting the 2014 National Budget to Parliament, Finance Minister Alexander
Chikwanda said Government will continue to encourage this initiative as it will
also improve revenue collection from the gemstone sub-sector.

Government has also pledged to set up precious-stone collection points to expose
small-scale gemstone miners and avail them an opportunity to have their products
sold to international buyers.

The move is part of Government plans to reorganise the local gemstones sector in
which it was losing millions of Kwacha in revenue through unsanctioned auctions
previously.

Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Mines Victor Mutambo said the decision
would ensure small-scale miners of precious stones benefit from their products
for which they were often exploited.

"We have small-scale emerald miners from places such as Mapatizya, from where it
is difficult to transport gemstones to an auction being held in Lusaka.

"But with the setting up of collection points, transportation will be made
easier and miners can bring their products during auctions in Lusaka and money
will be given to them instantly," he said.

Mr Kalesha however, suggests that Government should allow the auctioning of
emeralds abroad to help attract more international buyers and enhance
competition with other gemstone producing countries.

Mr Kalesha says emerald auctions should be extended abroad to attract
international buyers who did not often make the trip to Zambia when such sales
were conducted.

"Government's policy on local emerald auctions is supported but these sales
should also be extended internationally because in this industry, there is
competition coming our way from other producers like Brazil and Colombia.

"So, if we do not go out and explore the foreign market, it will be difficult to
attract buyers and our emeralds will not be competitive enough when compared to
those from other producers," he said.

But Government maintains that it will not allow locally-produced emeralds to be
auctioned abroad because all proceeds from the country's mineral wealth should
be invested locally to benefit the people of Zambia.

Dr Mutambo said the Government policy remains that auctioning of emeralds would
be done locally for the benefit of Zambians.

"Government policy on the auction of emeralds still stands and we have talked to
gemstone mines like Kagem," he said.

So far, Kagem Mining has held three successful emerald auctions in Zambia,
despite the firm still being in talks with the Government over possible foreign
auctions.

President Michael Sata has expressed satisfaction at the holding of these
auctions saying "additional spillover effects to other sectors of the economy
will also be enhanced as international buyers, who come and stay in the hotels,
will end up visiting other tourist attractions as well as having an interest in
investment opportunities in various sectors of the economy.

The resolve by Government to take emerald mining in Zambia to another level is a
welcome development considering that the country has solely relied on copper as
the cash mineral for over 49 years.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              961 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                             The Advocate (Burnie)

                           December 10, 2015 Thursday
                         Advocate First Edition Edition

BRIEFLYProducer funds GOAT...

SECTION: PRIMARY PRODUCER_; Pg. 49

LENGTH: 369 words


BRIEFLYProducer funds

GOAT and sheep producers can now apply for funding as part of Meat and Livestock
Australia's producer demonstration sites program. The funding allows producers
to bring the latest research into their every day operations. The PDS program is
part of MLA's on-farm adoption program and provides up to $25,000 a year for a
maximum of three years to producer groups to validate, adapt and demonstrate the
business value of implementing new management practices, technologies or
innovations and associated skills into local farming systems. Preliminary
applications should be submitted on or before January 15.

Bank scholarship

APPLICATIONS are now open for Rural Bank scholarships for 2016. The program,
which opened for applications last week, will offer three scholarships for
first-time undergraduate university or college students enrolled in agribusiness
studies or studies that will enable them to contribute to agribusiness.
Scholarship applications will close on January 25 and will be assessed in early
2016.

Scheme feedback

CONSULTATION on improvements to the national farm management deposits scheme
close next week. Federal Agriculture Minister Barnaby Joyce is encouraging
people providing advice to farmers to take a look at the proposed changes to the
scheme and provide feedback. The changes include a doubling of the deposit limit
for each primary producer from $400,000 to $800,000, introducing early access
for farmers to withdraw deposits in severe drought and enabling FMD accounts to
be used as a farm business loan offset. The consultation period closes on
December 15. For more information go to
www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/drought/assistance/fmd

TQM a winner

TASMANIAN Quality Meats was the big winner from the meat and livestock industry
in the 2015 Australian Export Awards announced in Melbourne recently. Winner of
the regional exporter of the year category, TQM is a regional exporting success
story, going from having no direct export sales in the 2011 financial year to
$12 million in export sales in 2013, and annual sales of more than $37 million
in 2014-15. TQM now exports fresh and frozen lamb, mutton, veal and offal to
markets in the Middle East and south Asia.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              962 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 20, 1986 Thursday

Beet growers get assistance from Ottawa

BYLINE: ANDREW McINTOSH; The Globe and Mail

SECTION: ROB; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 375 words


The federal Government is sending 99 sugar beet growers in Quebec a
 total of $1.8-million in compensation payments.

The move is designed to compensate the growers for a decline in the
 value of their lands resulting from the closing by Lantic Sugar Ltd. of a
 beet processing refinery in Mont St. Hilaire, Que., last spring.

Lantic, owned by Jannock Ltd. of Toronto and Steinberg Inc. of
 Montreal, bought Raffinerie de Sucre du Quebec, the debt-ridden province-
 owned operator of the plant, for $4- million cash and $40-million in
 debentures.

"Quebec sugar beet producers could not continue production when the
 refining operations were ended last spring," Agriculture Minister John
 Wise said in announcing the payments.

Mr. Wise said the contributions are also designed to help make it
 easier for the farmers to switch to other crops.

Simon Thiboutot, Agriculture Canada's development director in the
 Quebec region, said that while Lantic's decision to shut the refinery was
 not a bad one, the growers have suffered as a result of the closing.

He said the federal Government used money it had set aside for an
 incentive program under which the producers could get price-support grants
 before the growing season to provide the compensatory payments.

No Quebec farmers planted sugar beets this past summer, "not because
 they didn't want to grow sugar beets, but because they didn't have any
 markets."

Mr. Thiboutot said the growers will also get $1.2-million from the
 Quebec Government in compensation for losses they incurred in selling
 specialized farm equipment designed for harvesting their crops.

However, the federal official said the actual cost to the Quebec
 Government will be much higher. The provincial Agriculture Department will
 have to absorb a deficit of almost $10-million accumulated by its crop
 insurance and price stabilization fund.

The deficit grew under the Parti Quebecois government when the province
 provided sugar beet growers with support payments for several years as
 world sugar prices dropped.

Meanwhile, Treasury Board supplementary estimates tabled in Parliament
 yesterday show that Alberta and Manitoba sugar beet growers received
 almost $3.5-million in payments earlier this year to help cover the costs
 of planting their 1986 crops.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1986 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              963 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 21, 2014 Friday

Nevada: USDA Announces Growth of U.S. Organic Industry and Additional USDA
Support Available with New Farm Bill

LENGTH: 670  words

DATELINE: Carson City


The State of Nevada has issued the following news release:

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) announced new figures today that show
the organic industry continues to grow domestically and globally, with over
25,000 certified organic operations in more than 120 different countries around
the world.

Through the Agricultural Marketing Service's National Organic Program, USDA has
helped an additional 763 producers become certified organic in just 2013, an
increase of 4.2 percent from the previous year. The industry today encompasses a
record breaking 18,513 certified organic farms and businesses in the United
States alone, representing a 245 percent increase since 2002. The 2013 list of
certified USDA organic operations shows an increased rate of domestic growth
within the industry, resuming previous trends.

"Consumer demand for organic products has grown exponentially over the past
decade. With retail sales valued at $35 billion last year, the organic industry
represents a tremendous economic opportunity for farmers, ranchers and rural
communities," said Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack. "New support in the 2014
Farm Bill will enhance USDA's efforts to help producers and small business tap
into this market and support organic agriculture as it continues to grow and
thrive."

USDA has a number of new and expanded efforts to connect organic farmers and
businesses with resources that will ensure the continued growth of the organic
industry domestically and abroad. During this Administration, USDA has signed
three major trade agreements on organic products, first with Canada and then
with the European Union and Japan. Our trading partners are eager to establish
organic equivalency arrangements with the U.S. because they recognize the
strength of the National Organic Program and the value of the USDA organic
label.

USDA is also helping organic stakeholders access programs that support
conservation, provide access to loans and grants, fund organic research and
education, and mitigate pest emergencies. Funds are currently available for
research projects under the National Institute of Food and Agriculture's Organic
Agriculture Research and Extension Initiative to solve critical organic
agriculture issues, priorities, or problems. The program also funds research
projects to enhance the ability of organic producers and processors to grow and
market their products. Additional information is available online, and request
for proposals are due by May 8, 2014.

Additionally, the recently-signed 2014 Farm Bill includes provisions that are a
greater support to the organic community, including:

$20 million annually for dedicated organic research, agricultural extension
programs, and education. The Cooperative Extension System is a nationwide,
non-credit educational network. Every U.S. state and territory has a state
office at its land-grant university and a network of local or regional offices
staffed by experts that provide useful, practical, and research-based
information.
    $5 million to fund data collection on organic agriculture that will give
policymakers, organic farmers, and organic businesses data needed to make sound
policy, business, and marketing decisions
    Expanded options for organic crop insurance to protect farmers
    Expanded exemptions for organic producers who are paying into commodity
"check off" programs, and authority for USDA to consider an application for the
organic sector to establish its own check off
    Improved enforcement authority for the National Organic Program to conduct
investigations
    $5 million for a technology upgrade of the National Organic Program to
provide up-to-date information about certified organic operations across the
supply chain
    $11.5 million annually for certification cost-share assistance, which
reimburses the costs of annual certification for organic farmers and livestock
producers by covering 75 percent of certification costs, up to $750 per year


For more information please visit: http://usda.gov

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              964 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            June 20, 2007 Wednesday

Lexington women's juice company begins to bear fruit

BYLINE: Kathleen Norris Park

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 950  words


Kathy Bates devotes the whole summer away from her job as librarian at Noble
High School to Redland Juice Co., a wholesale business that she owns with her
partner, Jill Stichler. Stichler retired from the National Weather Service to
what she calls "a peaceful pursuit" and something she's always wanted to do -
grow grapes.

But there are plenty of days that are anything but peaceful. The women do almost
all the work in their respective vineyards themselves, pulling in a few
relatives, mostly for harvesting.

"We expect to pick the grapes the first week of August," Bates said. "Then the
juice-making business takes over. Timing is everything in the juice business.
Everything. "

That's in part because they're interrupting a natural process.

"We are trying to keep grape juice from fermenting into wine," Stichler said.
"We pick them and rush them into the refrigerators. If you leave grapes for as
little as three or four hours after picking, they will start to ferment. Before
this year and the new refrigeration units, we had to hustle the grapes into a
rented, refrigerated truck-trailer. We'd have to keep running down to the gas
station to buy diesel to keep it going. It's a race to the finish every year -
between the birds, the bugs, and the black rot, which we have to spray for every
two weeks. "

The women have about 9 acres between Bates' Vineyard at Dripping Springs in
Noble and Stichler's Willow Pond Vineyard in Lexington.

The grapes they grow produce about half the juice they produce. They buy the
rest, mostly from other Oklahoma growers and some from Arkansas, particularly
Concord grapes, which they can't grow here because Oklahoma summer nights are
too hot.

Bottled under the KJ Vineyard label, the juices are 100-percent natural and
non-alcoholic.

"We have about six different kinds of juice," Stichler said. "Concord, my
Chardonnay and Merlot, Kathy's Golden Muscat and Riesling. We both grow Muscat
Canelli, which, with others, is blended into Maiden Oklahoma, our signature
juice and the first one we ever made. "

"We sell to about 50 wineries - almost every winery in Oklahoma - and we're in
some great gift stores," Stichler said. "Like Kaye's, The Painted Door in
Bricktown, which also recently opened a gift shop in the Skirvin Hotel, and the
Oklahoma Travel Centers. Crestview Farms out of Edmond sells our juice at the
OKC Farmer's Market. And Benedict Street Market in Shawnee serves it by the
glass in their restaurant. "

Their business paradigm: a natural product

Bates and Stichler started their juice business in 2002 by buying juice and
reselling it to see if there was a demand for a fully natural product. Then,
starting with a small-farm diversification grant of $2,500 from OSU, they were
able to take their juice to the Food and Agricultural Products Center in
Stillwater.

"They are a group of people that help food producers," said Bates. "They helped
us test our juice in their labs and did lab analyses for us so that we can put
the nutritional facts on our labels. We went there our first year in business
and used their bottling equipment. "

The OSU team continues to provide information and advice on grape growing,
spraying, processing, distribution, costs and profit, and cost-effective ways of
marketing. Designers at FAPC made up the rack card and helped with both the logo
and the Web site.

Both Stichler and Bates have taken classes at OSU and earned two-year
certificates in enology viticulture.

USDA grant

The new 42-by-60-foot building and the attached breezeway to the original
building are the result of a $75,000 value-added producer grant from USDA Rural
Development.

The grant freed their own capital, allowing the women to buy two 300-foot
refrigeration units. The grant also helped by sharing their operating and
marketing expenses. And by matching their tonnage of grapes.

"The purpose of the grant is to help us grow by 100 percent in this one year,
from 25 tons of grapes last year to about 50, or a tad more, this year,"
Stichler said. "The grant will buy 25 tons of grapes, and we'll produce 25 tons.
"

Only two USDA Rural Development grants were given last year in Oklahoma. Bates
and Stichler urge other growers to apply.

This will be the fourth production year for Redland Juice and probably the first
that will make money.

"It's hard to start any kind of business, but especially a food business" said
Stichler. "It's hard to get the word out because ours is in the gift and gourmet
segment, not grocery. "

Bates and Stichler this month attended their first Dallas Gourmet Food Show,
hoping for one or two big customers.

"When you are new in a business, you get to be on the cutting edge or the
bleeding edge - whichever it turns out to be," Bates said.

The grapes, the grapes, the grapes

Stichler's vineyard produces Chardonnay, Merlot, two Concords, two Thompson
Seedless vines, and a few table grapes. She has French Vinifera, a quarter-acre
of Riesling, an acre of Chardonnay, an acre and a half of Merlot, both true
French wine grapes, and a half acre of Muscat Cannelli. Bates' four acres
produce mostly Riesling and Muscat Cannelli.

"The Riesling grapes will be ready about the first week in August," said
Stichler. "Each bunch turns a kind of yellow and will weigh about a quarter
pound when ripe. We measure the sugar content, and when it's between 18 and 20
percent sugar, we pick them. "

"We start picking around 6:30 a.m. until 10:30 a.m. After that, it's too hot,"
said Bates. "We start dropping about then. "

While the women do much of the work themselves, they do bring in some "friends
and kinfolk" for harvesting and hire help for distribution.

Redland Juice Co.

10851 Bryant Rd.

Lexington, OK 73051

(405) 527-9181

http://www.redlandjuice.com

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: New business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              965 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       Moscow-Pullman Daily News (Idaho)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            January 22, 2013 Tuesday

Study finds food hub not feasible for Moscow

BYLINE: Brandon Macz, Moscow-Pullman Daily News, Moscow, Idaho

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 699 words


Jan. 22--A study released Monday showed Latah County could not sustain a
regional value-added food processing facility as an incubator for new
businesses, as many local groups interested in economic development had hoped.

Instead, the consulting firm recommended a focus on filling gaps in nearby fruit
and vegetable production by making possible a year-round farmers market.

Consultants with Manheim Solutions, which conducted the study, said "incubator"
ventures were rarely profitable and survey data showed a lack of interest in
such a facility from producers and purchasers.

"There's a lot of people who will wait and see," said Dan French, primary
researcher for Manheim. "No one thought it was a bad idea, for what that's
worth."

However, the study also found that local food production didn't meet demand in
Latah County for fruit, which has a 326-acre gap in production, and for
vegetables, which has a 2,174-acre gap.

A steering committee spearheaded by the Clearwater Economic Development
Association and Latah Economic Development Council commissioned the study more
than a year ago. Using a USDA rural business enterprise grant, they wanted to
see if a food innovation and resource center could be constructed here.

Additional financial support for the study was provided by Latah County, the
University of Idaho, Moscow Food Co-op, Avista Utilities, LEDC and the Southeast
Washington Economic Development Association.

Fifty percent of producers surveyed for the study stated they were not willing
to go further than 25 miles to process food in an federally certified facility,
which put further constraints on developing a feasible business model, French
said. The greatest level of interest was in favor of a wet kitchen for specialty
foods and producing herbal and honey products.

Regional food innovation centers subsist through research and grants, not on
production alone, French said. Another problem with such facilities is finding
producers who have both food and business experience, he said. Succeeding in
small business is hard enough without dealing with additional regulations and
fickle consumers when it comes to food preferences, he said.

Latah County Commission Chairman Dave McGraw said he agreed such a facility was
risky.

It would require an urban renewal agency or port district to act as a base to
build something like that, said B.J. Swanson, LEDC executive director.

Even with a small-scale facility, French said, its revenue would have to reach
$1 million annually to break even.

"Even if we paint the rosiest picture, even a small scenario doesn't appear to
be a viable option," he said, adding Latah County should focus on cheaper
strategies like growing entrepreneurship and filling agricultural production
gaps. "We're talking about rebuilding the local food economy."

That could be accomplished through a market square, French said, which would
cluster food businesses into an all-season space. The model is similar to what
has been successful in Seattle with its Pike Place Market. He said the Legacy
Crossing Urban Renewal District in Moscow could provide the space, adding
another component could be a community garden nearby for local growers to use.

Moscow Mayor Nancy Chaney said a market place would need to produce a tax
increment to be viable, and suggested UI property within the district could be
used to promote the university's mission to support agriculture.

Deb Smith, CEDA economic specialist and project manager for the committee, said
food hubs are expensive, but the Moscow area would be the best place in the
area. She said growing entrepreneurs in Latah County should be the focus, as
well as showing them how to market and sell products.

The study results will be provided during the second Palouse-Clearwater Food
Summit 9 a.m.-noon Monday at the 1912 Center where more input will be gathered
from local chefs and brought back to the steering committee Feb. 1 for a
decision on how to proceed.

Brandon Macz can be reached at (208) 882-5561, ext. 238, or by email to
bmacz@dnews.com

___ (c)2013 the Moscow-Pullman Daily News (Moscow, Idaho) Visit the
Moscow-Pullman Daily News (Moscow, Idaho) at www.dnews.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130122-1MW-Study-finds-food-hub-not-feasible-for-Moscow-0122-20130122

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1MW


                    Copyright 2013 Moscow-Pullman Daily News


                              966 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            February 12, 2010 Friday

A SUGAR HIGH

BYLINE: Tavia Grant

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: INTERNATIONAL; DAYBOOK / February 12; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 515 words


Sugar prices have more than doubled in the past year and tripled in the past
decade. Global sugar consumption is expected to climb 28 per cent over the next
seven years, according to Czarnikow Group, particularly as income levels rise in
emerging markets. As prices for the sweet stuff flirt with 29-year highs, Tavia
Grant offers a look at the world of sugar:

WHY IT'S UP

Countries such as Egypt and Indonesia are consuming more.

Too much rain in Brazil, the world's largest producer.

Not enough rain in India, causing the world's No. 2 supplier to import sugar.

(Sugar cane grows best in tropical climates with heavy rain in a warm growing
season, followed by a dry period for ripening.)

THE MARKET

Eighty per cent of sugar is consumed in the country where it is produced, the
American Sugar Alliance says.

ETHANOL

Demand for sugar is also driven by the biofuel market. Sugar cane can be turned
into alcohol-based fuel, ethanol. This is used as a gasoline additive or
replacement.

VOICES

"Grocery shoppers shouldn't worry too much about the recent trend...to put this
in perspective, there's only about two-cents worth of sugar in a 99-cent
chocolate bar."

Phillip Hayes, American Sugar Alliance.

"Sugar cane is one of three crops that use the most potash per hectare planted.
So it's important for the fertilizer companies in Canada."

Patricia Mohr, commodity market specialist, Bank of Nova Scotia.

BEET SUGAR

Alberta's Taber area has produced the largest share of the country's beet sugar
since 1951. In recent years, Ontario farmers are starting to grow more sugar
beets. In most parts of Canada, it is still cheaper to buy imported raw sugar
than to produce it.

Ethanol could eventually lift fortunes for Canada's beet sugar industry as
rising energy prices spur demand for ethanol. Ethanol can also be made from
sugar beets.

BIGGEST PRODUCERS 2008, IN MLN TONNES, RAW VALUE

Brazil / 32

India / 26

EU-27 / 16

China / 15

Thailand / 8

BIGGEST CONSUMERS 2008, IN MLN TONNES, RAW VALUE

India / 23

EU-27 / 20

China / 15

Brazil / 12

U.S. / 10

SUGAR SLICES

7.8

Percentage increase in annual sugar prices in Canada's consumer price index as
of December, far outstripping the overall 1.3-per-cent rate of inflation.

9

Canada's ranking among world's largest sugar importers.

70

Percentage of global sucrose that is derived from sugar cane (grown in
hot-weather countries).

30

Percentage of global sucrose that is derived from sugar beets (grown in
cooler-weather countries).

90

Percentage of sugar in Canada that comes from cane, most of which is refined
from raw cane sugar imported from South and Central America, Australia and the
Caribbean.

BIG SUGAR

Cosan Ltd. (Brazil)

Bunge Ltd. (New York-listed)

Cargill Ltd. (Privately held U.S. multinational )

CSR's sugar division (Australia)

Redpath Sugar Ltd., (Toronto) now a unit of American Sugar Refining Inc.

Rogers Sugar Income Fund (Montreal)

GRAPHIC: KATHRYN TAM/THE GLOBE AND MAIL, TEXT: TAVIA GRANT/THE GLOBE AND MAIL //
SOURCES: STATISTICS CANADA; CANADIAN SUGAR INSTITUTE; INTERNATIONAL SUGAR
ORGANIZATION

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              967 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            November 2, 2009 Monday
                                  All Editions

Dollars target organic bread wheat in Maine

BYLINE: SHARON KILEY MACK OF THE NEWS STAFF

SECTION: Pg. A6

LENGTH: 598 words


The University of Maine's sustainable agriculture program, headed by Ellen
Mallory, will share $1.3 million in U.S. Department of Agriculture grant money
with the University of Vermont for research into local organic bread wheat
production.

"To hear the USDA talking about local production is a welcome thing," Mallory
said Friday.

Kathleen Merrigan, deputy U.S. secretary of agriculture, presented the
$1,320,378 grant in Portland. It's one of the largest of 19 announced
nationwide.

Merrigan said the organic wheat market represents a significant economic
opportunity for Maine's farmers.

Mallory explained that a recent trip by a group of Maine farmers, millers and
bakers to Quebec was eye-opening and reaffirmed that a major wheat industry is
possible in Maine.

"They are raising more than 300,000 acres of wheat in Quebec," Mallory said.
"One mill we visited was sourcing from 25,000 acres of wheat when it only had
500 acres just five years ago."

Mallory said the research that the two state universities will pair up on
includes determining which of 10 wheat varieties will do well in Maine's climate
and grow organically.

Research also will be conducted into fertility, disease and management, as well
as developing tools for farmers such as product guides and an online evaluation
system.

"Is Maine as well situated as Kansas and Nebraska for growing wheat? No,"
Mallory said. "The issue here is that there is a large demand in Maine for local
grain." Mallory said 10 researchers at the two universities will be working on
the project.

Merrigan's announcement was made at the Borealis Breads bakery in Portland,
where proprietor Jim Amaral uses locally produced organic wheat.

"That's some good bread by the way," Merrigan said. "The grant will help in the
entire organic wheat circle: Grow it here, mill it here, bake it here and eat it
here."

She said that wheat grown for bread production meets a higher standard than
wheat grown for other foods.

According to USDA, U.S. organic production has more than doubled since the late
1990s, but the consumer market has grown even faster. Organic food sales have
more than quintupled, increasing from $3.6 billion in 1997 to $24.6 billion in
2008. More than two-thirds of U.S. consumers buy organic products at least
occasionally, and 28 percent buy organic products weekly.

"This grant is not just for in-the-lab research," Merrigan said. "It is for
action right in the communities."

She said organic agriculture is one of the fastest-growing segments of U.S.
agriculture and that USDA and Congress, through the 2008 Farm Bill, are
addressing critical organic agriculture issues through the integration of
research, education and extension projects.

More than $19 million in grants were awarded to universities across the country.

"These grants are an important part of USDA's new 'Know Your Farmer, Know Your
Food' initiative, which will help develop local and regional food systems and
spur economic opportunity by assisting organic producers with new production and
marketing practices to meet rising consumer demand," Merrigan said.

She said U.S. producers are turning to certified organic farming systems as a
potential way to lower input costs, decrease reliance on nonrenewable resources,
capture high-value markets and premium prices, and boost farm income.

Research at USDA increasingly focuses on the science that supports development
of sustainable practices in agriculture and forestry, including organic farming,
to both reduce negative impacts on the environment and keep U.S. farmers
competitive.

sunrisecounty@bangordailynews.net

255-0618

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2009 Bangor Daily News


                              968 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                           November 29, 2012 Thursday

Reply: Letter: The right targets for EU subsidies

BYLINE: DBC Reed

SECTION: GUARDIAN LEADER PAGES; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 307 words


It is alarming that George Monbiot is promoting the anti-farming rhetoric of
19th-century laissez-faire (A euros 50bn bung that enriches landowners and kills
wildlife, 27 November). Karl Marx himself pointed out that the abolition of the
corn laws was an industrialists' ruse to lower wages in Britain by importing
cheap, mass-produced food from foreign and colonial partners. And so it proved.

After the destruction of British agriculture, and the overcrowding of ex-farm
workers in slum-ridden towns, the beginning of the 20th century brought the
results of prolonged malnutrition, when half the British recruits for the Boer
war were rejected for being too unfit or simply too small to bear arms, in a war
that was a prelude to those in which the UK faced starvation for producing only
a third of its food.

After the two world wars, the UK lost the foreign investments and imperial
preference markets the industrialists had been pressing the country to fight
for. It is not as if neocolonial food-exporting countries benefit: the Via
Campersina and Food Sovereignty movements struggle to point out that big-scale
food and commodity exports put the local subsistence farmers out of work
because, under free trade, they get dumped on by big foreign food producers in
their turn.

The global model Monbiot is supporting is one where industrial corporations are
interlocked with international agribusiness serving only themselves. If Monbiot
is worried by the enrichment of big landowners, he should argue for land value
tax, which would ensure common agricultural policy subsidies go into food
production by preventing them being diverted into the owners' land values. The
choice remains: subsidise home-grown food producers or subsidise industrialists
to pay skinflint wages in unsustainable industries in fractured communities.

DBC Reed

Northampton

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              969 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                      North Shore News (British Columbia)

                              July 17, 2015 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Star power; Writing the music for Compostela was a healing process for Jenn
Grant

BYLINE: Erin McPheeee, North Shore News

SECTION: MUSIC; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 1157 words


Jenn Grant at the Vancouver Folk Music Festival, held at Jericho Beach Park,
Friday to Sunday (July 17-19). Concert: Saturday at 1:40 p.m. Workshops: Friday
at 3:35 p.m., Saturday at 11 a.m., and Sunday at 12:20 p.m. Tickets and info:
thefestival.bc.ca.

When writing the music for her latest album, Compostela, singer-songwriter Jenn
Grant fully committed herself to the process, challenging herself to keep her
heart open in hopes the resulting songs might inspire and offer solace to others
similarly embarking on a journey of healing in the wake of personal tragedy.

Having lost her mother in 2012 at the young age of 62 to breast cancer, Grant,
now 34, set out to honour her spirit with something beautiful, and to allow her
goodness to come through in all the songs, whether they were directly about her
or not.

"After having gone through a traumatic experience of losing the person that you
love, it felt like the right thing to do for me would be to put out something
beautiful and open, and that would be a full-circle healing process for me where
I could move on from all this in a good way," says the PEI native who currently
calls Lake

Echo, N.S., home.

Grant is proud of the record, her fifth full-length studio album to date, and
feels like she accomplished her goal, encouraged by continued positive comments
from a grateful and supportive audience.

"I know that it's helped other people because I meet people on the street who
tell me their life stories and talk to me about things about healing and it
makes me feel like I've done something of value with that experience. I feel
really lucky to have been able to use music for something good or healing," she
says.

Reached Tuesday from Los Angeles, Calif., the multiple Juno Award nominee and
East Coast Music Awards winner was gearing up to kick off a string of western
dates with a show that evening. Having maintained a busy touring schedule since
Compostela's release in the fall, including a spring tour in Europe, she's
coming to Vancouver this weekend to perform at the 38th annual Vancouver Folk
Music Festival, running today through Sunday at Jericho Beach Park. Others on
the bill include Phosphorescent, Said the Whale, Lindi Ortega, The Sadies, Paulo
Flores and Old Man Luedecke.

Grant, who previously played the folk festival in 2008, is slated to perform at
three workshops over the course of the weekend, and will take centre stage for a
solo performance Saturday at 1:40 p.m. Joining her for the performance is her
husband and producer Daniel Ledwell on guitars, drummer Mike Meadows and bassist
Tavo Diez de Bonilla.

Compostela marks a new approach for the artist. In addition to wanting to honour
her mother, Grant approached the recording project with an interest in focusing
more strongly on storytelling and lyrics. To do so, she studied the works of
artists Father John Misty, Rodriguez and Damien Jurado.

"I kind of put myself on a diet of listening to those records so that I could be
inspired. I'm kind of a bit of a chameleon," she says.

While her resulting record doesn't sound like any of the other artists' per se,
it could be described as a cousin of sorts due to their felt influence, she
says.The album's title is a translation of "field of stars," referencing Spain's
El Camino de Santiago and the associated legend suggesting the dust from the
pilgrims who walk the renowned trail goes on to comprise the stars in the Milky
Way. Grant spent some time in Spain following her mother's passing and says it
was there that her writing process began, the songs starting to percolate in her
head.Joining her as producer on Compostela is her husband of four years, Daniel
Ledwell. They recorded the album mainly in their home studio and it marks the
third they've done together."Working with Danny, it's been really interesting
and rewarding," says Grant."Work and life, there really isn't a division. We're
just starting to try to, every once and a while, take a few days away from the
Internet and work of any kind. Because, I'm finding that I'm really craving that
sense of just unattachment I think of online stuff and that's been really good
for us. I think when you do that you are re-inspired and you just come out
fresher," she adds.Grant enjoys watching her husband, an award-winning producer
and multi-instrumentalist, work with other artists. "I can see him broadening
his horizons," she says of his own burgeoning career. Examples of artists
Ledwell has recently been working with include Justin Rutledge and Mama Kin - a
fellow 2015 Vancouver Folk Music Festival performer.

Joining Grant on Compostela are close to a dozen special guests - Sarah Harmer,
Buck 65, Ron Sexsmith, Rose Cousins and her brother Daniel on charango to name a
few. Grant relishes the opportunity to express herself through music alongside
artists she's inspired by. "I think it adds a layer of celebration to something
when you have friends and mentors. .. part of your project. It gives it some
wings," she says.

As for her next album, which she hopes to begin work on more seriously next
year, Grant has already started penning some new material.

"It's coming from a different place than Compostela," she says.

"I'm not going to play any of it yet, but I'm really excited about it. I've been
writing it on piano.. .. It's definitely different than what I've been doing,"
she says, of yet another direction she's considering pursuing.

In addition to her current solo tour, another focus of Grant's is her new side
project, Aqua Alta, formed as a result of her contributions to Rich Terfry/Buck
65's album 20 Odd Years. For the new group, Grant joined forces with two fellow
contributors to Terfry's 2011 record, producer Graeme Campbell and recording
engineer and musician Charles Austin.

Aqua Alta's musical direction is different than that of Grant's typical style,
described by Austin as "country music for aliens," merging beats and synth pop
offerings from

Campbell and Austin, with Grant's vocal melodies and lyrics. The trio recently
released its debut, Dreamsphere, and has about 10 shows under its belt so far
with more to come.

"I really like working with those guys," says Grant, who says a potential
follow-up release is already in their sights.

Grant is looking forward to performing at this weekend's Vancouver Folk Music
Festival. Today (Friday) at 3:35 p.m. she's set to take the stage for a workshop
with Hawksley Workman, Jasper Sloan Yip and Fortunate Ones entitled Cross
Country Checkup. Saturday morning she'll join Workman again, along with Matthew
and Jill Barber for The Cure for Everything at 11 a.m. "I know those guys really
well. Hawksley I've toured with a few times, and Matt and I did a tour together
last fall when my record just came out, and I've been friends with Jill for 10
years. So that's awesome, I'm really excited," she says.

Sunday, in Messin' with the Wrong Heart, Grant will perform alongside Frazey
Ford, Lucius and Basia Bulat at 12:20 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO SUPPLIED DeeDee Morris; Jenn Grant performs at the Vancouver Folk
Music Festival at Jericho Beach Park on Saturday. Other artists playing at this
year's festival include Phosphorescent, Said the Whale, Lindi Ortega, The
Sadies, Paulo Flores and Old Man Luedecke.; PHOTO SUPPLIED DeeDee Morris;  The
title of Jenn Grant's latest album Compostela means "field of stars" in
Spanish.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 North Shore News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              970 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 16, 1986 Thursday

Canadian raspberries freed from U.S. duty

BYLINE: Canadian Press

SECTION: ROB; Pg. B19

LENGTH: 337 words


A U.S. countervailing duty imposed nearly three months ago on raspberry
 imports from Canada has been suspended because the British Columbia
 Government has scrapped a farm income insurance program for raspberry
 producers.

The move is expected to provide some relief for Canadian exporters,
 although they still face a separate dumping duty that they are appealing
 in U.S. courts.

About $6-million worth of Canadian raspberries were sold in the U.S.
 market in 1984.

The International Trade Commission, a quasi-judicial U.S. agency, and
 the International Trade Administration, a wing of the U.S. Commerce
 Department, have suspended their investigations into the raspberry
 imports. Parties involved in the trade dispute have until Jan. 29 to
 request a resumption of the probe, which was called to investigate whether
 the countervailing duty imposed last October should be made permanent.

The duty of 0.99 per cent was calculated to offset the benefit that
 U.S. trade investigators said Canadian producers were receiving through
 the B.C. farm income insurance program. The Commerce Department ruled in
 October that the program was providing a subsidy that should be offset by
 the duty.

Since then, the B.C. Government scrapped the insurance benefits at the
 request of B.C. producers. That led to the agreement by U.S. trade
 authorities to suspend the duty and the investigations. Meanwhile, the
 Canadian raspberry growers are fighting a separate duty imposed by the two
 trade regulatory agencies for dumping - selling at less than fair value.
 Those duties, assessed on the border value of fresh and frozen
 raspberries, range from 0.3 per cent to 25.8 per cent, depending on the
 exporting company.

Canadian producers are appealing the dumping duties in the U.S. Court
 of International Trade in New York, where hearings are scheduled for later
 this month.

Complaints against Canadian imports were lodged in July, 1984, by nine
 organizations representing U.S. raspberry growers, packers and food
 processors, mostly in northwestern states.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1986 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              971 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                      Courier Mail (Queensland, Australia)

                           January 15, 2005 Saturday

Offer fails to entice many sugar growers

BYLINE: Robin Pash

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 484 words


STRUGGLING sugar farmers are largely ignoring a Federal Government lifeline to
help them leave the industry.

New figures show just 25 producers have taken up the offer of compensation to
get out of sugar farming, with a peak growers' group blaming tough selection
criteria for the poor response.

The re-establishment grants were a key element of the Government's $444 million
sugar industry reform package announced last April. Figures from the office of
federal Agriculture Minister Warren Truss show 25 growers have accepted grants
of up to $100,000 to either leave sugar farming for at least five years or get
out of the industry permanently.

Most of the growers who took up the grants were from Queensland, with a few from
NSW. Only four professional sugar harvesters -- who are also eligible for the
grants -- have taken up the offer so far.

The Government set aside up to $96 million over three years for the
re-establishment grants to help make the industry more efficient.

Only $2.5 million has been spent so far.

"It's just not working," Australian Cane Farmers Association chairman Ross
Walker said.

"There are a lot of very desperate farmers who want to leave the industry but
they're trapped, and this package is not really helping an orderly restructuring
at all."

Mr Walker said the main problem was tough criteria, including a maximum house
and contents value of $217,500 set in order for farmers to qualify.

"A house in town costs $300,000 or $400,000 these days so farmers are just
saying they're better off staying where they and growing a few vegetables. The
Government needs to have a fresh look at this."

But a spokeswoman for Mr Truss said the re-establishment grants were generous,
and denied the Cane Farmers Association's claim that the Government had hoped
hundreds of growers would leave the industry. Rates of uptake in such
demand-driven programs were notoriously difficult to forecast, she said.

"In planning the Sugar Industry Reform Program, the Government had no particular
target regarding the number of sugar growers and harvesters likely to exit the
industry," the spokeswoman said.

"The minister has always made it clear that it is up to individuals to consider
their own futures carefully in regard to staying in the industry or deciding to
leave. The criteria for the re-establishment grant are among the most generous
of any package made available to primary producers."

Mr Walker said another part of the sugar package was also failing -- the
Intergenerational Transfer scheme that was supposed to make it easier for farms
to be handed from one generation to the next.

When its $444 million sugar package was announced last April, the Government
provided a three-year "holiday window" from normal gifting provisions that apply
to the aged pension, setting aside $23 million for the scheme over four years.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: CML

                   Copyright 2005 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              972 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Farmers Weekly

                                 April 11, 2008

Finishing time cut by 70 days and liveweight up 30kg

BYLINE: jeremy hunt

SECTION: LIVESTOCK

LENGTH: 853 words



HIGHLIGHT: High performance bulls bought through as aresult of a farmer
education initiative have boosted returns for Northern Irish beef producers


Trying to make savings on feed costs is high on the agenda of every beef
finisher this year. But some Northern Ireland producers cut the finishing period
by 70 days last year, even though cattle gained an extra 30kg.

It was worth almost £150 a head - and this year it will be worth more than £200.
The reason? Using bulls with high EBV figures.

The EU funded Beef Quality Initiative - based on a hefty £6m grant - has just
come to the end of its five-year programme, which subsidised the purchase of
performance recorded bulls to 900 Northern Ireland beef producers.

Farmers who were able to claim back 50% of the purchase price of high-ranking
bulls have reaped the benefits, says beef and sheep development adviser Kieran
Mailey, who is based at Greenmount College.

"Northern Ireland beef production needed to improve in terms of better
performance of finishing cattle and a planned approach to breeding suckler herd
replacement females.

"The project's aim was to achieve that by helping producers get a real grasp of
what performance recorded figures mean and how they could apply them in their
own herds. There's no doubt our beef sector has made a huge leap as a result of
the BQI scheme," says Mr Mailey.

Two Charolais bulls were used on the hill farm run by Greenmount College in
2006. One was an elite bull (top 1% for growth, muscle and beef value) and the
other had an average ranking for the same traits.

"While there was a £75 difference in the value of the carcasses produced by the
two bulls [see table below], having cattle killed 74 days earlier achieved an
estimated saving of £74 from less feed consumed at a cost of £1 a day," Mr
Mailey adds.

"When that was added to the actual margin earned by the progeny of the elite
bull, it was worth a total extra income of £149 a head. That saving would be
considerably more now based on the big increase in feed costs.

"Almost 2000 beef producers completed the BQI learning programme and 900 went on
to buy a high genetic merit bull. And when questioned after assessing the
performance of the bulls' progeny we found that 88% said they would buy another
Elite or Super ranked sire," he says.

Farmers who joined the BQI programme had to attend a series of training days and
produce a breeding plan for their own herd. They were then eligible to join the
subsidised bull purchase scheme to acquire either Superior or Elite ranked
sires.

jh@jeremyhuntassociates.com

Using high performance bulls has resulted in carcasses yielding 30kg more weight
and an improved margin of £75.

Using figures to help select bulls takes the guesswork out of buying decisions,
says Stephen Heenan, Clough, Co Down.

Case Study

Tony Griffith

Saintfield, Co Down


     ·    A big rise in daily liveweight gain - up to 1.43kg - has been achieved
          by calves bred in Tony Griffith's 65-cow herd at Saintfield House
          Estate, Saintfield, Co Down.


The Charolais bull used in the herd, after Mr Griffiths' involvement in the Beef
Quality Initiative, is inthe breed's top 25% on performance.

"Calves by the high EBV sire were averaging 1.1kg overtheir first 16 weeks
compared with 0.98kg by our other stock bull.

"The trend continued last year. Progeny of the performance recorded bull
averaged 1.43kg over the first four months compared with other calves' 1.3kg,"
says Mr Griffiths.

The BQI programme was also aimed at improving the ability to breed better
replacement heifers after taking account of a bull's maternal traits as well as
growth.

"Fertility, temperament and milking ability are our main criteriafor herd
replacements. We'vetraditionally bought-in replacements, but last year we
retained some of the bull's heifers. He's in the breed's top 25% for milk, so
we're hoping we can benefit from that."

Case Study

Stephen Heenan

Clough, Co Down


     ·    An investment of 6500gns in a Charolais bull that is in the breed's
          top 1% for muscle and the top 5% for growth, has brought a significant
          improvement in the growth rates of suckled calves in the 100-cow herd
          of Stephen Heenan, Parkview Farm, Clough, Co Down.


The system run on his 100-acre unit depends heavily on grass rather than
bought-in feeds, a policy he felt required greater emphasis on sires with
genetic performance superiority.

"Once you've learned how to interpret the figures and grasped how to use them
you begin to realise that you have something that can take the guesswork out of
buying a bull. You've got something to go by to back up your own visual
assessment," says Mr Heenan.

He made his 6500gns purchase at Perth, buying a bull from the Balthayock herd by
leading breed sire Dingle Hoffmeister. Latest results show the average carcass
weights of the bull's steer progeny - bred predominantly out of Limousin-cross
cows - were 372kg at 24 months giving an average daily gain of 0.94kg from birth
to slaughter.

Heifers achieved a 320kg carcass weight at 21 months, with bulls averaging 360kg
at 14 months. "Steers we sold last autumn at 16 months averaged 1.2kg a day
liveweight gain . And in addition to the improved performance, we have benefited
from the bull's easy-calving trait, which has not only reduced calf losses, but
made a big saving on labour."

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2008 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              973 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                             June 30, 2009 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Hits a wrong note

BYLINE: Guy Annable, The Ottawa Citizen

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 171  words


Re: Throwing parties with your money, June 28.

Thanks, Randall Denley, for taking the federal government to task for the
$338,000 grant from the marquee tourism events program grant that was rushed and
spent two days before the Ottawa International Jazz Festival concert.

I asked myself the same question: what is the true value that this grant will
really produce?

While I appreciate the great lengths that jazz festival executive producer
Catherine O'Grady went to plug her schedule hole, I doubt the concert attracted
much incremental tourism business to the capital city.

I am glad to see that investigative journalism is still alive at the Citizen and
that Denley read between the lines on information about this grant that clearly
shows no value for the stimulus dollars spent unless you are the performing
musician from New Orleans.

I imagine that the premium paid for this last-minute concert was very dear
indeed and his rate for the late booking was much higher than the normal the
musician usually charges.

Guy Annable, Nepean

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2009 Ottawa Citizen, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                              974 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                       The Gazette (Tasmania, Australia)

                            April 15, 2015 Wednesday
                                Gazette Edition

Beef producers win scholarship

BYLINE: ROGER HANSON

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 387  words


ON the steep hills sloping towards the River Derwent at Plenty, the 102ha
Settlers Point farm has been awarded a scholarship to continue its sustainable
farming development.

Rebecca Lynd and her partner Rebecca Tudor have been awarded a Sprout Tasmania
producers program scholarship to assist their continued drive towards
ethically-raised animals on their business Big River Highland Beef.

The one-year Sprout Tasmania program puts producers through an induction,
on-farm visits, online educational units and mentoring from experts in small
business, value-adding, food quality, agriculture, horticulture, freight and
logistics.

Their farm produces rare-breed Scottish Highland cattle, Wessex saddleback pigs
and a pair of heritage registered Waler horses. The Waler is an Australian breed
of riding horse developed from horses brought to the Australian colonies in the
19th century. Walers were the type of horse used by light horsemen in the Middle
East during WW1.

Scottish Highlands are well suited to free-ranging in Tasmania's climate and
farm landscape which has no reliance on irrigation or handfeeding.

"We love the Scottish Highland, not only are they gorgeous cattle, but they are
a traditional old-style hardy browsing breed that can live on the side of a
hill. They are docile, good calving and pest- resistant animal," Ms Lynd said.

Scottish Highland cattle are a slow-growing, rare breed that are viable to
slaughter after about four years.

Highland cattle are deceptive in size appearance, even though they are not tall,
with bulls weighing more than 800kg.

For the past seven months, they have been testing a program to provide premium
beef to the local domestic market and high-end restaurants and cafes.

"The meat tastes like real beef, nothing else like it, it reminds me of just how
beef tasted when I was growing up.

"Their meat has superior marbling and flavour. These factors mean our product is
marketed as unique, grass-fed, premium beef." Ms Lynd said their "nose to tail"
philosophy involved working with the natural assets of the breed and land to
deliver minimal inputs over the lifespan of the cattle to avoid waste in the
process. Cattle are processed at a nearby abattoir.

Details on Big River Highland Beef's Facebook page or
www.sprout.org.au.Morerural stories in Tasmanian Country, out every Friday

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: The Gazette


                   Copyright 2015 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              975 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                               Leicester mercury

                                 April 9, 2002

Have van, will deliver organic food

BYLINE: A. Marston

SECTION: Features; General; Advertorials; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 497 words


Reducing the miles that food travels to local people is an idea which has led to
the foundation of Farmshop Home Delivery, a business recently set up in the Vale
of Belvoir.  And directors lan Jalland and David Rose now plan to extend the
concept to other centres in the East Midlands, with the help of a GBP 300,000
government development grant under the Rural Enterprise Scheme.

Farmshop Home Delivery is located at Swan Lodge, Upper Broughton, near Melton
Mowbray.

It has created links with nearly 40 local producers, and sells foods ranging
from fruit and free-range chickens to honey and hand-made bread.

Customers place orders by phone, fax or e-mail and regular weekly deliveries are
made by van. A freefone telephone number has paid dividends, says Mr Jalland.

"We have three types of customer. The 'light greens' are environmentally aware
and shop with us because they believe in cutting food miles by buying locally
and because we re-cycle our delivery boxes and offer a complete range of organic
meats and vegetables.

"Then there are the affluent executive customers who are looking for quality and
foods which are fully traceable back to the farm or producer in our area.

"Thirdly, the over 60s shop with us on taste because they like to have food the
way it used to be and our delivery service is convenient for them. They can buy
large amounts of heavy or bulky foods without worrying about the transport." All
three of the consumer groups believe in supporting local suppliers, adds Ian,
who has converted a redundant barn at Swan Lodge into offices and warehousing.

Farmshop Home Delivery is now staffed by three people in addition to the two
directors.

A former dairy, Swan Lodge is run as an arable/mixed farm by lan's father,
Robert.  In addition, his sister Amanda operates an equestrian centre on the
site.

"We are now looking into supplying higher value products such as ready-prepared
meals," adds Ian. "We are also interested in getting more producers of items
such as butter, fish and free-range chickens." Shares are available for private
investors and there are also opportunities for people who want to form strategic
partnerships to start up similar operations elsewhere in Leicestershire and
beyond.

Duncan Hopwood, spokesman for Business Link for Leicestershire which assists new
enterprises, says no idea should be overlooked when starting up a business.

"Finding a gap early in a growing market can be very profitable, and there are
many advantages to a mobile service, particularly for a busy household.

"The current demand for fresh, locally produced goods also makes this type of
service a viable option. It is a good idea to keep on eye on current trends
demand for organic foods has been increasing steadily over the last few years."
A TASTE OF HONEY: Ian Jalland, co-founder of Farmshop Home Delivery, offers a
variety of locally produced products ranging from fruit and free-range chickens
to honey and bread

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002

LANGUAGE: English

                        Copyright 2002 Leicester mercury


                              976 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                             April 4, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Bread for sale at 6 cents a loaf

BYLINE: The Leader-Post

SECTION: BUSINESS & AGRICULTURE; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 208  words


A Saskatchewan farm group will sell loaves of bread for pennies outside the
Legislative Building on Wednesday morning to show consumers why producers are in
an income crisis.

The Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan (APAS) event, to be held
at 10 a.m., coincides with a giant "solidarity rally" in Ottawa, which is
expected to bring thousands of farmers to Parliament Hill.

Organizers say they hope Regina residents take away more than just cheap
Saskatchewan-produced bread.

At six cents a loaf, the price reflects the amount a producer receives for
producing the necessary wheat, said the APAS.

Association president Ken McBride said short-term help is needed to keep the
industry afloat until strategies are in place to put more value back into the
pockets of producers.

The group calculates that a farmer actually loses the equivalent of two cents
per loaf of bread for producing the wheat that's necessary. That means producers
actually subsidize the consumer in Canada, while in the U.S. the government
subsidizes the producer, said APAS policy manager Marvin Shauf.

Agriculture Canada has forecast a negative realized net farm income for
Saskatchewan this year of $200 million, as producers face low commodity prices
and rising costs.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2006 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              977 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 20, 2014 Thursday

Arkansas: USDA announces growth of U.S. organic industry, additional USDA
support available with new farm bill

LENGTH: 671  words

DATELINE: Little Rock


Arkansas Farm Bureau, The State of Arkansas has issued the following news
release:

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) announced new figures today that show
the organic industry continues to grow domestically and globally, with over
25,000 certified organic operations in more than 120 different countries around
the world.

Through the Agricultural Marketing Service's National Organic Program, USDA has
helped an additional 763 producers become certified organic in just 2013, an
increase of 4.2 percent from the previous year. The industry today encompasses a
record breaking 18,513 certified organic farms and businesses in the United
States alone, representing a 245 percent increase since 2002. The 2013 list of
certified USDA organic operations shows an increased rate of domestic growth
within the industry, resuming previous trends.

"Consumer demand for organic products has grown exponentially over the past
decade. With retail sales valued at $35 billion last year, the organic industry
represents a tremendous economic opportunity for farmers, ranchers and rural
communities," said Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack. "New support in the 2014
Farm Bill will enhance USDA's efforts to help producers and small business tap
into this market and support organic agriculture as it continues to grow and
thrive."

USDA has a number of new and expanded efforts to connect organic farmers and
businesses with resources that will ensure the continued growth of the organic
industry domestically and abroad. During this Administration, USDA has signed
three major trade agreements on organic products, first with Canada and then
with the European Union and Japan. Our trading partners are eager to establish
organic equivalency arrangements with the U.S. because they recognize the
strength of the National Organic Program and the value of the USDA organic
label.

USDA is also helping organic stakeholders access programs that support
conservation, provide access to loans and grants, fund organic research and
education, and mitigate pest emergencies. Funds are currently available for
research projects under the National Institute of Food and Agriculture's Organic
Agriculture Research and Extension Initiative to solve critical organic
agriculture issues, priorities, or problems. The program also funds research
projects to enhance the ability of organic producers and processors to grow and
market their products. Additional information is available online, and request
for proposals are due by May 8, 2014.

Additionally, the recently-signed 2014 Farm Bill includes provisions that are a
greater support to the organic community, including:

$20 million annually for dedicated organic research, agricultural extension
programs, and education. The Cooperative Extension System is a nationwide,
non-credit educational network. Every U.S. state and territory has a state
office at its land-grant university and a network of local or regional offices
staffed by experts that provide useful, practical, and research-based
information.
 $5 million to fund data collection on organic agriculture that will give
policymakers, organic farmers, and organic businesses data needed to make sound
policy, business, and marketing decisions
 Expanded options for organic crop insurance to protect farmers
 Expanded exemptions for organic producers who are paying into commodity "check
off" programs, and authority for USDA to consider an application for the organic
sector to establish its own check off
 Improved enforcement authority for the National Organic Program to conduct
investigations
 $5 million for a technology upgrade of the National Organic Program to provide
up-to-date information about certified organic operations across the supply
chain
 $11.5 million annually for certification cost-share assistance, which
reimburses the costs of annual certification for organic farmers and livestock
producers by covering 75 percent of certification costs, up to $750 per year


For further information please visit: http://www.arfb.coma

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              978 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                            Concord Times (Freetown)

                               December 10, 2015

RPSDP, World Bank Begin Impact Assessment Today

BYLINE: Samuel Ben Turay

LENGTH: 378 words


The Rural and Private Sector Development Programme (RPSDP) and the World Bank
office in Sierra Leone will today begin a two-day media and communication field
trip assess the impact of implementation of the programme in districts across
the country.

Speaking at a meeting yesterday at their Siaka Stevens Street offices in
Freetown, RPSDP Grant Manager, Alimamy Kargbo said the programme is government
owned and operates under the Ministries of Agriculture, Forestry and Food
Security and Trade and Industries, with support from the World Bank.

"We are happy to do this assessment, to see what impact the project has
created," said Kargbo, adding that the objectives of the programme are to
improve efficiency along the value chain of agricultural commodities with higher
benefits flowing to the producers.

He said the project has four components - domestic marketing improvement, which
aims at improving domestic distribution channels for selected agricultural
products in a bid to improve the ability of farmers and traders to market their
goods in Freetown and other large domestic markets; agricultural export
promotion, which will provide the necessary tools and services for promoting
export of commodities such as cocoa, coffee, cashew, oil palm, cassava and
ginger. The component will support export promotion initiative for the said
commodities, identified as promising for export by the Diagnostic Trade
Integration Study (DTIS). Target beneficiaries include producers, exporters and
private enterprises in the value chain.

He identified the other components as support to farmer-based organisations and
technology improvement, with an aim to increasing farmers' access to improved
agricultural technology and practices to support quality improvement in
commodities supported under the first two components, and strategic studies to
identify support for additional commodities and markets, targeting rural
producers; while the last component will entail policy regulations, project
management, monitoring, evaluation and policy regulations.

In a brief statement, World Bank Communications Consultant Ahmed Sahad Nasralla
said the trip would be documented for future projects, and admonished both the
RPSDP and the media team to capture issues that would make stories.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              979 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                     News Bites - Australian Stock Exchange

                            August 4, 2005 Thursday

SEDIMENTARY HOLDINGS TAKES ST ARNAUD GOLDFIELD OPTION

LENGTH: 209 words


Sedimentary Holdings Ltd has entered into an agreement with private interests in
respect of the St Arnaud goldfield in northwest Victoria.

The agreement incorporates an option to purchase the tenements outright if a
mining lease is granted to Sedimentary, allowing mining to proceed within the
area of EL4363 (under application).

Gold was first found at St Arnaud in 1855 and the field was a continuous
producer until 1916 when like Ballarat the mines closed during World War 1. In
that time over 12 tonnes of gold were produced from the underground mines at a
recovered gold grade of over 15 gpt.

The Lord Nelson mine was the main producer with a recorded production of 322,401
ozs to a depth of 786m over a strike length of about 200m.

Following grant of the tenement Sedimentary plans to drill test for high grade
shoots of ore beneath and along strike from the previous workings.

STOCK DASHBOARD: AUGUST 3, 2005

SEDIMENTARY HOLDINGS

Closing Price: 20.5c

Price change from previous trading day: +2.5%

Relative Strength (6 months percentile rank): 28.6

Market capitalisation: $57.88 million

Turnover volume: 838,300

Volume Index (1 is average): 1.9

Turnover value: $171,276

Turnover period: 657 days

Value of $1,000 invested 1 year ago: $932

Source: www.BuySellTips.com

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Capacity/Facilities

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2005 News Bites Pty Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                         Australian Company News Bites


                              980 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                          The Courier Mail (Australia)

                             April 22, 2008 Tuesday
                        1 - First with the news Edition

The recipe for success

BYLINE: Michael Lund

SECTION: GOOD LIFE; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 2247  words


Love of food is only one of the ingredients in the creation of a successful food
business, writes Michael Lund

IS IT your dream to run your own business growing, making or selling the foods
you love?

Perhaps you have the perfect product; the tastiest cheese, the most delicious
dips or the smoothest of wines?

Or maybe you just want to market your own food products that have already found
favour -- and flavour -- among your family and friends.

The good news is that many people in Queensland are already doing just that. The
bad news is that it can be hard making the start, and attracting the money
needed to keep things going.

Take a look in any supermarket or speciality store and the shelves are packed
with thousands of products all vying for the shopper dollar.

The best advice from those who've already found success in the food industry is
to find something that consumers want. It's no good trying to market something
if nobody's interested. Faced with competition from overseas where labour costs
are cheap, a second key to success is to find your niche in the market place and
then concentrate on producing a high quality product.

The Queensland Government says consumers are prepared to pay more for quality,
and that's where many of the most successful new industries have tended to
concentrate.

Adding value

SELLING apples was not enough for David Sutton. He and wife Roslyn were growing
apples on a 12-hectare property just north of Stanthorpe, in the heart of
Queensland's Granite Belt, and selling them to markets across the southeast.
``We were getting such poor prices at the markets,'' he says.

They needed to do something else if they were going to make enough to stay in
business.

The buzz word in the food industry is to ``value add'' so they decided to turn
many of the apples into apple juice.

To buy the juicing equipment David Sutton says he bypassed the banks and secured
a cheaper $40,000 loan from the Queensland Rural Adjustment Authority, set up by
the State Government to help rural and small businesses. That was about seven
years ago and he says a lot of patience was needed in the early days as the
return on their investment was slow.

``In our first year we probably sold 3000 to 4000 bottles,'' Sutton says. ``Last
year we sold about 40,000 bottles, and it's growing about 50 per cent each
year.''

Now Sutton's Juice Factory & Cidery sells a wide range of premium apple juices,
ciders, brandies and other fruit liqueurs as well as a range of seasonal fruits.

You won't find his products in the supermarkets though and Sutton likes it that
way. The bulk is sold via mail order, the rest sold direct from the property, or
through speciality shops and restaurants.

He's now looking to diversify even more and his plans include opening a cafe
outlet.

Aside from any government help, he says networking groups such as the Queensland
Food and Beverage Industry are useful in bringing together people in the food
industry to swap and share ideas, and even forge new deals for products.

The right advice

FOOD is big business in Queensland, worth about $15 billion a year and employing
more than 43,000 people.

There are more than 1400 companies -- from large to small -- involved in food
production and processing and the State Government is keen to encourage more by
marketing the state as a ``Food Hub''.

It recently reformed the Food Industry Advisory Council to keep ministers
informed with the latest developments and demands.

One of the council members is food consultant and writer Alison Alexander, who's
been involved in promoting the state's food industry for years. David Sutton
credits her with helping develop his apple juice business. ``Alison tells you if
something is a bad idea,'' he says. ``It's no good producing something that
people don't want.''

Alexander says too many new food businesses fail because people have not done
their homework to see if there's a demand for their product.

``If there's some way that we (the advisory council) can help find markets, then
we can help,'' she says.

She's a firm believer in ``value adding'' to produce quality products that
consumers want and cites Queensland's wine and cheese industries as recent
success stories. ``The wines that are coming out of Queensland, there's some
fantastic examples,'' she says.

For the love of food

FACED with competition from the wine giants in southern states, the Queensland
Wine Industry Association says the local industry is marketed more as a tourism
attraction to bring visitors into the wine-producing regions.

President Grant Casley says the state's wine producers tend to concentrate on
quality over quantity, with cellar door sales favoured over sales in bottle
shops.

``It's challenging,'' he says, although he admits he produces wine from the
Casley Mount Hutton Winery, in Stanthorpe, more for passion than for big
profits.

It's a similar story for the seven prominent business partners -- including
master winemaker Andrew Corrigan -- who last year took over the Hidden Creek
Vineyard, at nearby Ballandean.

One of the partners, Jim Barnes, quit his job as a teacher after 22 years and
studied a degree in wine science as part of his commitment to do something
different. ``I didn't want to work in the big companies or anything like that,''
says Barnes. ``Wine making on the Granite Belt seemed ideal.''

Again the focus is on making the best wines they can to develop the brand rather
than reap any rich rewards. The partners have done it alone, says Barnes,
without tapping into any government grants.

``I live very frugally,'' he laughs. ``Obviously we want the thing to make money
but we're not going to starve if it doesn't.''

Passion over profits

THIS theme is common among many small businesses in the food industry. They grow
and produce the foods they do because they love doing it, with the aim of making
enough to survive rather than to secure huge profits.

Some help to promote products comes from State Government-funded stalls at trade
and consumer shows, with a number of Queensland producers invited to take part
at discounted prices.

``Certainly the cost of doing a stall on our own was prohibitive,'' says
Kingaroy Cheese's Chris Ganzer. The benefits, he says, are being part of a
Queensland branding on quality food products, which does lead to the
all-important increased sales.

His operation started with investment from friends and local businesses. ``We
still speak to each other,'' he says.

His aim is to grow the business to the point where in several years time his
brand may be attractive for a takeover.

``There's a passion in the product and a desire to see it grow,'' says Ganzer.
``Money is not what motivates me personally.''

What helped his business to grow was finding someone to help promote and
distribute his products, which allowed him to concentrate on making the cheese.
That help comes from Black Pearl Epicure, based in Brisbane's Fortitude Valley
and founded by managing director Babak Hadi.

Hadi says he's the middle-man between the producers and the end users, usually
the restaurant industry , which demands high standards. ``There are small
producers that are making great products but marketing is a completely different
ball game to them,'' he says.

He agrees that many new food businesses fail because they don't provide products
people want, or of a quality and at a price people are prepared to pay.

His advice for anyone looking to start in the food industry: ``Talk to
distributors''.

``Don't talk to your family, friends or neighbours as they will only tell you
how great your product is and how great it tastes. That's not real.''

Parent company

FAMILY support is not a worry for Nigel Jackson. At 22 he's making cheese as
part of a new business he started last September to ``value add'' to his
parents' dairy farm at Yatala, on the northern Gold Coast.

He recently won a scholarship from the Dairy Association that helped him develop
a range of cheeses, including some flavoured fetas.

It's early days and he produces only about 4kg of cheese a day that's sold
through farmers markets, and IGA supermarkets under the name Malleea Cheese.

His parents are dealing with the business side while he concentrates on making
the cheese.

``It's been pretty tough to get it all going, I'm just a small fish and there's
quite a few big ones around me,'' he says.``I just want to keep a boutique size
of business, while trying to grow as big as I can.''

Going private

THE Rudd Government has just scrapped a number of grants targeted at the food
industry -- such as the Food Innovation Grants -- and plans to announce new
funding

programs soon.

The State Government offers help to all businesses through a mentor scheme that
gives them access to experts with free advice in a range of areas, from
developing business plans and accessing grants, to attracting investors.

The trouble here though is that investors -- both private and corporate -- do
not always see the food industry as an attractive investment.

One State Government official says it's difficult for all businesses -- not just
food -- to attract new capital.

Some funding can come from a growing band of angel investors; people who have
their own private wealth and are looking to invest in new ventures.

It can be a risky game though, according to the Brisbane Angels chairman John
Mactaggart.

``I don't like restaurants for a start,'' he says. ``The risk of failure is
pretty high.

``Investment in food can give a good life-style type of return, but that's not
what the angels are looking for.''

The Brisbane-based Blue Sky Private Equity firm does have investments in the
food industry, including macadamia nut farms and a Mexican fast-food outlet
called Beach Burrito, based at Bondi Beach in Sydney, NSW.

Blue Sky managing director Mark Sowerby says the fast-food outlet is already
looking to open a second store and has the potential to expand further, making
it an attractive investment.

One factor making any food industry a risky investment he says is the exposure
to risk beyond its control, such as the weather. ``You can do everything right
and make every good call that you can but you can still find that the seasons
are too tough on you,'' he says.

What attracts Sowerby is a business that's already established -- he doesn't
like start-up ventures -- so something that's already found a niche in the
market place and offers the potential for expansion is perfect.

Alison Price believes she has just the business.

Feeding the market

FROM her kitchen in Clayfield, in Brisbane's inner north, her company Ten10 Eats
packages a range different ready-made meals cooked fresh each day and sold
chilled for less than $10 each. They take less than 10 minutes to cook. ``It's
all good quality food,'' she says. ``The sort of stuff you would cook at home.''

Her target is busy people who want to eat well but haven't got the time to cook
for themselves.

Price admits she had no kitchen experience -- or experience in the food industry
-- but with a degree in business and marketing she believes she has found the
all-important niche in the market place.

To start last year she needed $200,000. It came from her own money and her
family -- and after about nine pitches, she managed to secure funds from a
private investor she discovered through the Angel network.

``A lot of investors are not interested in the food business,'' she says. ``It
just seems to be a group of businesses that investors shy away from.''

Price has big plans, though, with a second outlet already open in Brisbane
Square, George St, and thoughts of expanding further. ``The number of people
that walk into our stores and ask about franchising is refreshing,'' Price says.
``We would like to go there.''

The fact that Price is passionate about both the product and the business is
already given her that advantage over others in the food industry.

What to do

IF you're thinking of starting a new food business in Queensland, here are some
useful tips.

If your idea is unique, is there a demand?

If your idea is not unique, what can you do better than others are already
doing?

Test the market. Chefs and restaurants can be a good place to start. If you can
get them to use your product and put it on menus, that can help generate
consumer demand.

Try the smaller family owned stores to see if they're interested in selling your
product. Getting new products into major supermarkets can be hard at first.

Attractive packaging is important in getting consumers to pick your product over
others. If the quality is good they may buy your product again.

Contact the State and Federal Government to see what help is available.

Get advice from as many people with business knowledge as you can.

Develop a business plan and work out all the costs, including any distribution
costs.

Work out how much of your own money you can put in your business.

Be patient. It can take several years for a new product to make any profit.

Be prepared to quit if things are really not working out and you look like
making losses you -- and possibly your family -- can't afford.

Useful links and numbers

Queensland Food and Beverage Industry

www.qldfbi.com.au

Queensland Government

Department of Tourism, Regional Development and Industry -- Business Hotline
1300 363 711; www.dtrdi.qld.gov.au

Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries -- Business Information Centre 13
25 23; www.dpi.qld.gov.au

Queensland Rural Adjustment Authority

1800 623 946; www.qraa.qld.gov.au

Federal Government

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry -- (02) 6272 3933;
www.daff.gov.au

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CML


                   Copyright 2008 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              981 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                  Wiarton Echo

                             March 14, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Eat Local Grey Bruce studies expansion into wholesale

BYLINE: Zoe Kessler, Wiarton Echo

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 664  words


Eat Local Grey Bruce got an injection of about $12,800 to explore scaling up to
deliver local products to the Greater Toronto Area market.

Jessica Hastings, co-owner of LAMBlicious, a supplier for the not-for-profit
food cooperative, collaborated with the co-op to apply for its successful
Growing Forward 2 grant application, which they received Feb. 22.

Eat Local Grey Bruce, a local food distribution system that connects producers
with consumers, will contribute matching funds towards the approximately $26,000
project which is now possible with the federalprovincial GF2 grant.

According to its website, the Growing Forward 2 initiative was created to help
Canadian agri-food businesses develop new markets and increase innovation and
competitiveness.

LAMBlicious, a South Bruce Peninsula producer, Burdock Grove of Williamsford and
BUFF of Shallow Lake, joined forces with Eat Local Grey Bruce to apply for the
funding.

The goal, Hastings said, is to "develop a business and marketing plan to scale
up the current direct to consumer food hub into wholesaling."

Potential new wholesale customers could include restaurants, caterers, small
grocery stores locally and 2-3 hours away, including the GTA, she said.

Hastings said LAMBlicious' experience in wholesaling to larger areas such as
Kitchener, London and Toronto will help guide and monitor the project.

The group will research the most cost-effective ways of delivering to nearby
cities; strategic planning for producers and restaurants; marketing and other
aspects of moving into wholesale supply in the future.

Thorsten Arnold, former general manager of the Eat Local Grey Bruce co-op, acted
as a consultant in the application process.

Arnold was instrumental in establishing the co-op's online farmers' market,
which supplies local Grey Bruce customers with mainly locally produced food.

Through that experience, Arnold said, "Especially with meat we've realized the
local market is far smaller than our production capacity."

In a telephone interview March 9 Arnold said the co-op is not looking for mass
markets, but rather, "We want to sell to customers who value the story about
food but also support our growing practices."

Local customers "have a focus on grazing and grass fed" meats and finishing
barns with organic or non-GMO feeds, Arnold said.

Currently, he said, about 100-150 boxes of food are prepared weekly for co-op
customers.

Scaling up to the GTA market could mean increasing to around 4,000 boxes a week
to the end customer.

"The scale of marketing is very different," Arnold said.

"We will probably have to take ownership of butchering if we are to maintain the
quality," he said. "We have a few very good butchers, most of whom are booked
into 2018."

Arnold said scaling up would be difficult to do with a single farm, but rather
several farms would have to they work together as a group.

The first step will be "to sit down and do a business plan for the economics of
selling to the GTA."

Arnold said the co-op wants to maintain "some level of connection between
farmers and consumers, even in city consumers. We're looking at different
buyers. One is restaurants who value the story around food."

The co-op and collaborators on the project will also have to consider whether to
buy, rent or collaborate on a list of items it will need, for example
considering who may have freezers in strategically good areas.

"Maybe it could be a food bank. If there's extra capacity there, maybe that's
something we can use," Arnold said.

"If we rent from someone else who has higher capacity, we help their business.
It doesn't have to be Eat Local; in the end it's about a food chain; if one
element in this chain doesn't work, the whole chain collapses."

Arnold said the group was considering how to communicate the local Grey Bruce
producers and their highquality products to a GTA market.

"Maybe we also need a brand," he said, which focuses on grass-fed products from
Grey Bruce.

"That's the high quality the market expects," he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Submitted Photo; Heather Shouldice (left, front), co-owner of BUFF Big
Rock Bison, Marilla Arnold, Arkelle Lesperance, Jessica Hastings-Lesperance,
co-owner of LAMBlicious, Thorsten Arnold (left, back) and Oscar Arnold,
supporters of Eat Local Grey Bruce, met near Wiarton, March 10.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 Wiarton Echo
                              All Rights Reserved


                              982 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Daily News (South Africa)

                              May 06, 2008 Tuesday
                                   e1 Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 395 words


VAT exemption battle lines set

As the government considers widening the basket of goods exempted from value
-added tax (VAT) to help cushion the poor from the food price crunch, the battle
lines are beginning to be drawn between the conservative approach of Finance
Minister Trevor Manuel and interventionists in President Thabo Mbeki's cabinet.

As pressure builds on government to take meaningful action, Manuel argues that
food subsidies can have unintended consequences which may not benefit the poor.

In contrast, Health Minister Manto Tshabalala-Msimang has suggested government
may throw caution to the wind and consider interventions if an appeal to
suppliers to moderate prices does not work.

She argues that her department's interventions - to cap prices of medicines at
retail outlets - could be the role model in other sectors.

Nevertheless, the government is looking at issuing food vouchers or increased
social assistance to the poor - through its social grants programme - to fight
spiralling food prices.

The government is considering including a wider range of food items in the
basket which are exempt from value added tax.

Currently 15 categories of food, including brown bread, eggs, dried corn, fruit
and vegetables do not incur a 14% VAT. White bread is one of the items which
could be included. - Donwald Pressly

Milk, poultry, pork price hikes on way

Milk, poultry and pork prices were all set to follow the hikes in agriculture
input costs, including maize, as producers of these products were not making any
money, Absa board member Johan Willemse said yesterday.

The big question was when meat prices would react upwards, said Willemse, who is
also a professor of agricultural economics at the University of the Free State.

Farming input prices, including grains and oil-based costs such as diesel and
fertiliser, had doubled over the past year.

Local farming had a choice to either become a low-cost producer of commodities
such as Argentina, Brazil and Ukraine, or enter value-added niche food markets,
he said. - Tom Robbins

Confidence rises in local hotel industry

An expected increase in corporate travel and conference delegates has lifted
confidence in the hotel industry, mainly in Gauteng and the Western Cape, but
not in the Eastern Cape or Mpumalanga, according to the latest survey by
consultancy Horwath. - Audrey D'Angelo

Briefs from

Business Report

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ND


                 Copyright 2008 Independent News and Media Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              983 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                              Western Daily Press

                               September 3, 2001

Flannel, fudge and flim-flam!;
 A month after receiving our questions on behalf of the beleaguered farming
community, Margaret Beckett's department comes up with some answers, but it's
all . . .  On July 31 we hand-delivered 12 questions to Margaret Beckett on
behalf of farmers, farmers' leaders and people involved in rural affairs. Last
night we finally received her answers.

SECTION: News, Pg.4

LENGTH: 1483 words


Q Why was MAFF not better prepared to cope with foot-and-mouth?

A The Department has contingency plans to deal with all notifiable animal
diseases, including foot-and-mouth disease. These are regularly updated and
tested by the State Veterinary Service. We have just experienced the worst ever
incidence of FMD. Obviously, there will be lesson, both positive and negative,
to be learned in the light of the FMD episode.

The Government has announced three major independent inquiries in relation to
the FMD outbreak which aim to address fully all the issues.

Q Why only now have you ordered a review of the costs of disinfecting when it
was obvious what the scale of the eventual bill was likely to be?

A A review was ordered after initial bills received in England appeared to be
significantly higher than others in Scotland. In many cases, too, the standard
of invoicing was inadequate. Clearly there we needed to ensure that Government
expenditure is both justified and properly accounted for.

Q Cheap pork imports have increased by 70 per cent in the last three years while
the size of the British pig herd has fallen by 30 per cent. Will you act to
ensure shoppers can still buy British bacon in future?

The Government knows very well the seriousness of the situation facing the UK
pig industry. Unprecedented support for pig producers has been put in place in
the past two years, with over 60 million spent on or allocated to the sector.
Retailers, caterers and public purchasing organisations have all been encouraged
to source to British Standards and have been made aware of both the quality and
welfare-friendliness of British pig meat.

Q You favour CAP changes so Farmers will be supported by environmental work,
rather than through straight food subsidies. Will any such system take account
of how much they actually need to live on?

A The Government is determined to help develop a sustainable, competitive and
diverse farming industry by creating an environment within which the industry
may respond positively to the challenges it faces.

A key way to achieve this is through reform of the Common Agricultural Policy.
One of the original objectives of the CAP was to ensure a fair standard of
living for agricultural producers. The Government believes that the CAP is
failing to deliver not only on that objective, but also on what the wider rural
economy and environment, and indeed, the general public need.

We want to secure a more economically rational CAP, which is sustainable in
relation to the countryside, environment and rural economy. These reforms will
require some restructuring, but will mean a more competitive farming industry
can respond more flexibly to consumer wishes without being constrained by the
market-distorting nature of the current CAP. We make available targeted
assistance to the industry for the "public goods" it provides, but which the
market cannot support.

Q What happened to the last Government's pledge to farmers to start removing and
simplifying their burden of red tape? Which regulations have been simplified or
removed?

A The Government wants to lighten the burden on farmers. A series of "Red Tape
Reviews" produced recommendations from industry aimed at reducing both the
regulatory burdens and the time and effort farmers spend on administrative
tasks.

The Government confirmed last year that these would be pursued as part of the
Action Plan for Farming, accepting all 29 recommendations made by the review
group on the Integrated Administration and Control System and Inspections, and
41 out of 43 made by the review group on Intervention. The Food Standards Agency
is taking forward those relating to the Meat Industry.

Good progress has been made towards implementing these recommendations, some of
which should help cut the paperwork burden.

A number have already been completed, and others are under way.With the creation
of DEFRA we now have an opportunity to assess the combined impact of rural
affairs and environmental initiatives on farmers and see where duplicative
paperwork can be cut or trimmed.

Q Do you accept that farmers need to make a profit to be able to invest in the
future of the industry and stay in farming?

A Yes .

Q Ifso, what will you do about the fact that a large majority of farmers are now
being paid prices well below the cost of production for their commodities?

A We recognise the serious difficulties facing the farming industry and have
introduced a number of measures to assist farmers, injecting some 1.35 billion
into the sector since 1997.

The Government is also keen to see fair and equitable relations between
supermarkets and their suppliers, and urges all members of the supply chain to
act responsibly in the current difficult circumstances. However, there are no
plans for market intervention.

Q You have talked of farmers forming co-operatives, adding value and taking more
of the food chain profits for themselves.

Do you accept that none of this can be done without money which farmers
currently have not got? Will you provide it?

A We have been encouraging farmers to consider the benefits of working together
and adding value for some time now.

This does not necessarily require new money. For instance, there are existing
large collaborative groups which producers can join. We have been running a
joint initiative with the NFU to promote the benefits of collaborative marketing
and this has attracted considerable interest from the agricultural community.

Adding more value to the produce does generally require investment.

The 1.6 billion England Rural Development Programme (ERDP) is helping to promote
sustainable farming as a key part of the rural economy. Under the ERDP, for
example, the 152 million Rural Enterprise Scheme includes measures for marketing
quality agricultural products (such as forming or strengthening collaborative
marketing groups) and for farm diversification. The 44m Processing and Marketing
Grant provides funding help for the capital costs of buildings and new equipment
for processing and marketing primary agricultural products.

In addition two rounds of national grants under the Agriculture Development
Scheme have taken place developing stronger collaborative structures between
producers.

Q When will the Government begin to offer the same range of start-up grants,
golden hellos and low interest loans that other EU community members provide to
attract the next generation of farmers - as the average age of the British
farmer is 58, and rising?

A The ERDP will help farm and other rural businesses create new jobs, acquire
new skills and become more sustainable through, for example, diversification and
better marketing. These measures will help encourage more young people into
agriculture.

Q Ifhill farmers' incomes fall any more, large numbers will inevitably quit. Who
will then manage these high-quality landscapes - which attract so much valuable
tourism?

A There is no evidence to suggest that hill farms will be abandoned. In the
short to medium-term we expect the hills to remain under predominantly sheep and
suckler cow production.

Q When will you look at the vast amounts of largely unchecked meat arriving in
this country, as even EU food and veterinary inspectors are only planning 24
checks worldwide this year?

A All imports of meat from outside the EU must be pre-notified and presented to
an authorised Border Inspection Post, so they can undergo veterinary checks
before they can enter. The Government is aware, however that some meat is being
illegally imported. DEFRA is co-ordinating cross-Government action so that more
effective and efficient action can be taken against illegal imports.

Q How do you propose to convince British farmers that you and your Government
genuinely believe in a future for British agriculture?

To recap, since 1997 the Government has introduced measures worth 1.35bn (not
including foot-and-mouth disease-related payments) to the farming industry,
recognising the acute difficulties facing British agriculture.

In addition, the ERDP is investing around 1.6 billion in rural areas over seven
years through a range of agrienvironment and rural development schemes.

On August 9, the Prime Minister set up an independent Policy Commission on the
Future of Farming and Food.

This will advise the Government specifically on developing a sustainable,
competitive and diverse farming and food sector which contributes to a thriving
and sustainable rural economy and advances environmental, economic, health and
animal welfare goals.

The Commission's work will be consistent with the Government's aims for Common
Agricultural Policy reform, where we seek reforms to secure a better deal not
only for farmers, but also for the environment, for consumers and for taxpayers.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                      Copyright 2001 Bristol United Press


                              984 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                              June 20, 2011 Monday
                                 First Edition

CANVAS

BYLINE: REE IZETT - Ree Izett has been a communications consultant for 20 years
and was a senior adviser to the previous minister for the arts, Peter Batchelor.

SECTION: NEWS; The Arts; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 637 words


The Victorian Ombudsman's report last week reveals a lack of understanding about
our creative industries. Free tickets aren't a perk - they're work. BEAUTY, like
the arts and gifts, is in the eye of the beholder. A Melbourne producer tells of
arriving home one day to find a family friend, then a fashion buyer, on the
living room floor sobbing.

"What on earth is the matter?" he asked. "I have to go to Paris," she cried.
"Again." To those of us not in retail, this job requirement could bring tears of
joy. Jumping on a plane and watching Paris fashion shows may not seem like work,
let alone work that anyone would ever be reluctant to do. But to her, Paris was
a chore, a regular part of her job. Last week's report by the Victorian
Ombudsman reveals some lack of understanding of our creative industries. In the
report, he connects the isolated iPhone-with-purchase toner affair with the
day-to-day of Arts Victoria staff attending "stakeholder events", citing both as
"gifts" They couldn't be more different. Setting toners aside, the events in
question - performances and exhibitions - are the end products of our industry.
Producers of these will forgo a percentage of ticket revenue so that their work
can be seen, judged and reported on by their peers, including other producers,
public and private investors, selected media and others. This viewing is usually
confined to a single night: opening night. The producers know that most of these
people present will have the experience to pass judgment. Is it good? Is it bad?
Does it present anything new or have we seen it before? How are ticket sales?
How long will it run? Will it make budget? For Arts Victoria staff in
particular, has it lived up to the promise it held on paper when peer-assessed
for funding? Have these public funds advanced culture in Victoria? Like Paris,
opening nights can appear glamorous. The occasional red carpets, the buzz, the
people, the show! Well, I hate to break it to you, Mr Ombudsman, that is the
smoke and mirrors of show business. While attending an arts event can be
pleasurable, it is a chore, a routine part of the job. Not seeing a show can
mean your professional value as a judge is diminished. Miss too many shows and
your judgment is not worth listening to. And "gift" does not describe having to
attend shows unpaid straight from the office as many times a week as partners
and children at home will bear. The Ombudsman raises "conflict of interest" in
the case of Arts Victoria, because staff members also oversee grants. Given that
public funding not directly put to cabinet is determined by peer group
assessment ahead of ministerial approval, it is hard to see how a staffer's
attendance - often at the end of the funding process - could be anything other
than part of their analysis. We need to ensure that they see every possible
event because the more they see, the more informed they are. The Ombudsman
suggests that if Arts Victoria paid for tickets, this would avoid any perception
of a conflict of interest. Around the world, there have been various attempts to
alter the standing tradition. Most end up where they started. Our industry has
been around for hundreds of years and, despite attempts to put a price on
knowledge, the current practice of complimentary peer review is the one that
works. It provides market intelligence to everyone involved, for better or for
worse. If transparency is what the Ombudsman is after, then by all means have
Arts Victoria set up a separate register of who attends what. For my part, I'd
like to see these people attend everything that they can get to. And make this
register available for all to see. We may all be in for a surprise when we
discover the amount of unpaid work that is done by them for the benefit of our
state and the rest of the creative industries.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              985 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                              Grey-Bruce This Week

                            March 23, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Eat Local Grey Bruce eyes GTA

BYLINE: Zoe Kessler, Postmedia Network

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 665  words


Eat Local Grey Bruce got an injection of about $12,800 to explore scaling up to
deliver local products to the Greater Toronto Area market.

Jessica Hastings, co-owner of LAMBlicious, a supplier for the notfor-profit food
co-operative, collaborated with the co-op to apply for its successful Growing
Forward 2 grant application, which they received Feb. 22.

Eat Local Grey Bruce, a local food distribution system that connects producers
with consumers, will contribute matching funds towards the approximately $26,000
project which is now possible with the federal-provincial GF2 grant.

According to its website, the Growing Forward 2 initiative was created to help
Canadian agri-food businesses develop new markets and increase innovation and
competitiveness.

LAMBlicious, a South Bruce Peninsula producer, Burdock Grove of Williamsford and
BUFF of Shallow Lake, joined forces with Eat Local Grey Bruce to apply for the
funding.

The goal, Hastings said, is to "develop a business and marketing plan to scale
up the current direct to consumer food hub into wholesaling."

Potential new wholesale customers could include restaurants, caterers, small
grocery stores locally and 2-3 hours away, including the GTA, she said.

Hastings said LAMBlicious' experience in wholesaling to larger areas such as
Kitchener, London and Toronto will help guide and monitor the project.

The group will research the most cost-effective ways of delivering to nearby
cities; strategic planning for producers and restaurants; marketing and other
aspects of moving into wholesale supply in the future.

Thorsten Arnold, former general manager of the Eat Local Grey Bruce co-op, acted
as a consultant in the application process.

Arnold was instrumental in establishing the co-op's online farmers' market,
which supplies local Grey Bruce customers with mainly locally produced food.

Through that experience, Arnold said, "Especially with meat we've realized the
local market is far smaller than our production capacity."

In a telephone interview March 9 Arnold said the co-op is not looking for mass
markets, but rather, "We want to sell to customers who value the story about
food but also support our growing practices."

Local customers "have a focus on grazing and grass fed" meats and finishing
barns with organic or non-GMO feeds, Arnold said.

Currently, he said, about 100-150 boxes of food are prepared weekly for co-op
customers.

Scaling up to the GTA market could mean increasing to around 4,000 boxes a week
to the end customer.

"The scale of marketing is very different," Arnold said.

"We will probably have to take ownership of butchering if we are to maintain the
quality," he said. "We have a few very good butchers, most of whom are booked
into 2018."

Arnold said scaling up would be difficult to do with a single farm, but rather
several farms would have to they work together as a group.

The first step will be "to sit down and do a business plan for the economics of
selling to the GTA."

Arnold said the co-op wants to maintain "some level of connection between
farmers and consumers, even in city consumers. We're looking at different
buyers. One is restaurants who value the story around food."

The co-op and collaborators on the project will also have to consider whether to
buy, rent or collaborate on a list of items it will need, for example
considering who may have freezers in strategically good areas.

"Maybe it could be a food bank. If there's extra capacity there, maybe that's
something we can use," Arnold said.

"If we rent from someone else who has higher capacity, we help their business.
It doesn't have to be Eat Local; in the end it's about a food chain; if one
element in this chain doesn't work, the whole chain collapses."

Arnold said the group was considering how to communicate the local Grey Bruce
producers and their high-quality products to a GTA market.

"Maybe we also need a brand," he said, which focuses on grass-fed products from
Grey Bruce.

"That's the high quality the market expects," he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / Heather Shouldice (left, front), co-owner of BUFF Big Rock Bison,
Marilla Arnold, Arkelle Lesperance, Jessica Hastings-Lesperance, co-owner of
LAMBlicious, Thorsten Arnold (left, back) and Oscar Arnold, supporters of Eat
Local Grey Bruce, met near Wiarton, March 10.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Grey-Bruce This Week
                              All Rights Reserved


                              986 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                            November 16, 2015 Monday

Washington: Hoeven Announces Nearly $125K USDA Grants to Support Development of
New Agricultural Products

LENGTH: 250 words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Washington: Office of the Senator John Hoeven has issued the following news
release:



 Senator John Hoeven, who serves on the U.S. Senate Agriculture and
Appropriations Committees, announced today that the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) has awarded three grants totaling $124,182 to businesses in
North Dakota to support the development of new agricultural products and markets
for existing products. The funds are made available through USDA&rsquo;s Value
-Added Producer Grant program. The details of the awards are as follows:





     ND Golden Growers Cooperative &ndash; A $75,000 planning grant to conduct a
feasibility study of products derived from corn grain, including food-grade
gluten-free flour and higher value animal feed products.

     Aspen Aquaponics &ndash; A $25,182 grant to support the sale of retail and
wholesale packaged fresh vegetables and herbs.

     Meadowlark Granary &ndash; A $24,000 grant to expand baking and milling
capacity as well as marketing of local food products made from hard red spring
wheat.



 &ldquo;Agriculture continues to be the cornerstone of North Dakota&rsquo;s
economy,&rdquo; Hoeven said. &ldquo;These awards will help local businesses find
new uses and markets for our crops, which will help grow and diversify our
economy. That means greater opportunities for our farmers, ranchers and all of
our state&rsquo;s residents.&rdquo;





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              987 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2017 ICC Information Group Ltd.
                         ICC Financial Analysis Reports
            ICC Information Limited is not an investment adviser and
          makes no warranties regarding merchantability or suitability
                     of material for a particular purpose.

                                January 16, 2017

                     THE MUSIC PRODUCERS GUILD (UK) LIMITED

                                   MILL HOUSE
                               103 HOLMES AVENUE
                                      HOVE
                                  HOVE BN3 7LE


TRADE ADDRESS: 103 Holmes Avenue, HOVE BN3 7LE

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: 02032397606
FAX: 020-7371-8887
URL: www.mpg.org.uk

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
REGISTRATION NO.: 03746150

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
INCORPORATION DATE: April 6, 1999
JURISDICTION/PLACE OF REGISTRATION

* * * * * * * * * * CORPORATE STRUCTURE * * * * * * * * * *



TOP SUBSIDIARIES BY TURNOVER
Registration    Company Name                        Turnove
No.                                                       r
08577339        MUSIC PRODUCERS GUILD AWARDS              0
                LIMITED
-               -                                         -
-               -                                         -
-               -                                         -
-               -                                         -
-               -                                         -
-               -                                         -
-               -                                         -
-               -                                         -
-               -                                         -

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
DIRECTORS:

     ·    Mr Michael Glossop, Record Producer
     ·    Mr Andrew Hunt, Record Producer
     ·    Mr Daniel Joseph Cox, Sound Engineer
     ·    Mr Crispin Warren Bruno Ellingham, Music Producer
     ·    Mr Cameron Stewart Craig, Recording Engineer/producer


Go To ICC Directors
SECRETARY:

     ·    Penelope CarolineGanz, Solicitor


* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
PRINCIPLE ACTIVITIES: Activities of professional membership organisations
INDUSTRY TYPE:
COMPANY TYPE:  Private Limited company without share capital::Private Limited
company without share capital::
COMPANY SIZE:  Ceased IRL

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
SIC:
94120

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: June 30, 2016
FISCAL YEAR END: June 30

LAST FILED ACCOUNTS:  June 30, 2016
ACCOUNTS LODGED DATE:  January 5, 2017
ANNUAL RETURN:  April 6, 2016
CREDIT LIMIT:  22,500

* * * * * * * * * * BALANCE SHEET * * * * * * * * * *


ASSETS
Date of Accounts                           30/06/201 30/06/201 30/06/201
                                                   6         5         4
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Tangible Assets                                    1         1         1
Intangible Assets                                  -         -         -
Total Fixed Assets                                 1         1         1
Stocks                                             -         -         -
Debtors                                            -         -         -
Cash                                           9,951     1,658     6,469
Miscellaneous Current Assets                  10,121    14,928     8,348
Other Current Assets                          20,072    16,586    14,817
Total Current Assets                          20,072    16,586    14,817
Fixed Assets                                       -         -         -
Intermediate Assets                                1         1         1
Due From Group, Non Current                        -         -         -
Due From Group, Current                            -         -         -
TOTAL ASSETS                                  20,073    16,587    14,818



LIABILITIES
Date of Accounts                           30/06/201 30/06/201 30/06/201
                                                   6         5         4
                                                 GBP       GBP       GBP
Creditors                                          -         -         -
Bank Overdraft                                     -         -         -
Miscellaneous Current Liabilities              1,531     1,630     3,774
Bank Loans - Current Portion                       -         -         -
Other Short Term Finance                           -         -         -
Due To Group, Current                              -         -         -
Due To Directors, Current                          -         -         -
Other Current Liabilities                      1,531     1,630     3,774
Short Term Loans                                   -         -         -
Long Term Loans                                    -         -         -
Long Term Bank Loan                                -         -         -
Other Long Term Finance                            -         -         -
Due To Group, Non Current                          -         -         -
Due To Directors, Non Current                      -         -         -
Other Long Term Liabilities                        -         -       500
Total Current Liabilities                      1,531     1,630     3,774
Total Long Term Liabilities                        -         -       500
TOTAL LIABILITIES                              1,531     1,630     4,274
Called Up Share Capital and Sundry                 -         -         -
Reserves
Profit & Loss Account Reserve                 18,542    14,957    10,544
Revaluation Reserve                                -         -         -
Shareholder Funds                             18,542    14,957    10,544
Called Up Share Capital                            -         -         -
Sundry Reserves (Including Grants)                 -         -         -
Contingent Liabilities                             -         -         -
NET ASSETS                                    18,542    14,957    11,044


* * * * * * * * * * INCOME STATEMENT * * * * * * * * * *


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
Date of Accounts   30/06/201 30/06/201 30/06/201
                           6         5         4
                         GBP       GBP       GBP
Total Sales                -         -         -
Cost of Sales              -         -         -
Gross Profit               -         -         -
Operating Profit           -         -         -
Export                     -         -         -
Nontrading Income          -         -         -
Interest Payable           -         -         -
Pretax Profit              -         -         -
Taxation                   -         -         -
Profit After Tax           -         -         -
Dividends Payable          -         -         -
Retained Profits           -         -         -
Value Added                -         -         -
Capital Employed      18,542    14,957    11,044
Net Worth             18,542    14,957    10,544
Working Capital       18,541    14,956    11,043
Emp. Renumeration          -         -         -
Dir. Renumeration          -         -         -
Audit Fees                 -         -         -
Non-audit Fees             -         -         -
Depreciation               -         -         -
Number of                  -         -         -
Employees

* * * * * * * * * * OTHER FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *


GROWTH RATES
Date of Accounts        2      3      5
                    Years  Years  Years
                      GBP    GBP    GBP
Sales                   -      -      -
Pretax                  -      -      -
Total Assets        21.02  35.46  63.12
Current Assets      21.02  35.47  63.11
Current             -6.07 -59.43 116.86
Liabilities
Capital Employed    23.97  67.89  59.84
Employee Wages          -      -      -
Number of               -      -      -
Employees



INDUSTRY AVERAGES
Compared to 1,309 companies in the same industry
sector
(year ending 2016)
SIC Code:
91120 Activities of professional organisations



INDUSTRY QUARTILES
                                                      Lower   Median    Upper
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                  -2.44     4.35    14.66
Pretax Profit / Total Assets (%)                      -1.93     2.14     9.77
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                              -2.3     2.61     12.9
Sales / Total Assets (%)                              49.27    90.27    165.3
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales) x       24.65     2.98        0
365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities                      1     2.06     5.27
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)            29,083.8 43,699.2 63,206.0
                                                          5        6        9
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees (GBP)    24,000   33,500 43,891.8
                                                                            9
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                    62,500 103,859.  159,500
                                                                   6
Wages / Turnover (%)                                  43.49    32.07    22.83



CREDIT RATING
Year  0  9
=        7
Year -1  9
=        7
Year -2  9
=        5
Year -3  9
=        6

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *
Date of Accounts                                0/06/201 30/06/201 30/06/201
                                                       6         5         4
Pretax Profit / Capital Employed (%)                   -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Assets (%)                             -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Shareholders Funds (%)                 -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Sales (%)                              -         -         -
Sales / Total Assets (%)                               -         -         -
Sales / Fixed Assets (%)                               -         -         -
Export / Sales (%)                                     -         -         -
Working Capital / Sales (%)                            -         -         -
Sales / Stocks                                         -         -         -
Credit Period In Days (Trade Debtors / Sales )         -         -         -
x 365
Current Assets / Current Liabilities               13.11     10.18      3.93
Quick Assets / Current Liabilities                 13.11     10.18      3.93
Total Debt / Net Worth (%)                             -         -         -
Shareholders Funds / Total Assets                   0.92       0.9      0.71
Long Term Debt / Net Worth (%)                         -         -         -
Interest / Pre Interest Profit (%)                     -         -         -
Current Liabilities / Stocks                           -         -         -
Employee Remuneration / Number Of Employees            -         -         -
(GBP)
Employee Remuneration / Sales (%)                      -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Number Of Employees (GBP)              -         -         -
Sales / Number Of Employees (GBP)                      -         -         -
Capital Employed / Number Of Employees                 -         -         -
Fixed Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)               -         -         -
Total Assets / Number Of Employees (GBP)               -         -         -
Pretax Profit / Value Added (%)                        -         -         -
Value Added / Sales (%)                                -         -         -
Value Added / Number Of Employees (GBP)                -         -         -
Value Added / Employee Remuneration                    -         -         -
Sales / Audit Fees                                     -         -         -
Total Assets / Audit Fees                              -         -         -
Creditors / Debtors                                    -         -         -
Total Debt / Working Capital                           -         -         -
Total Debt / Total Assets                              -         -         -

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
CURRENT SHARES OUTSTANDING: GBP 18,542

* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: East Partnership Ltd

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2017


                              988 of 998 DOCUMENTS



               South Burnett Times and Rural Weekly (Queensland)

                               February 22, 2013

Vision: valuing farming

BYLINE:  Daniel Burdon

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 458  words



HIGHLIGHT: Blueprint for agriculture A peek up to 2050


AN AUSTRALIA that truly values and respects agriculture and the essential role
it plays in society, forms the driving vision for the industry unveiled by the
National Farmers' Federation.

After more than 12 months of work, NFF president Jock Laurie revealed the
Blueprint for Australian Agriculture to the National Press Club on Thursday last
week.

The Blueprint forms an overarching vision for the industry out to 2050.

Mr Laurie said it was developed with the input of nearly 4000 Australians who
identified the challenges, opportunities and potential solutions to the problems
primary production faces.

"It is an ambitious plan that identifies seven critical areas in which action
must happen now to ensure we are well placed in the future: innovation,
research, development and extension; competitiveness; trade and market access;
people; agriculture in society; natural resources and transformational issues,"
he said.

"The blueprint participants have called for such action as an increase in
investment in agricultural research, development and extension to help improve
productivity growth and address issues like the changing climate."

And while the blueprint outlines the long-term possibilities for Australian
agriculture, the more immediate future is also under heavy scrutiny, with the
federal election date now set.

Those immediate priorities were set out in the NFF's budget submission,
revealing the growing urgency of extension to Australia's producers.

Mr Laurie said while there was a definite need to improve investment in research
and development, there was no point in that investment if it was not extended to
producers.

"We've seen over many years state governments cut and keep cutting extension to
producers, and it's time that was brought back - we don't care whether it's
delivered by states or the Commonwealth," he said.

"That essential role that departmental extension officers played as independent
advisers for farmers has disappeared and it needs to return."

Other priorities, advised by the long-term vision, included a $5 million grant
for the Primary Industries Education Foundation - to help get more young people
signed up for a future in the industry.

It also said the much-touted National Food Plan had to be more than a document -
it must be used to make available sufficient resources to deliver the promises
made.

Mr Laurie said there was a danger the plan could become a list of challenges and
priorities that never saw the light of day due to a lack of resources.

Mr Laurie said participants in the blueprint also wanted to see a reduction in
red tape, more infrastructure investment and the inclusion of agriculture in the
national curriculum, as a matter of priority.

See nff.org.au/blueprint

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TRW


                    Copyright 2013 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              989 of 998 DOCUMENTS



            The Daily Mercury and Rural Weekly (Mackay, Queensland)

                           February 21, 2013 Thursday

Vision: valuing farming

BYLINE:  Daniel Burdon

SECTION: Pg. 6

LENGTH: 458  words



HIGHLIGHT: Blueprint for agriculture a peek up to 2050


AN AUSTRALIA that truly values and respects agriculture and the essential role
it plays in society forms the driving vision for the industry unveiled by the
National Farmers' Federation.

After more than 12 months of work, NFF president Jock Laurie revealed the
Blueprint for Australian Agriculture to the National Press Club on Thursday last
week.

The blueprint forms an overarching vision for the industry out to 2050.

Mr Laurie said it was developed with input from nearly 4000 Australians, who
identified the challenges, opportunities and potential solutions to the problems
primary production faces.

"It is an ambitious plan that identifies seven critical areas in which action
must happen now to ensure we are well placed in the future: innovation;
research, development and extension; competitiveness; trade and market access;
people; agriculture in society; and natural resources and transformational
issues," he said.

"The blueprint participants have called for such action as an increase in
investment in agricultural research, development and extension to help improve
productivity growth and address issues like the changing climate."

And while the blueprint outlines the long-term possibilities for Australian
agriculture, the more immediate future is also under heavy scrutiny, with the
federal election date now set.

Those immediate priorities were set out in the NFF's budget submission,
revealing the growing urgency of extension to Australia's producers.

Mr Laurie said while there was a definite need to improve investment in research
and development, there was no point in that investment if it was not extended to
producers.

"We've seen over many years state governments cut and keep cutting extension to
producers and it's time that was brought back - we don't care whether it's
delivered by states or the Commonwealth," he said.

"That essential role that departmental extension officers played as independent
advisers for farmers has disappeared and it needs to return."

Other priorities, advised by the long-term vision, included a $5 million grant
for the Primary Industries Education Foundation - to help get more young people
signed up for a future in the industry.

It also said the much-touted National Food Plan had to be more than a document -
it must be used to make available sufficient resources to deliver the promises
made.

Mr Laurie said there was a danger the plan could become a list of challenges and
priorities that never saw the light of day due to a lack of resources.

Mr Laurie said participants in the blueprint also wanted to see a reduction in
red tape, more infrastructure investment and the inclusion of agriculture in the
national curriculum, as a matter of priority.

See nff.org.au/blueprint

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MBT


                    Copyright 2013 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              990 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                    Variety

                               November 11, 2016

Virginia Lures Production With Varied Locations, Layers of Tax Credits, and
Discretionary Grants;

BYLINE: Variety Staff

SECTION: PRODUCTION;

LENGTH: 244  words


The state of Virginia offers film and TV producer a wide variety of locations,
including military installations (the Pentagon, the Norfolk Navy Yard), colonial
heritage sites (the towns of Williamsburg and Jamestown), and picturesque
landscapes (the Appalachian Mountains, Atlantic Coast beaches),

And to address pocketbook questions, Virginia provides refundable tax credits
alongside discretionary grants decided by the governor for projects that
bringing bonus value to the state.

The refundable tax credit is pegged at 15% for all qualifying expenses,
including wages. It can be boosted by an additional 5% if shooting takes place
in the state s economically distressed areas. Also, 10% to 20% more is available
in Virginia resident payroll credits, and an extra 10% can be had for Virginia
residents who are first-time industry employees.

The discretionary grant given by the governor is awarded to qualified projects
that bring revenue and other added value to the state. A condition of receiving
the grant is a joint public announcement between the production company and the
Governor.

An additional sales and use tax exemption is available to qualifying
productions.

Recent projects shooting in Virginia include  Imperium  (2016),  Jason Bourne
(2016),  Ithaca  (2015),  Captain Phillips  (2013),  Argo  (2012),  Lincoln
(2012), and Super 8 (2011).

Information courtesy of EP Financial Solutions, a production incentive
consulting and financial services company.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2016 Reed Business Information, US, a division of Reed Elsevier Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              991 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               Leadership (Abuja)

                               December 23, 2014

Jonathan Urges Movie Producers to Promote Farming

LENGTH: 605 words


President Goodluck Jonathan on Tuesday in Abuja urged movie producers in the
country to assist government in encouraging the youth to take to farming.
Jonathan made the call when a delegation of movie artistes and producers, under
the aegis of Legends of Nollywood, visited him at the Presidential Villa.

He said that they could do that by portraying farming in a positive way in their
movies to raise the interest of young Nigerians to it.

Jonathan said agriculture in the country had gone beyond poor rural farmers
working with hoes and cutlasses as portrayed in many Nollywood movies.

"Nollywood should endeavour to represent the farmer as someone with value; they
should begin to present farming differently.

"We have even come up with the National School Agriculture Programme to make our
school children know that farming these days is not about tilling with hoes or
felling trees with axes.

"We want them to know that it is about using tractors and other modern
technologies.

"We have medical doctors, lawyers and engineers who are into farming.

"Nollywood is what the young people watch so much. If you now try to change
their psyche about farming, it will go viral.

"So, this is my request to you, and government will assist those who would want
to work on films in this area."

The President also appealed to television station owners in the country to
adhere to the National Broadcasting Commission's (NBC) code on local and foreign
television contents.

He made the appeal after the leader of the delegation, Mr Paul Obazele, raised
concern that most television stations now prefer foreign contents to local ones.

He reminded the Nollywood actors of their duty as promoters and documenters of
local culture and tradition and urged them not to sacrifice that duty on the
alter of profit making.

The President said government would use all available means, including
persuasion, to get them to do the right thing.

Jonathan said he welcomed the idea of building a Hall of Fame in Abuja to honour
famous and illustrious individuals who brought glory to the country.

The president, who said that he had been nursing such idea since his days as
Deputy Governor of Bayelsa, said that government would come up with one.

Jonathan told the delegation that government was also considering building a
"Hall of Shame" to blacklist those involved in acts of dishonour.

He commended Nollywood actors for bringing pride to the nation, adding that
government would continue to support them.

Earlier, the leader of the delegation, Mr Paul Obazele, said the delegation was
at the villa to present the award of Grant Patriarch of Nollywood to the
President for his legendary support to the industry.

He told the President that Nollywood stars had been nursing the idea of building
a Hall of Fame in Abuja to honour famous individuals who brought glory to the
country.

He said no government in the history of Nigeria had demonstrated genuine
political will to develop the Nollywood industry like the Jonathan
administration.

Obazele recalled the role played by Jonathan in the evolution and growth of the
African Movie Academy Awards (AMAA) since his days as Deputy Governor of
Bayelsa.

He also commended the President for the recent award and disbursement of
financial grants to the industry.

The actor pledged the commitment of the industry to the cause of nation
building.

The News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) reports that highpoint of the visit was the
conferment of the Grant Patriarch of Nollywood award on Jonathan.

On the delegation were Zack Orji, Larry Coldsweat, Alex Osifo, Patience Ozokwor
popularly known as Mama G, and other notable Nollywood stars. (NAN)

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              992 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 27, 2016 Monday

South Dakota: South Dakota Ag in the Classroom Seeks Donations of Ear Tags

LENGTH: 356  words

DATELINE: New York



 Pierre: The State of South Dakota has issued the following news release:



 South Dakota Ag in the Classroom (SDAITC) is looking for donations of animal
ear tags from livestock producers for a hands-on activity for FFA chapters to
use in elementary classrooms.









 "The most requested teaching tools I get asked for are ready-to-use kits," said
Ann Price, SDAITC executive director. "I received a grant to put together kits
that FFA advisors can use to train their chapter members. Those members then
take the kits into elementary classrooms and educate younger students about
livestock production."







 "I plan to reissue a teaching kit based on the book 'Levi's Lost Calf' by
Amanda Radke that used ear tags as a hands on piece for students. It was the
most popular lesson I've ever had, by far. Last time I did this project,
livestock producers really came through for me and donated about 10,000 tags
that were used in over 300 kits that went to schools all over South Dakota and
surrounding states."







 The tags do not have to be new. They only need to be clean and in good
condition. They can be blank or numbered. Cattle, sheep, goat or hog tags are
all welcome. The more types, shapes, colors and sizes, the better, however fly
tags cannot be used.







 According to Price, "I want the youth to be able to touch the tags, see how
they stay in the animal's ear and see how different producers customize the
information on the tags to fit their operation and then take the tags home and
share the info they learned that day with their families."South Dakota Ag in the
Classroom's mission is to be the premier educational organization in preparing
individuals with tools to teach our youth the value of agriculture.







 Agriculture is a major contributor to South Dakota's economy, generating $25.6
billion in annual economic activity and employing over 115,000 South Dakotans.
The South Dakota Department of Agriculture's mission is to promote, protect,
preserve and improve this industry for today and tomorrow.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              993 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                           Express and Echo (Exeter)

                            April 23, 2008 Wednesday

Cheese and sausage trails could help local producers, says MP

BYLINE:  JOANNE COCHRANE

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 484 words


Devon food producers could benefit from themed food trails around the county, a
leading Conservative MP has said.

Cheese and sausage trails - similar to the wine trails of France or whisky
trails of Scotland - could attract visitors to the area and showcase Westcountry
food. That's according to Jim Paice, the  Shadow Secretary of State for
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, who visited  the Taste of the West Trade Show at
Westpoint yesterday.

Producers from across the region were showing their goods to local and national
buyers, including Waitrose, Tesco, Budgens and Asda.

Mr Paice spoke to producers about various issues, particularly red tape. He
suggested the region could set up a food-themed trail to attract visitors.

He said: "In Scotland you have whisky trails where you spend a few days moving
around districts.

"There's no reason why you can't have a Devon food trail where you would have
local products - like cheese or sausages - and local accommodation along the
trail.

"Most producers have become good at adding value, for example turning milk into
ice cream."

Mr Paice was concerned that money destined for farmers was being channelled
through regional development agencies. He said more needed to be done to ensure
farmers received available grants.

In its first day, the show attracted 1,000 people and organiser  Hale Events
plans to hold another next year, on March 30 and 31.

Mike Anderson, from the firm, said: "Our intention of attracting national buyers
from across a number of food industries has so far worked very well.

"Visitors ranged from small B&B owners looking to source from local suppliers to
buyers from the country's largest multiples, reflecting the growing consumer
demand for locally- grown produce.

"The exhibitors have already confirmed that the quality of buyer attending the
show is very high, with consistent orders coming through even in the first few
hours yesterday.

"In its first year and after its first day, the Taste of the West Trade Show has
already successfully provided buyers representing different-sized organisations
from across a selection of industries with the ideal platform to source all
kinds of  local produce from the country's foremost food producing region."

Alan Wright, of Kenniford Farm  which produces pork products, said it was quiet
in the morning but it had picked up.

"We've had a lot of interest in our sausages. A lot of visitors to the stand are
from guest houses or pubs and they want to improve the quality of their
product," he said.

"The shadow minister seemed to be in agreement about adding value to farm
businesses, for example by becoming retailers.

"Farmers are good at farming but need extra help to diversify. The minister said
there was a fund available to farmers for that. More people should know about
it.

"I also like the idea of a creating a Westcountry cheese or sausage trail. It
will help to strengthen our brand identity."

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2008 Express and Echo
                              All Rights Reserved


                              994 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                                   The Times

                             March 8, 1996, Friday

Compensation for non-production not subject to VAT

SECTION: Features

LENGTH: 833 words


Court of Justice of the European Communities (Fifth Chamber). Mohr v Finanzamt
Bad Segeberg Case C-2194

Before D. A. O. Edward, President of the Fifth Chamber and Judges J.-F.
Puissochet, J. C. Moitinho de Almeida, C. Gulmann and L. Sevon

Advocate General F. G. Jacobs

(Opinion November 23, 1995)

(Judgment February 2)

Compensation paid to a farmer on his undertaking to cease milk production,
pursuant to a Community regulation, was not subject to value-added tax, as the
undertaking did not constitute a supply of services.

The Court of Justice of the European Communities (Fifth Chamber) so held on a
reference by the Bundesfinanzhof, Germany, by order of April 21, 1994, for a
preliminary ruling under article 177 of the EC Treaty on questions on the
interpretation of the Sixth Council Directive 77388EEC of May 17, 1977 on the
harmonisation of the laws of the member states relating to turnover taxes,
common system of value-added tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ 1977 L145 p1).

In March 1987 Jurgen Mohr, the owner of an agricultural holding on which he kept
dairy cattle, applied for a grant under Council Regulation (EEC) No 133686 of
May 6, 1986 fixing compensation for the definitive discontinuation of milk
production (OJ 1986 L119 p21).

In his application he undertook definitively to discontinue milk production. In
September 1987 his application was upheld and he was granted a single payment of
DM385,980. In the same year Mr Mohr sold his cattle and ceased all milk
production.

The Finanzamt decided to treat the compensation payment as consideration for a
taxable supply, namely the discontinuation of milk production, and to make it
subject to VAT.

In proceedings brought by Mr Mohr the Bundesfinanzhof referred to the Court of
Justice the questions whether a farmer who was a taxable person and definitively
discontinued milk production thereby made a supply of services within the
meaning of article 6(1) of the Sixth Directive, and whether the compensation
received for such discontinuation was a monetary payment which was taxable under
article 11(A)(1)(a).

Article 6 provides: ''(1) 'Supply of services' shall mean any transaction which
does not constitute a supply of goods ... Such transactions may include inter
alia ... obligations to refrain from an act...''

Article 11(A) provides: ''(1) The taxable amount shall be: (a) in respect of
supplies of goods and services ... everything which constitutes the
consideration which has been or is to be obtained by the supplier from the
purchaser...''

In its judgment he Fifth Chamber of the Court of Justice held:

Regulation No 133686 provided for the grant of compensation to any producer who
undertook to discontinue milk production definitively.

The German and Italian Governments submitted that such a producer supplied a
service for consideration within the meaning of the Sixth Directive.

They stated in that regard that payment of compensation and an undertaking to
discontinue milk production were mutually dependent, thus establishing the
direct link between the service provided and consideration for it as required by
the case law of the court.

The service, they said, consisted in an obligation to refrain from an act,
continuing milk production, within the meaning of article 6(1) of the directive,
and the compensation paid was in the nature of consideration for that
undertaking, thus constituting a taxable amount within article 11(A)(1)(a). That
interpretation of the directive could not be accepted.

According to article 2(1) of the First Council Directive 67227EEC of April 11,
1967 on the harmonisation of legislation of member states concerning turnover
taxes (OJ English Special Edition 1967 (I) p14), VAT was a general tax on the
consumption of goods and services.

In a case such as the present, there was no consumption as envisaged in the
Community VAT system.

By compensating farmers who under took to cease their milk production, the
Community did not acquire goods or services for its own use but acted in the
common interest of promoting the proper functioning of the Community milk
market.

In those circumstances, the undertaking given by a farmer that he would
discontinue his milk production did not entail either for the Community or for
the competent national authorities any benefit which would enable them to be
considered cosumers of a service.

The undertaking did not, therefore, constitute a supply of services within the
meaning of article 6(1) of the Sixth Directive.

On those grounds the Fifth Chamber of the Court of Justice ruled:

Articles 6(1) and 11(A)(1)(a) of the Sixth Directive were to be interpreted as
meaning that an undertaking to discontinue milk production given by a farmer
under Regulation No 133686 did not constitute a supply of services.

Consequently, any compensation received for that purpose was not subject to
turnover tax.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1996 Times Newspapers Limited


                              995 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                           The Malakoff News (Texas)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                January 4, 2013

Annual agricultural census mailed;
Still the best way to gather data

BYLINE: The Malakoff News staff

LENGTH: 464  words


ATHENS-The 2012 Census of Agriculture forms will be mailed to more than 3
million U.S. Agricultural producers the last week of December.

Approximately 375,000 forms will be mailed to current and potential Texas
farmers, ranchers and agricultural producers.

The first Agriculture Census took place in 1840, and is now conducted every five
years.

The Census looks at land use and tenure, operator characteristics, production
practices and economic information. It serves as an important "voice" for
America's fanners and ranchers.

The Census is the only source of uniform, comprehensive and impartial
agricultural data for every county in the nation and plays a role showing the
value and importance of agriculture of individual counties and may be used to
make future decisions shaping the future of American agriculture.

Census data is used for many purposes by many individuals and organizations
including:

University research and extension, state and local officials, agribusinesses,
farm organizations and commodity groups.

Companies and cooperatives for determining future locations of facilities
serving agricultural producers.

Community planners target needed services to rural residents.

Legislators, who shape farm policies and programs.

Producers making plans for their future operations.

Allocating block grant dollars to states and funds for beginning farmer,
conservation and other programs identifing research priorities and allocating
funds accordingly, and in rural economic de-velopment such as broadband Internet
expansion.

Returning the Census form is required by all who receive them even if they no
longer farm or have been involved in agriculture, including retired operators
who own land enrolled in CRP or WRP.

A note of explanation on the front page will suffice.

Only $1,000 worth of agricultural production is needed to be counted as a farm.
A few cows, several goats, laying hens for local egg sales or some hay
production may be all it takes.

The Census of Agriculture has mandatory reporting authority due to the large
amount of funds and other resources targeted and allocated based on the results.

Individual information is guaranteed confidentiality by federal law, Title 7, of
the U.S. Code which prevents NASS from sharing individual information with any
other government agency. NASS is also immune from any type of mandatory
disclosure of individual data, including legal processes and FOIA.

NASS is restricted to publishing only aggregate totals at state and county
levels in a manner where identity of any individual is not discernible in the
published totals.

The form is lengthy, but many commodity specific sections may be marked "no," if
producers did not raise those items.

For more information, call (888) 424-7828 toll free from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Monday-Friday.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Agriculture

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MLN

                      Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2013 The Malakoff News


                              996 of 998 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                             March 26, 2001, Monday

Livestock so vital to tri-states; Huge economic role: Dubuque, Grant and Jo
Daviess counties marketed $353 million in products in 1997

BYLINE: JOHN EVERLY

SECTION: Pg. a1

LENGTH: 883 words


U.S. officials and farmers, including those in the tri-states, worry that an
outbreak of animal diseases sweeping Europe could wreak economic havoc here.

European officials are struggling to contain the spread of foot-and-mouth
disease, a virus that leaves infected animals debilitated. It causes severe
losses in the production of meat and milk.

The United States has banned meat and livestock imports from the European Union.

Because the disease can spread so quickly, it wields a tremendous economic
threat to a country's livestock producers.

Although it poses no human health threat, it has the potential to deliver a
serious blow economically to the United State's domestic livestock industry.
Unchecked, an epidemic could cost billions of dollars, federal officials say.

In 1997, tri-state farms marketed more than $ 353 million worth of livestock
products in Dubuque, Grant and Jo Daviess counties alone, according to the
Census of Agriculture.

Jo Daviess County ranked seventh among Illinois counties in 1999 livestock cash
receipts, at nearly $ 44 million.

Grant County leads Wisconsin in the number of cattle and hogs on farms. Dubuque
County ranks among the nation's top 100 counties in livestock value.

Once introduced, the spread of foot-and-mouth would be rapid and far-reaching,
ag experts say. The disease can be carried by people through nasal passages, on
clothes, shoes and vehicles.

If a single farm is infected, the disease could spread through any visitors to
that farm: friends, relatives, neighbors, seed dealers, fertilizer suppliers,
and any other individuals who do business with livestock producers.

From there, the spread grows exponentially as each carrier tracks the disease to
his next stop, which may be another farm.

There's a ripple economic impact affecting sale barns, meat processors, the
trucking industry, grocery stores and consumers.

Experts say an outbreak of foot-and-mouth would virtually shut-down agricultural
economic activity.

"Foot-and-mouth is probably the most economically devastating livestock disease
in the world today, but the U.S. has not seen a case since 1929. We'd like to
keep it that way," said Wisconsin State Veterinarian Clarence Siroky.

If the disease were to enter the United States undetected, routine livestock
movements could spread it rapidly, Siroky said. It could easily get into wild
animals, where it would be virtually impossible to eradicate, he said.

In the modern global economy, foot-and-mouth could potentially spread rapidly to
non-infected areas. People and vehicles are believed to be common carriers for
the disease's spread.

With several thousand international travelers arriving in the tri-state area
each year, animal health officials and veterinarians are taking the threat
seriously.

"It would be easy to spread the disease from farm to farm when they are located
close together as they are in most of Iowa," said Iowa State University
veterinarian Nolan Hartwig. "In addition to farm-to-farm spread by a person, we
believe that the virus can be carried by the wind for several miles."

The rapid spread is a chief concern.

"Although the likelihood of the introduction of foreign animal diseases is low,
the damage an outbreak could cause to our livestock industry is extremely high,"
said Kevin L. Petersburg, area veterinarian in charge with the USDA's Animal
Plant Health Inspection Service office in Des Moines. "That is why APHIS and
states devote a lot of resources to foreign animal disease prevention and
preparedness."

Animal Plant Health Inspection Service has set up a system of preventive
measures to keep the disease out of the United States. The agency has also
developed plans to respond to a foreign animal disease outbreak, he said.

Wisconsin Gov. Scott McCallum and agriculture officials have mapped out a battle
plan for action in case foot-and-mouth disease spreads to Wisconsin.

Agriculture Secretary Jim Harsdorf said Friday that the governor would declare a
state of emergency if a cow with the highly contagious livestock disease were to
be found in the state.

A 40-mile quarantine area would be declared around that farm. Infected animals
would immediately be slaughtered, and others within the quarantine area would be
monitored and tested, then slaughtered if necessary, he said.

Also, no other animal susceptible to the disease would be allowed to move into
or out of that area, and human travel also would be restricted.

The Agriculture Department recently added 100 inspectors to its force of 1,800
nationwide to focus on flights arriving from Britain and elsewhere in Europe.

Because the disease can spread so easily, federal officials have stepped up
efforts to block its entry into this country. This month, the agriculture
department announced it is temporarily prohibiting the importation of fresh
pork. The ban also includes chilled or frozen ruminant meat and other products
of swine and ruminants from the European Union.

Still, the fight against foot-and-mouth disease depends, in part, on the honesty
of travelers. They are required to indicate on customs forms if they have been
on a European farm or are carrying meat or other food that could harbor the
disease.

- The Associated Press contributed

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 2001, Telegraph-Herald


                              997 of 998 DOCUMENTS



                                 Daily Variety

                             July 1, 2009 Wednesday

SMOKE HOUSED AT SONY

BYLINE: MARC GRASER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01

LENGTH: 373 words


George Clooney has parted ways with Warner Bros., moving the Smokehouse Pictures
shingle he runs with Grant Heslov to Sony.

The pair landed the two-year first-look pact at a time when studios are cutting
back on production deals, no matter how big the producer may be.

"While we have been trimming production deals overall for the last few years, we
see real value in opening our doors to producers with their critical and
commercial track record and their artistic point of view," said Sony Pictures
Entertainment co-chair Amy Pascal.

Clooney and Heslov had been based on the WB lot as producers for the past nine
years, initially working together at Section Eight, co-founded by Steven
Soderbergh, before launching Smokehouse in 2006. Clooney has been closely
associated with the studio since he became a breakout star on the WB-produced
"ER" in 1994.

Heslov produced and co-wrote "Good Night, and Good Luck," which Clooney helmed.

Smokehouse's executive team includes senior VP of development Nina Wolarsky and
creative exec Alex Meenehan.

Smokehouse still has several projects in development at the studio, including
"Farragut North," an adaptation of Beau Willimon's play about the Iowa
presidential primary; legal drama "The Challenge," penned by Aaron Sorkin; and
John Grisham adaptation "The Innocent Man."

It also has the satirical comedy "Our Brand Is Crisis," based on the docu by
Rachel Boynton; "Escape From Tehran"; and spy thriller "The Tourist," an
adaptation of Olen Steinhauer's novel.

Over the years, however, Smokehouse has found better luck getting films made and
released at other companies.

Its first official project was the Clooney-directed vintage football comedy
"Leatherheads," at Universal. Smokehouse also has "A Very Private Gentleman" at
Focus, while this fall, Overture will release "The Men Who Stare at Goats,"
which Heslov helmed.

Clooney spoke amicably of the departure: "Warner Bros. has been a great place to
work, and I've felt like part of a family for almost 20 years," he said. "So in
moving on, I'm leaving a terrific company and a lot of dear friends. They're a
class act."

Thesp will next be seen in Jason Reitman's "Up in the Air" at Paramount and
heard in animated feature "Fantastic Mr. Fox" from Fox.


LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 Reed Elsevier Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              998 of 998 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

'La Boheme' Is to Close After 228 Performances

BYLINE:  By JESSE McKINLEY

SECTION: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 447 words


Baz Luhrmann's daring modern restaging of the Puccini opera "La Boheme" will
close on June 29, its producers said yesterday. The production, which cost about
$8.5 million to mount at the Broadway Theater, recouped only about a quarter of
that investment.

Jeffrey Seller, one of the producers, said that although the production had
found an audience, it was not necessarily the audience that a show needed to
survive on Broadway.

"I think we definitely had snob hit appeal, but I don't think we got that
suburban audience," Mr. Seller said. "We got young hipsters, Manhattan art
lovers, kids and cognoscenti. What we didn't get was the 'Showboat' audience
from New Jersey."

The production, reset in 1950's Paris by Mr. Luhrmann, the director, and
Catherine Martin, his wife and chief designer, opened on Dec. 8 in a blaze of
publicity, mostly a result of Mr. Luhrmann's reputation as a dynamic hep-cat
filmmaker ("Moulin Rouge," "Romeo and Juliet").

That opening was one of the most dazzling in recent Broadway history, with an
array of Hollywood stars including Leonardo DiCaprio, Hugh Grant, Sandra Bullock
and Cameron Diaz.

The critics seemed swept away. Writing in The New York Times, Ben Brantley
called the production a "rapturous reimagining of Puccini's opera of love,"
adding that it was "both the coolest and the warmest show in town."

Riding on such praise, "La Boheme" sold extremely well shortly after opening,
although initial estimates by the show's producers that it would sell nearly $1
million worth of tickets in a day proved overoptimistic.

Its first day was closer to $600,000, which is still good, but not the level of
sales to indicate a multiyear hit.

Sales for the show began to fall off this spring. Last week "La Boheme" grossed
$529,526 and played to just 55 percent of capacity.

The show was also expensive to run, costing about $560,000 a week because of its
large cast -- one crowd scene featured more than 50 actors -- and elaborate
production values.

Originally budgeted at $6.5 million, the show ran overbudget by $2 million
before opening.

"La Boheme" won two Tony Awards on Sunday (for lighting and scenery) and a
special award for its 10 leading players, but it lost out to "Nine" in the best
musical revival category, one of the few categories that readily translates into
sales.

Mr. Seller said that he would tell the cast -- including its three rotating sets
of Mimis and Rodolfos, the tragic lovers at the story's heart -- of the show's
closing after yesterday's matinee.

While "La Boheme" will leave New York after 12 previews and 228 performances,
several additional productions are planned, including one scheduled for Los
Angeles in January.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from Baz Luhrmann's "Boheme," set in 1950's Paris, at
the Broadway Theater. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
