
                                1 of 1 DOCUMENT


                           Ruidoso News (New Mexico)

                            August 13, 2015 Thursday

Major broadband coming to Mescalero

BYLINE: By Dianne Stallings dstallings@ruidosonews.com @RuidosoNews on Twitter

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 895 words


Persistence and a good plan moved Mescalero Apache Telephone Inc. to the front
of the line for financing by the U.S, Department of Agriculture of a
multimillion dollar broadband communication system.

Officials from the Rural Development Division of the USDA were in the area
Thursday to present a certificate of obligation to officials of MATI and the
Mescalero Tribal Council, representing the $5.397,000 obligation by the Rural
Development's Rural Utilities Service's Telecommunications Loan Program and the
Substantially Underserved Trust Land Program.

The project on the reservation that abuts Ruidoso is the first in the nation to
be obligated, which allows MATI officials to take advantage of low interest
dollars. With the loan, MATI can upgrade specific portions of its copper cable
facilities with fiber, primarily aimed at the homes of 1,178 telephone customers
and 500 data customers currently served by the company, which is a wholly-owned
corporation of the tribe that operates one exchange serving the reservation. The
proposed improvements, which could take up to two years to construct and
install, primarily will be located in the more densely populated areas of
Mescalero, including the Geronimo, Pena, Goat Summit and Carrizo housing cores.

"Broadband access is important to our rural communities," Brandon McBride, RUS
administrator, said Wednesday during an interview in Ruidoso. "It's important in
terms of having new educational opportunities. It can improve rural health care
and it also is important for local businesses to being able to compete in the
global market place. It will allow Mescalero to provide fiber to the homes of
many of its customers and that will improve broadband services for them."

For those receiving the fiber facilities at home, children with schoolwork will
be able to go on-line and do homework, he said.

"In some cases, distance learning opportunities are available once we improve
broadband access," McBride said. "A lot of times, local schools can connect with
colleges and universities outside of the area to provide those kinds of
programs."

Electronic health records can be accessed and physicians practicing in rural
hospital can consult with doctors in larger hospitals in urban areas, he
said.The processGodfrey Enjady, who heads MATI, applied for the loan through the
USDA's traditional telecommunication infrastructure loan program, McBride
said."We were able to use our authorities through SUTA, and their loan came
through, and we were able to process that," he said. "It is a good project and a
good proposal."

Terry Brunner, USDA Rural Development State Director, said, "From the New Mexico
side, they were really persistent. They had the idea early and worked a lot with
USDA over the last few years to put the project at the front of the line. It is
a really nice commentary on the quality of work being done by the Mescalero that
they are the first in the gate for this program."

The program is subject to annual review and funding by Congress, McBride said.

Statements of support for the Mescalero project were issued by U.S. Sens. Martin
Heinrich and Tom Udall, Democrats from New Mexico and U.S. Rep. Steve Pearce, a
Republican who represents the Second Congressional District, sent a
representative to the ceremony Thursday. They noted that SUTA is a provision in
the 2008 Farm Bill, which amended the Rural Electrification Act of 1936. The
provision gave the Rural Utilities Service new tools to finance improvements in
electric, telecommunications and water and sewer infrastructure in underserved
tribal communities.USDA's area investment

Over the past six years, the USDA has invested $8.2 million in Lincoln County
housing, Brunner said.

"Out of $8.2 million, there were some direct loans, three to potential home
owners at 3.3 percent interest and about 12 home repairs for homeowners in at
the low income level, who can come in and apply," he said. "We also have done 50
or so loan guarantees, where a lender makes the loan and we back it up with
government guarantees. It's popular, because it is for moderate to low income."

The housing figure jumps to about $40 million, if Otero County is thrown into
the mix, he said.

"We've been trying to shed some light on that so people understand the impact
Rural Development has had on the area," Brunner said. "We financed a lot of
sewer lines to homes along the highway in Mescalero (about $4 million for the
system).

"Proper sewage treatment is really important, especially in New Mexico where we
have so many people on domestic wells. If you have good sewer treatment, you can
get them off septic systems and prevent leakage into ground water resources. You
not only provide a crucial service, but protect groundwater and keep it safe
from contamination."

Brunner said he planned to tour McBride through the regional Wastewater
treatment plant constructed by the village of Ruidoso and city of Ruidoso Downs
to serve the area. The USDA financed $8.7 million of the $32 million cost of
that plant.

"It's all necessary, if you are going to have economic development," McBride
said. "You have to have safe drinking water, affordable housing and
increasingly, we're seeing that broadband access is key to attracting economic
development. As Lincoln County continues to grow and develop, it's important we
have that nice infrastructure in place for the community."

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Examining a piece of fiber optics at the kick-off ceremony in Mescalero
are from left, MATI General Manager Godfrey Enjady, network service manager
David Westmacott, Gloria Salas representing Congressman Steve Pearce, USDA Rural
Development State Director Terry Brunner, Mescalero President Danny Breuninger,
USDA Rural Utilities Service Administrator Brandon McBride and Mescalero Chief
of Staff Duane Duffy.
Terry Brunner, USDA Rural Development State Director. standing, and USDA Rural
Utilities Service Administrator Brandon McBride from Washington D.C., were in
Ruidoso Wednesday in preparation for an official kickoff to a 5.3 million
broadband communication enhancement project on the Mescalero Apache Reservation
that abuts the village.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2015 Ruidoso News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved
