
                              500 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Tasmanian Country (Australia)

                            December 3, 2010 Friday
                                  1 - Edition

Competition at core of growers' fears Competition at core of fears

BYLINE: JENNIFER CRAWLEY

SECTION: Pg. 9

LENGTH: 775 words


TASMANIAN orchardists are bracing for an influx of New Zealand apples after the
World Trade Organisation overturned Australia's ban on the trans-Tasman fruit,
saying it was unscientific and broke international rules.

The New Zealand apple and pear marketing board ENZA said the WTO decision
cleared the way for detailed discussions to start on the technical details of
imports into Australia, with New Zealand apples expected to be on Australian
supermarket shelves by 2012.

Federal Agriculture Minister Joe Ludwig has announced a review of quarantine
laws that may yet delay or continue to keep New Zealand apples out of Australia,
but growers are not confident.

Spreyton apple grower Marcus Burns said competition, not fireblight disease, was
the biggest worry with New Zealand apples.

However, Pipfruit NZ chief Peter Beaven said competition was a good thing for
Australian growers because it would encourage Australians to eat more apples.

Apples and pears grown on Mr Burns' 22ha property, Avro Park Orchards, are sold
at Coles supermarkets and are used to make the popular Spreyton Apple Juice.

Mr Burns said New Zealand only had to land one pallet of apples at a market
somewhere in Tasmania to affect local growers.

``They're not going to land at a premium price above Australia, it's going to be
under,'' he said. ``If they have any volume at all that will benchmark it.

``I imagine the supermarkets will buy directly from New Zealand.''

But Mr Beaven said NZ apples would help Australian growers increase their
profits.

He said Australia's per-capita consumption was one of the lowest in the Western
world.

Australians eat between 6kg and 8kg of apples per person per year, New
Zealanders 15kg, German 18kg and Turks 34kg.

``What I have always said to the Australian growers is that there's a really
good opportunity for us to grow consumption in Australia, not to pinch your
share of the market,'' Mr Beaven said.

``Your consumers don't eat anything like what's normal even in the United States
and the UK they are up to around 10kg.''

He said consumers would be inclined to eat more apples if they were offered a
larger variety.

``You don't have Pacific Rose, you don't have much Jazz, you don't have Pacific
Queen, you don't have many Coxes and you have almost no Braeburn,'' Mr Beaven
said.

``Of course there's going to be some competition. Whenever you get new entrants
into a market you're going to get competition, but there is an opportunity to
grow the Australian consumption of apples rather than pinch a share of the
Australians'.''

Mr Burns said the main variety of apples grown in Tasmania was Gala, a type the
New Zealanders are expert at growing.

``Right now Tasmanian growers are making their money because we grow a better
Gala than the rest of Australia,'' he said.

``There goes our cream.''

Mr Beaven said if Tasmanians continued to grow high-quality colour Galas they
would continue to get good prices for them.

``Nothing's going to change,'' he said.

Mr Burns said he was hopeful that some varieties grown in Tasmania would not be
viable for the New Zealanders to export.

He said it cost less to grow an apple in New Zealand than it did here, and it
cost less to pack them because they were packed in a central packing shed,
whereas most Tasmanian orchards had their own packing shed.

``At the end of the day I guess the Kiwis are a bit smarter than what we are,''
he said. Mr Burns said he feared local markets would be flooded if a shipment of
New Zealand apples was rejected by the major supermarkets because of defects.

Mr Beaven said New Zealand apples travelled for 35 days to the United Kingdom by
ship and were rarely if ever rejected.

``It would be a very, very sad day if somebody sent 50 containers of bad fruit
to Tasmania,'' he said. ``That's just bollocks on the part of your growers to
even think that it could possibly happen.''

Mr Beaven said the Australian market was capable of taking half a million cases
of NZ apples. He said mature, symtomless apples did not pose a risk of
fireblight, and the two decisions in the Japan-US WTO case and two decisions in
the NZ-Australia WTO case supported that.

``How much evidence do we need to put in front of Australia before they accept
the fact that everyone else accepts around the world?'' Mr Beaven said.

The Burns have reacted quickly to the challenge of Kiwi imports and are
diversifying their farm infrastructure.

``We've pulled out trees that we may not have pulled out, we've started planting
wine grapes and we are looking at market garden vegetables for very local
sales,'' Mr Burns said.

``She's a funny world.

``I wonder if New Zealand would like some of our fruit in a glut year.''

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: TSC


                   Copyright 2010 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              501 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                            South Wales Evening Post

                                 April 8, 1998

Threats made to dog owners

SECTION: Agriculture: FARMING GEN, Pg.5

LENGTH: 204 words


DESPERATE West Wales farmers are warning dog owners their pets will be shot if
they worry sheep.

Farmers threatened by an economic crisis say they are prepared to take the
extreme measures to protect their flocks.

The agricultural industry is going through its worst crisis since the Second
World War.

Any loss of sheep would be a disastrous blow to farmers already struggling to
make ends meet.

They are now calling on everyone who takes to the countryside to keep all
animals under control or face the consequences.

With the approach of the Easter Bank Holiday, farms in the area are preparing
for an influx of visitors.

The Farmers' Union of Wales is supporting their stand and is calling on pet
owners to keep canines on leads to protect new-born lambs.

The FUW says that farmers in the region are experiencing a bumper lamb crop
after a mild winter.

However, there have been increasing complaints about attacks from dogs.

A spokesman said: "Some farmers are taking special precautions to protect their
flocks during a very difficult economic period in the sheep industry.

"The public should be aware that farmers are perfectly within their rights to
shoot dogs in the act of worrying sheep and lambs."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

                    Copyright 1998 South Wales Evening Post


                              502 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Philippines Daily Inquirer

                           September 7, 2013 Saturday

Ex-officials tied to pork scam not off the hook

BYLINE:  TJ Burgonio

LENGTH: 279  words


The former executives of government corporations that were used as conduits for
the diversion of senators' and congressmen's pork barrel will also be held
accountable in the ever-widening pork barrel scandal, Malacañang said Friday.

They include the two officials of the National Agribusiness Corp. (Nabcor) and
the Zamboanga del Norte Rubber Estate Corp. (ZREC) who appeared before the
Senate inquiry into the pork scam that they released millions of pesos to
nongovernment organizations on the mere say-so of the lawmakers.

"What the President said is clear:  'We go where the evidence takes us'," said
deputy presidential spokesperson Abigail Valte.

"We're talking of huge money here, and that's people's money," she said.
Salvador Salacup, an assistant secretary at the Department of Agriculture who
headed ZREC from 2007 to 2009, told a Senate hearing on Thursday that Senators
Juan Ponce Enrile, Jinggoy Estrada and Ramon Revilla Jr. had used the state
agency to channel their Priority Development Assistance Fund (PDAF) to an NGO.

Alan Javellana, the Nabcor president from 2007 to 2009, told the same hearing
that the three senators also channeled portions of their PDAF to three NGOs
identified with businesswoman Janet Lim-Napoles, the alleged brains of the pork
barrel scam.

The two said they were surprised by the influx of endorsements for pork
implementation from the legislators, but that the  \Department of Agriculture
had ordered to act on the lawmakers' requests to release the funds to the NGOs.

In announcing the scrapping of the pork barrel in late August, President Aquino
said Nabcor and ZREC would be abolished because of their role in the misuse of
the PDAF.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Philippines Daily Inquirer
                              All Rights Reserved


                              503 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                           Manila Times (Philippines)

                            January 18, 2010 Monday

Investment influx from China, Korea, ME seen

BYLINE: BY BEN ARNOLD O. DE VERA

LENGTH: 225 words


THE Board of Investments (BOI) said it expects an influx of investments from
China, South Korea and the Middle East-areas where the Philippine government
conducted missions late last year.

Trade Undersecretary Elmer Hernandez, who is also managing head of the BOI, told
reporters on Friday night that many potential investors are currently conducting
their due diligence here.

The official cited China's Wahaha Group, which recently visited BOI, as well as
a 15-men delegation from Korea representing both the business and government
sectors.

He said foreign businessmen mostly expressed interest to invest in the country's
construction, information technology, manufacturing and mining sectors.

Hernandez said investments from local businessmen would depend on this year's
Investment Priorities Plan, work on which already began.

"We're still crafting the listing and this will be taken up by the board in a
meeting [this] week."

The official said agriculture, infrastructure, mining, renewable energy and
water supply are good investment areas for local investors.

Hernandez said BOI targets a 10-percent growth in commitments this year. The
agency has yet to release data on total investments pledges last year, but
Hernandez had said the BOI might slightly miss its target of P288.35-billion
worth of pledges, or the same amount generated in 2008.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2010 News Bites Pty Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                               Global News Bites


                              504 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    July 12, 2000, Wednesday, FIRST EDITION

Census report shows new metro area influx About 70,000 more left rural areas
than came in

BYLINE: Haya El Nasser

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 426 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON -- Rural areas and small towns are losing their appeal
now that good jobs abound in metropolitan areas.

For the first time in seven years, the number of people who left
non-metropolitan areas from March 1998 to March 1999 outnumbered
those who came in, according to a Census Bureau report out today.
During that time, people continued to flock to metro areas, mostly
the suburbs.


The numbers are causing demographers to wonder if the much-publicized
rural rebound of the 1990s is over. After more than a decade of
decline and exodus, rural areas began enjoying an influx in 1992-93.

The Census Bureau's annual Geographical Mobility report showed
that about 300,000 more people moved in to rural areas than left
in 1992-93. But the numbers released today show that from 1998
to 1999, about 70,000 more people moved out than came in.

The report is based on a nationally representative survey of 50,000
households.

Much of the '90s rural boom was caused by a recession that hit
metro areas particularly hard, says Calvin Beale, senior demographer
with the Department of Agriculture. "In the first half of the
'90s, unemployment was higher in metro areas than it was in non-metros,"
he says. "In the last half of the '90s, the employment rates
reversed."

As companies cut jobs and offered early retirement, more people
took refuge in small towns where they found lower costs of living
and better lives, Beale says.

Many people also left the earthquakes, floods and race riots of
California for more pastoral settings.

The technological revolution helped. Armed with computer modems,
they set up businesses in cabins in Colorado and farmhouses in
Vermont. This new breed of entrepreneurs became known as "lone
eagles."

The rural numbers started to slide in the late '90s. Most of the
rural areas showing gains are in the path of suburban sprawl,
Beale says.

"It's far too radical to say that the rural renaissance is dead,"
says William Frey, demographer at the Milken Institute, a think
tank in Santa Monica, Calif., that studies world economics. "The
suburbanites who aren't happy with what they have in the suburbs
will still be around."

Beale says he expects rural migration to rise again as more of
the 79 million baby boomers reach retirement age. The oldest boomers
turn 54 this year.

"Metro America is going to continue to shed enough people out
into the rural areas," he says. "These retirees have good health
and good income. It makes them more likely to move."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              505 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                 Sunday Herald

                            December 9, 1990 Sunday

An eager field of four awaits a moving choice

LENGTH: 290 words


On Monday, the dual effects of the rural crisis and the recession will be
softened for one of the state's regional centres.

The State Government is due to announce the new location for the Department of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, which will be moved from Melbourne as part of a
policy initiative announced by the Premier, Mrs Kirner, in September.

An early field of 20, comprising most of the state's main towns and cities, has
been whittled to four - Geelong, Ballarat, Bendigo and Shepparton.

The winning city would gain an important government operation, up to 250
families who would relocate and additional funding to enable the expansion of
institutions such as schools and hospitals to cope with the sudden population
growth.

Each city believes it could handle the sudden influx and all have offered the
department various incentives.

Bendigo: Bendigo has offered several sites, one on the city's main street 400
metres from the main post office. It stated in its submission that there was no
environmental, social or economic impediments to the site's development.

Ballarat: When the DARA committee appointed to determine a site visited
Ballarat, its members were treated like visiting royalty. They were shown 15
possible sites and given a run down on the city's status. One site is the
current Friskies dog food factory, which the company will have vacated by next
March when it ceases its Ballarat operation.

Geelong: Post-Pyramid Geelong, Victoria's second biggest city, has offered the
Farrow Corporation headquarters on the city's bay as a possible site for the
relocation.

Shepparton: Shepparton's geographic location, central to most areas of the
state, is the city's main drawcard.

END OF STORY

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: SHD

                   Copyright 1990 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              506 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           Ledger (Lakeland, Florida)

                             July 14, 2000, Friday

AG CENTER A BOOST FOR BARTOW; CITY LEADERS ARE EAGER FOR THE INFLUX OF EMPLOYEES
AND AN IMPROVED AREA.

BYLINE: BILL RUFTY The Ledger

SECTION: Metro; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 399 words


BARTOW -- Construction is well under way for a state government building in
downtown Bartow.

As the concrete block walls go up on the first floor of the Florida Department
of Agriculture's Regional Operations Center at 605 E. Main St., so do the hopes
of city business leaders about the increased number of workers downtown and the
improved neighborhood.

This first phase of the operations center should be completed by early March,
said Terry McElroy, communications director for Agriculture Commissioner Bob
Crawford.

Crawford sought and won money for the $ 3.1 million operations center and then
selected the downtown of his home city as the site of the regional facility.
Crawford grew up in Bartow and graduated from Bartow High School .

"Ultimately, the center will have 200 employees, both new and relocated
positions, adding to the economy of downtown Bartow. But that is more than five
years away,' McElroy said.

Agriculture officials expect the building initially to house 30 to 50 people,
largely depending on how soon some of the smaller divisions can exit from leases
in various areas.

The regional center is intended to consolidate many far-flung branches in a
central location near Interstate 4.

The operations center will house agriculture law enforcement, food safety,
marketing news, LP gas standards and animal standards. To begin with, several
two- and three-person offices in Tampa and Orlando will be closed.

When complete, the two-story building will contain 22,800 square feet of office
space. In addition, the complex will include a 100-seat auditorium with
satellite television equipment to broadcast meetings and seminars to other areas
of the state.

The new building and additional employees will be an economic boost to the
downtown almost immediately, city officials and Crawford have said.

State Rep. Adam Putnam, R-Bartow, said at an unveiling of plans last year that
Crawford's center was the biggest governmental project to come to Bartow since
the late Gov. Spessard Holland located the headquarters of District 1 of the
Florida Department of Transportation in Bartow just before World War II.

"The commissioner's intentions are two-fold -- first, to consolidate because of
the population explosion and Bartow's ideal location; and secondly, he wanted to
assist in the ongoing renovations in his home town," McElroy said.


LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ERNST PETERS/Ledger photos: A sign warns of the closed sidewalk at the
construction site of the Florida Department of Agriculture's Regional Operations
Center recently in Bartow.; Construction continues on the Florida Department of
Agriculture's Regional Operations Center recently on Main Street in Bartow.; The
Ledger: Map

             Copyright 2000 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation


                              507 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                           Manila Times (Philippines)

                            November 21, 2016 Monday

Governor seeks protection for onion farmers

BYLINE: JING VILLAMENTE

LENGTH: 264 words


SOURCED FROM CURRENT GLOBAL NEWSPAPERS AND JOURNALS

Nueva Ecija Gov. Czarina Cherry Umali on Sunday called on the national
government to always ensure that onion farmers are protected and should not be
at the mercy of traders and of erratic movement of supply and demand in the
market.

Umali was reacting to reports that a shortage of onions has been observed
leading to influx of imported onions in the market. Nueva Ecija is the top
onion-producing province in the Philippines. A total of 19 municipalities and
cities plant onion whole year round on about 1,577 hectares of land. "The
interest of farmers should always come first. They must be protected. Their
crops should be protected. Their produce must get a fair share of the market.
Politicians with bad intent should stop manipulating the farmers and prop up
superfluous issues to confuse the public. That is not good politics," Umali told
The Manila Times in a chance interview in Quezon City. She said that even
Serafin Santos, the chief of the Office of Provincial Agriculture, reported that
there was no crisis in the supply of onions but some unscrupulous traders are
hoarding their stocks to earn more. Santos reported that last August, farmers
already harvested their fully grown onions and are planting for their next crop
harvest. He said as early as September 2016, they received an advice from the
Bureau of Plant Industry of the Department of Agriculture to conduct an
inventory of current onion stock over a lingering fear that supply may fall
short because of the damage done by army worms during the last cropping.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: English

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Political/General News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2016 News Bites Pty Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              508 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Chester Chronicle

                                October 13, 2011
                                Frodsham Edition

Fresh Traveller concerns over pounds 340,000 green belt;
Alvanley news

BYLINE: Rachel Flint

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 293 words


CONCERNED villagers are worried Travellers could pitch up on their doorsteps
after acres of land were sold for more than pounds 300,000 at auction.

For more than five years, villagers living in Alvanley and Helsby have
campaigned against Travellers living on a temporary site in green belt land on
Towers Lane, Alvanley.

Now just over a month after villagers across Helsby, Mickle Trafford, Alvanley
and Dunham-on-the-Hill celebrated following the announcement potential
Travellers' sites would not be developed on their doorsteps, fears are growing a
neighbouring field could soon be filled with a fresh influx of caravans.

Concerns more Travellers could pitch up in the area were raised after more than
25 acres of agriculture land in Commonside, Alvanley were put up for auction on
the Denton Clark website.

Now fears have reached boiling point after the 29 acres of agriculture land were
sold at auction for a total of pounds 340,000 under three different lots - more
than pounds 100,000 over the original asking price - to an unknown buyer.

Residents living near the land originally considered clubbing together to buy
the fields in order to stop them being bought by Gypsies and Travellers at the
auction, but were unable to match the high bids placed on the day.

Alvanley Parish Council Clerk Derek Bowker said despite action by Cheshire West
and Chester Council's Executive to move forward with the shortlist of sites, the
fear of fresh pitches appearing in the village was still very real to home
owners and residents.

A spokesperson for Denton Clark Auctioneers confirmed the lots had been bought
for a total of pounds 340,000, but would not confirm if the land had been sold
to an individual or multiple clients or who had bought the land.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  FEARS: Residents are concerned that new temporary sites could appear
after land sold for more than pounds 300,000. IC030211site-002

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ch


                           Copyright 2011 MGN Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              509 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Kashmir Monitor (India)

                              May 27, 2013 Monday

Youth are the strength of nation: Mir

LENGTH: 390 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, May 27 -- Describing that youth are the strength of the Nation,
Minister for Agriculture Ghulam Hassan Mir called upon the youth for their
participating in the development process and contribution in socio-economic
development of the country and the state as well.

The Minister was addressing a public gathering at Mamoosa of Pattan area on
Sunday.

Reiterating the programmes specified for the welfare of the youth, the Minister
said the government has launched various schemes for their welfare, adding that
they have to come forward and avail the benefits of these schemes.

He urged upon the youth for establishing their own income generating units,
adding that they have to become employment providers, not employment seekers.

Stressing the need for actively participation of youth in election process, Mir
said that electoral process is meant for the development of the State and area.
He said the youth of the State have enormous potential and the needs is to
mobilize it better way and use for peace and development of the State.

The Minister announced Rs. 30 lakh for repair and upgradation of Lolpora-Mamoosa
road. He said that the upgradation of existing Lolpora-Mamoosa road would
strengthen the road connectivity and boost economic activities in the area as
well.

The Minister said one Agriculture Officer would be retained for three Panchayat
Halqa. He said that this initiative would help in boosting the agriculture
production and improve the financial health of the farmers. He urged upon the
farming community for availing the benefits of farmer friendly schemes launched
by the Agriculture and other allied Departments.

The Minister also invited business tycoons from country and abroad for investing
in the State, adding that this would redress the problems of unemployment and
also open new vistas for the youth for working outside the State.

Referring to the influx of tourists in the State particularly in Valley, Mir
said that record numbers of tourists are visiting the state. He sought tourists'
cooperation in maintaining the hygienic environ in the State in general and
particularly at tourist destinations. Published by HT Syndication with
permission from The Kashmir Monitor. For any query with respect to this article
or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2013 The Kashmir Monitor
                              All Rights Reserved


                              510 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            BBC Monitoring Kiev Unit
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              May 30, 2011 Monday

Ukrainian premier rules out switching to barter in trade with Belarus

LENGTH: 448 words


Excerpt from report by private Ukrainian Inter TV on 30 May

[Presenter] Belarus businessmen are encountering problems caused by the currency
crisis that has broken out in the country. There are also problems in interstate
trade. It is hard for Minsk to settle with Kiev, but [Ukrainian Prime Minister]
Mykola Azarov says there is no point switching to natural exchange of goods. He
is sure there are no grounds for barter. The neighbours have currency reserves
and they can confirm their reputation as a reliable economic partner. A report
by Hennadiy Vivdenko looks at what awaits ordinary Ukrainians from the
Belarusian crisis.

[Passage omitted: A Belarusian analyst says that Belarusian agricultural
products will become much cheaper and "shuttle traders" may sell dairy, meat
products in border regions.]

[Correspondent] Belarusian companies are having great difficulty settling with
Ukrainian suppliers. According to the Ukrainian embassy in Minsk, local
customers owe at least 500m dollars. In the first place, this is for Ukrainian
metal and metal constructions. The Ukrainian prime minister sympathetically
describes Belarus as fraternal, but he says there are no grounds to switch to
interstate barter. But he thinks it worthwhile to study the neighbour's
experience.

[Azarov, speaking at hospital opening in Kiev] Generally speaking, the things
that are happening [in Belarus] at the moment should, first of all, be a very
serious lesson for us. Our government and our authorities should take this into
account when implementing their economic policy. And we certainly are taking
this into account.

[Correspondent] At the National Bank of Ukraine [NBU], they do not believe that
the Belarusian scenario is possible on the Ukrainian currency market. The head
of the group of advisers to the NBU head [Valeriy Lytvytskyy] confirms this
position with fresh data from the State Statistics Committee.

[Lytvytskyy, in Ukrainian] In the first quarter, we had a net influx of currency
of about 1bn. In the first third of the year, we have a net capital influx, a
proficit of the consolidated balance, of 2bn in one month.

[Correspondent] Unlike in Belarus, there is no agitation at Ukrainian currency
exchange points. While the national currency of our northern neighbour is in
retreat, Ukraine's currency reserves are continuing to grow at a record rate. At
the NBU they have almost 40bn dollars, which is 10 times more than their
colleagues in Minsk. So the Ukrainian hryvnya has not reacted in any way to the
collapse of the Belarusian rouble.

[Passage omitted: A banker says that Belarus' share in Ukraine's foreign trade
is negligible.]

Source: Inter TV, Kiev, in Russian 1700 gmt 30 May 11

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2011 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              511 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                  Korea Times

                            January 13, 2012 Friday

Korea-China FTA could deal fatal blow to farmers

BYLINE: By Kim Tong-hyung

LENGTH: 756 words


The news simply keeps getting worse for Korean farmers, crumbling under the fear
of an existential crisis as the country moves to ink a slew of free trade
agreements (FTAs) with major economies flexing bigger muscles in industrial
agriculture.

There are observers who anticipate that Korea's recently-ratified free trade
pact with the United States, once it kicks in, will eventually have farmers here
hanging on the ropes. An FTA with China, which is also on the table, could prove
to be the uppercut that floors them.

In a recent report, the Korea Institute for International Economic Policy
(KIEP), one of Korea's many state-run think tanks, admitted that an FTA with
China will hit the local farming industry in a way the Korea-U.S. FTA never
could.

Should its free trade negotiations with China go through, Korea may see
production in its agriculture and fisheries sectors drop around 14.26 percent
from the levels of 2005 due to the influx of cheaper Chinese products. Under an
extreme scenario that both countries decide to remove import tariffs on all
agriculture products, the margin of decline could extend to 20 percent.

The economic value of the lost production could measure up to 3.3 trillion
(about $2.8 billion) a year, KIEP said, nearly four times larger than the annual
815 billion won damage it expects from the influences of the Korea-U.S. deal.

"The damage to the local farm industry from a Korea-China FTA will be at least
twice as big as the damage from the Korea-U.S. FTA," the KIEP report said.

A separate report from the Korea Rural Economic Institute (KREI) projected that
the loss in agricultural production due to a Korea-China FTA would be around 2.7
trillion won on the premise of a 50 percent cut in import tariffs on all
agricultural products. Chinese agricultural imports will likely surge by more
than 200 percent after the FTA kicks in, according to the report.

"The Korea-U.S. FTA will lead to a 3 percent decline in agricultural production
for the first 15 years after the deal becomes effective. One could assume that
the effect of a Korea-China FTA will be three to five times larger," said Moon
Han-pil, head of KREI agricultural trade research team.

"It's imperative that the government works to implement protection for sensitive
items such as rice to minimize the damage to local farmers. It would be wise to
lower tariffs but not eliminate them entirely on items including chili, garlic
and cabbages, and provide protection for vegetable growers and commercial flower
growers, sectors that are expected to be badly exposed to the Korea-U.S. FTA."

Aside from its deal with the U.S., Korea has so far signed FTAs with a variety
of economies, such as the European Union, Chile, Singapore and the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Next on the to-do list are deals with China,
Canada and Australia.

It's obviously too early to tell how the complicated web of falling import
tariffs will affect different people and companies here, although Korea's
electronic and automotive powerhouses like Samsung and Hyundai are likely to
emerge as winners. There is less suspense in guessing who the big losers would
be as farmers here brace for the possibility that they are relying on a decaying
business model.

Farmers have begun expressing their anger over the slew of FTAs in the pipeline.
Cattle farmers from around the nation organized and attempted to release up to a
thousand cows, bulls and calves in front of Cheong Wa Dae last week. The planned
protest was defused by police.

On his recent trip to Beijing, Korean President Lee Myung-bak agreed with
Chinese leader Hu Jintao to officially begin negotiations for an FTA between the
two countries within the next two months.

Opposition parties such as the Democratic United Party (DUP) slammed Lee's
verbal commitment, urging the government to take a closer look on how a free
trade deal with China could affect farmers and manufacturers here.

"It's obvious that a Korea-China FTA will devour our farmers and also decimate
our small-and-medium-sized companies and light manufacturing sector," said DUP
lawmaker Choi In-gi.

"Consumer electronics, cars and mobile phones will be among the sectors that
could benefit from a boost in trade, but other industries will be hurt severely
by China and its competitiveness based on cheaper labor. Government officials
have struggled mightily to prepare plans to protect farmers from the affects of
the Korea-U.S. FTA, so it's hard to imagine why they are so eager to proceed
with a free trade pact with China."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2012 The Korea Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              512 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                            December 7, 1998, Monday

Under agreement, Canada will further ease way for US agricultural products

BYLINE: BY DOUG PALMER

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 466 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


U.S. trade negotiators said Friday they had reached an agreement with Canada to
further open its market to U.S. farm goods, allowing Montana and North Dakota
farmers to ship grain directly to Canada. The agreement, announced by U.S. Trade
Representative Charlene Barshefsky, also included Canada's promise to allow U.S.
farmers to export grain by rail and to revise its animal health import
regulations.  The agricultural trading partnership between Canada and the United
States is one of the biggest in the world, with $15 billion in farm goods
crossing the border last year. ""This is a first step, but for American farmers
and ranchers it is good news in a trying year, '' Ms. Barshefsky said in a
statement. ""While we clearly have more to do, the measures we have achieved
today will help solve many of the problems faced by grain growers, the cattle
industry and pork producers.'' The agreement was described as an important step
toward resolving a number of long-simmering farm trade disputes along the
U.S.-Canadian border. A Sunday blockade had been planned by angry farmers in
Minnesota, Montana and North Dakota to stop imports of Canadian goods if Ottawa
did not agree to some specific changes. The pact included greater cooperation on
cattle trade data and a U.S. plan to establish a new mechanism to monitor grain
imports from Canada with quarterly consultations between both nations. It also
will eliminate a 30-day quarantine on U.S. live hogs exported to Canada from 33
states, sharply reducing costs for U.S. producers. Ottawa also agreed to
eliminate burdensome testing requirements for a wheat disease known as karnal
bunt, which affected much of the wheat grown in 14 Northern U.S. states, Ms.
Barshefsky said. U.S. trade officials acknowledged there were more farm trade
issues yet to be resolved with Canada. Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman said
Canada also agreed to work with the United States to avoid trade disruptions
based on differing regulations for pesticides and veterinary drugs for animals.
The American Farm Bureau, the nation's largest farmer organization, expressed
some skepticism about the agreement and said U.S. producers would be watching to
see if Canada lived up to the pact. ""It's progress, obviously. There's a lot of
work to be done,'' said Dick Newpher, head of the Farm Bureau's office in
Washington. American farmers have complained that an influx of Canadian wheat,
cattle and pigs pushed down U.S. prices while the border rules denied them
access to Canadian markets. The dispute over agricultural trade has become a
high-profile issue for Northern farm state lawmakers because growers are facing
the lowest commodity prices in a generation, skyrocketing rates of bankruptcies
and a series of weather and crop disease problems.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1998 Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              513 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                Himalayan Times

                            March 16, 2016 Wednesday

Organic food

LENGTH: 170  words


Sununtar setboonsarng and haidy ear-dupuy

In Hanoi, where the population of 7.5 million is rapidly increasing with the
influx of migrants from other provinces, the demand for fresh, safe food is
higher than ever before. A recent survey about food safety in 8 Asian countries
shows that those most worried about pesticides being used to grow the vegetables
they eat are in Viet Nam. This concern, though, is creating new opportunities
for local farmers and civil society to come to together to promote healthy,
pesticide-free, sustainable agriculture to meet Hanoi's growing demand for safe
food. But organic food must be certified as such, and that can become very
expensive if smallholder farmers are to adopt the third-party certification
system, which requires them to navigate a labyrinth of paperwork and shoulder
the cost of an independent auditor to verify compliance with international norms
and regulations that often don't account for many of the challenges of farming
in a developing nation.

-Blogs.adb.org/blog

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2016 Himalayan Times, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              514 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       The Sun Herald (Sydney, Australia)

                             January 7, 1990 Sunday
                                  Late Edition

WESTWARD HO? NO GO |

BYLINE: ELISABETH MEALEY

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 433 words


MORALE within the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries in Sydney has hit
rock-bottom.

And up to 100 experienced staff have quit because of the Governnment's plans to
shift the head office to Orange.

Since last August's decision to relocate almost 500 head office staff by
December 1991, at least 40 senior professional officers have transferred to
other departments or found jobs in private enterprise.

Large numbers of clerical and administrative staff also have left.

According to the department's Public Service Association representative, Trish
Kernahan, many more experienced staff are likely to leave in coming months.

"It's obvious that the vast majority of people would not be able to go to
Orange," Ms Kernahan said.

"But people have been given little choice. It's either go to Orange or get out."

Agriculture Minister Ian Armstrong, who has not wavered from his plan to
decentralise the department, said the staff losses were "not unexpected".

Mr Armstrong said: "Most of the staff that have left have been able to find
positions in other departments."

Ms Kernahan said morale was extremely low because of the loss of experienced
staff and the influx of untrained people hired to replace them.

"It's depressing. The people who are leaving feel obliged to train new people
before they get out themselves," she said.

"They care about the work they're doing but they're handing it over to
inexperienced people."

When announcing the relocation plan, Mr Armstrong claimed the move would save
the Government more than $40 million over the next decade. But recent Treasury
costing set the maximum saving at just $1.5 million.

Mr Armstrong denied that morale in the department was low, claiming the 2,500
departmental staff in country areas outside Sydney were enormously supportive of
the relocation.

"They now have an opportunity for a career path that was not previously
available to them because of the aberration between living costs in the city and
the country," he said.

A PSA-sponsored staff survey last September found that of the 238 who responded
only 18 head office staff were prepared to move to Orange.

According to Ms Kernahan, the major grievances among staff were: housing
problems - the real estate market in Orange had been over-inflated in
anticipation of the move and rental accommodation was scarce - a shortage of
child care and primary school places in Orange, and a general lack of specialist
health services.

Ms Kernahan said that while the Department had offered to pay removalist fees
and cover the cost of items such as school uniforms, no general compensation
package had been offered.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Port: IAN ARMSTRONG

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1990 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              515 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Business Mirror (Philippines)

                           January 18, 2017 Wednesday

Government gives up bid to extend rice QR

BYLINE: Cai Ordinario

LENGTH: 703  words


The government has abandoned plans to ask the World Trade Organization (WTO) to
extend the quantitative restriction (QR) on rice due to lack of time, the
Department of Agriculture (DA) said on Wednesday.

In a news briefing in Malacañang, Agriculture Secretary Emmanuel F. Piñol said
the government will no longer file for an extension of the rice-import quota,
which is set to expire on June 30.

Piñol said this was the result of the discussions in the recent Committee on
Tariff and Related Matters (CTRM) meeting. The CTRM is cochaired by the
secretaries of Trade and Industry and Socioeconomic Planning.

'In the last meeting of the CTRM, the consensus was against [DA's position]. The
QR will expire and the government cannot do anything about it,' he said.

The DA chief noted that the country's application for the QR extension was
processed over a period of two years. To date, the Philippines is the only
country in the world that continues to implement rice import caps.

Piñol said the 'saving grace' for the Philippines would be the Republic Act (RA)
8178, or the Agricultural Tariffication Act of 1996, which has not yet been
amended by Congress. RA 8178 needs to be amended to allow the Philippines to
replace the QR-a nontariff barrier-with a specific duty.

He said the law can effectively prevent the influx of cheap imported rice into
the Philippines. No bill has yet been filed in Congress to amend RA 8178. 'We
are hoping that our friends in Congress will be sympathetic with the Filipino
farmers,' Piñol said.

Trade experts and the National Economic and Development Authority (Neda)
expressed concern that the failure to amend RA 8178 under a post-QR scenario
could open the country to WTO sanctions.

Former Tariff Commissioner George Manzano told the BusinessMirror that sanctions
can be imposed against the Philippines if other WTO member-countries complain
about paying a higher duty due to the nonamendment of RA 8178.

Currently, the government allows rice imports within the minimum access of
volume (MAV) of 805,200 metric tons (MT) to enter the country at a lower tariff
of 35 percent. Imports in excess of the MAV are slapped a higher tariff of 50
percent.

'My guess is we will be open to sanctions if an exporter complains and brings
the matter up in the WTO,' Manzano said.

Sanctions from the WTO could mean trade partners asking for concessions such as
lower tariff on specific goods or nondelivery on the trade pacts.

However, Manzano said before these are imposed, the WTO needs to subject
complaints to due process. He said this is the importance of the WTO-placing
order on global trade.

Neda Undersecretary Rosemarie Edillon told the BusinessMirror that concessions
may not be considered as sanctions since the Philippines has made trade
concessions in the past, particularly in the maintenance of its QR.

These concessions include allowing the entry of more dairy and livestock
imports. These concessions, she said, was used by the economic managers to
extend the QR.

'Concessions are not sanctions. Sanctions include not importing from the
Philippines,' Edillon said.

To prepare for the scrapping of the QR, she said the government needs to discuss
concessions at the CTRM as early as now. Once the CTRM has decided, the
government can now make the necessary commitments.

'Government failure'

Despite extending the rice-import quota twice, Piñol said millions of farmers
remain poor due to the inaction of the government.

'I am not blaming anybody. I am not blaming a specific administration, I am not
blaming a specific individual. But the plain and simple truth is that the
government has failed to deliver,' he said.

Piñol cited the failure of the government to expand irrigated rice lands in
previous years. Of the 3.9 million hectares of Philippine rice farms, he said
only 1.3-million hectares are irrigated.

This means that around two-thirds of rice farmers in the country could only
produce rice-a water-loving crop-once a year.

Piñol said the government also failed to convince farmers to adopt hybrid-rice
seeds, which could increase yield, and bring down the cost of production.

'As of the moment, of the 3.9 million hectare of rice farms, only 300,000 plus
is planted to hybrid seeds,' Piñol said.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Business Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                              516 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                  Korea Times

                            March 26, 2009 Thursday

Koreans to Get EU Wine, Pork Belly Strips on Cheap

BYLINE: By Kim Hyun-cheol

LENGTH: 506 words


Staff Reporter

Businesses here are busy anticipating the future, as South Korea signed a
tentative free trade agreement (FTA) with the European Union (EU) Tuesday.

Korea and the EU began trade talks in May 2007, with differences over industrial
tariffs and auto trade regulations initially standing in the way. The two
parties, however, made progress on those and other conflicting issues since the
seventh round of negotiations in May last year.

Industries including auto and electronics expect more profitability with the
pact, with easier access to Korea's second largest trade counterpart. Some
fields, however, such as chemical, machinery and agriculture, brace for a
further adverse balance due to a rush of imports.

Industry watchers say farm products will have the largest influx once the deal
takes effects, especially frozen pork including belly strips, or samgyeopsal,
and chuck rolls, which are in high demand here.

Prices of frozen EU belly strips cost about 86.6 percent of what they do in
Korea, according to the Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries,
and they could further go down to 72.1 percent.

The ministry also expected wine and cheese imports to increase. "A lot of
European countries have high quality wines, and customers will favor European
wine with cheaper prices through the FTA," an official of the ministry said.

As for auto-related issues, one of the most sensitive throughout the talks,
Korea and the EU agreed to eliminate tariffs on cars with an engine capacity of
over 1.5 liters within three years. Tariffs for cars with smaller capacities
will be lifted after five years.

The outcome is a hopeful sign for more exports of small- and compact-sized
vehicles to Europe, the industry says.

Vehicles were Korea's biggest export item to European countries. Last year,
Korea sold over 400,000 vehicles to EU member states while importing 32,000.

Korea posted a trade surplus over $23 billion last year with the EU, the
country's second-largest trading partner next to China, with trade surpassing
$90 billion.

The FTA, once finalized, will boost South Korea's exports by $11 billion and
gross domestic product by 3.1 percent, the Korea Institute for International
Economic Policy forecast.

Some critics, however, raise questions over the actual effects of the FTA.

Local farmers are subject to a serious blow with the abolition of the current
25-percent tariff on imported pork and other European farm products are expected
to dominate shop shelves here as apples and chicken, for example, are up to 50
percent cheaper than homegrown ones.

Tariff rates are also set in favor of Europe. Currently, Korea's non-tariff
items account for 1.7 percent on farm products and 29.8 percent on others, well
below the 43.2 percent and 58.8 percent in the EU. This means immediate tariff
removal is likely to do more damage to Korea.

Opponents of the agreement also claim that auto exports will not significantly
rise for European models because most major carmakers here already have plants
in Eastern European countries.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2009 The Korea Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              517 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

Alberta farmers brace for heat; Influx of grasshoppers also a worry

BYLINE: Sammy Hudes, Calgary Herald

SECTION: CANADA; Pg. C7

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: CALGARY


A forecast of hot, dry weather for the upcoming months has many Alberta farmers
worried about crop production.

"Above-normal temperatures" are likely until the end of August in southern and
central Alberta, according to Environment Canada meteorologist Bill McMurtry.

This could be combined with less precipitation than normal, said McMurtry.

And with drier weather comes the potential for an increase of grasshoppers that
invade farmland.

"In general, the spring so far has been relatively dry in many locations,
particularly in the agricultural belt across the Prairies," Mc-Murtry said.

Mark Cutts, a crop specialist with Alberta Agriculture, said the effects on
farmers could be "extensive."

"We could see an impact on yield," he said. "Moisture would certainly be
welcome."

If not, grasshoppers could plague the province's farms, Cutts warned.

"Once they hatch, if their conditions remain warm and dry, they'll be
productive.

"When they find a plant type that they favour in terms of their diet, then they
will just feed on that crop, so potentially they could have an impact on the
amount of plants that are in a field."

All that farmers can do at this point is pray for rain, said Lynn Jacobson,
president of the Alberta Federation of Agriculture. "It's a waiting game for a
lot of people now," he said. "If they don't get some decent moisture in the next
week or week and a half in some areas, it's really going to start hurting the
crop and the production."

Jacobson said some crops, such as chickpeas, hold out better against drought.
Others, like barley, could fare poorly.

"You can't really prepare beforehand," he said.

The forecast has some farmers worried about their livelihood.

"As a farmer, we grow barley to make money," said Brian Otto, who also harvests
wheat and yellow peas in Warner, about 70 kilometres southeast of Lethbridge.

"It's how we operate our farms, and certainly if we have reduced yield, that's
less to sell. It has a direct impact on the cash flow of the farm."

On Tuesday, canola farmer Steve Selgensen was out spraying crops in his field in
Hussar, about 100 kilometres east of Calgary.

"There's different grades of sprays you can put on these crops, and everybody's
just looking for the cheapest bang for their buck because they don't want to
spend any more than they have to," Selgensen said. "It's looking not so good
right now."

Otto said he prepares for the possibility of drought by taking out crop
insurance.

"The years you have good crops, you have to be trying to keep that money set
aside for the eventuality," he said. "In southern Alberta, we're prone to
drought once in a while, so you've got to be prepared for that."

About 160 km north of Calgary in Sylvan Lake, farmer Jason Lenz said it's been
the driest spring in 15 years.

"The crops didn't germinate as vigorously," he said. "At this time of year, your
crops are a little bit thinner, just not as even as they normally are, and
that's directly related to the amount of moisture we have ... Our farm is in
generally a very high rainfall area, and to have dry conditions like this is
really uncommon."

Otto said there are systems to preserve moisture in the ground longer that
didn't exist 20 or 30 years ago, which help farmers in these situations.
However, they are otherwise powerless against the detrimental effects of the
weather. "The farmers are at the mercy of mother nature," he said. !@COPYRIGHT=©
2015 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Colleen De Neve, Calgary Herald; Hussar area farmer Steve Selgensen
says while the situation is not dire yet, if the area does not get rain soon,
the growing season might be impacted.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 The Star Phoenix
                              All Rights Reserved


                              518 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           North Queensland Register

                           February 27, 2014 Thursday

ALMOST 100 submissions have been made to the Senate

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 274 words


ALMOST 100 submissions have been made to the Senate inquiry into the collection
and disbursement of grass-fed cattle levies.

As the North Queensland Register went to press on Tuesday morning, the figure
stood at 97 with another influx of submissions likely to occur in the following
days.

It is quite an improvement from three weeks ago, when only 13 submissions had
been made to the inquiry.

However, graziers have warned, although there has been an increase in
submissions, they still only accounted for a small percentage of the total
grassfed producer population nationwide. Cameron McIntyre, Bauhinia Downs, said
the inquiry relied on all producers to have their say, with many pastoral
companies run by CEOs who didn't have as great a vested interest in the
industry.

"A lot of these CEOs are schmoozed by MLA and so they aren't going to speak out
against the organisation," Mr McIntyre said.

He said he was chasing up a few producers in the coming days to ensure they got
their submissions in on time.

The Queensland Department of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries, and the
Department of Agriculture have both made submissions.

Many of the producer's submissions were in the format the Australian Beef
Association (ABA) sent around to ensure time-confined graziers had the
opportunity to make a submission.

Submissions to the inquiry close on Saturday, March 1.

A public hearing in Canberra is set for March 7.

For more information, and to make a submission, visit
http://abareview.webs.com/submissions. All submissions can be viewed online by
visiting the APH website and going to Parliamentary Business/Committees/Senate
and following the links.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              519 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                THE KOREA HERALD

                             May 31, 2012 Thursday

Local food movement takes root in Korea

LENGTH: 1048 words


Aims to promote consumption of locally-grown foods amid wave of FTAs

Community-supported agriculture, farmers' cooperative markets and other "eat
local" projects are springing up in Korea, touting the benefits of locally-grown
foods amid an influx of imported produce.

The consumer movement, in vogue in many Western countries for some years, brings
a ray of hope to Korean farmers struggling to survive the rising tide of free
trade globalization.

For conscientious consumers, it means new alternatives to Western industrial
agriculture giants that dominate grocery shelves.

"Many rural communities are interested in the local food movement, for it
promises farmers a steady stream of revenue and consumers a supply of fresh
harvests at cheaper prices," said Jeong Eun-mi, a researcher at the Korea Rural
Economic Institute.

Customers look at vegetables at a store run by the National Agricultural
Cooperative Federation in southeastern Seoul. (Kim Myung-sub/The Korea Herald)

"They see it as a chance to revitalize rural economies, which have lost their
vibrancy over decades with the decline of agriculture in Korea."

The local food movement, or locavorism, aims to build a locally based food
economy in an era of globalized, industrial food systems, by linking consumers
directly to small-scale farmers and food producers in the area.

The claimed benefits of eating local produce are far ranging â[#x20ac]o from
freshness, taste and community cohesion, to helping the economy, the environment
and even national security.

"Eat local" has been a popular catch phrase in many Western countries. In the
U.S., for one, thousands of farmers' markets thrive, allowing local farmers to
sell directly to the area's consumers. Initiatives such as a "100-Mile Diet"
gained popularity, urging consumers to buy food grown within 100 miles (161
kilometers) of their home.

Efforts to make this a norm in Korea are palpable.

Starting from June, Seoul's urban farmers will sell their fresh harvests at an
open-air market set up every Saturday in Gwanghwamum, the heart of the bustling
city.

In Wanju, North Jeolla Province, the nation's first store for local food opened
last May, with a promise "from farm to shelf in less than a day."

Farming communities are landing deals with schools or big corporations in their
areas to supply them with their products.

For Cho Min-jung, a mother of two living in Gwacheon, the local food movement is
about a sense of safety and trust in food she feeds her children.

"Like Shintoburi, locally grown food is really the best for us," she said,
citing an old Korean idiom which literally translates as one's body and earth
are not two separate things.

She said she has low trust in the safety of imported food, especially from Japan
and China, Korea's closest neighbors â[#x20ac]o Japan because of radiation fears
and China after a series of food safety crises there.

Cho buys fresh organic vegetables, fruit and meat from a local consumer co-op
store near her home, which sources directly from farmers in neighborhood cities
in Gyeonggi Province to more distant provinces of Chungcheong, Jeolla and even
Jeju Island.

A strict localvore may ask whether Cho is really buying "local," suggesting that
local food should be limited to that grown within a certain radius of her home.

Yet, in Korea, the local food movement is taking off with little discussion of
its definition. For many Koreans, it seems that food produced within the country
is local enough, given the thousands of kilometers that imported food travels to
reach consumers here.

Food produced in distant parts of the globe is fast making inroads into Korean
kitchens, a trend reinforced by free trade agreements that the country has
signed in the past few years.

According to a recent study by the National Institute of Environmental Research,
Koreans consumed 468 kilograms of imported food on average in 2010, up from 410
in 2001.

Koreans turned out to be eating more foreign agricultural products than
consumers in three other countries â[#x20ac]o Japan, Britain and France. The
average for Japanese was 370 kilograms, 26.5 percent less than that of Koreans.

"While the three comparative nations saw a decline, or the status quo, in per
capita consumption of imported food, Korea's dependence on it has increased,
driven by grains, vegetables, and fruits," said Lee Dong-won, a researcher at
the institute.

Moreover, the country is increasingly buying food produced far away, he pointed
out.

The food miles, which measure the distance food has travelled from farm to
plate, jumped 37 percent from 2001-2010 from 5,172 kilometers to 7,085
kilometers.

Over the period, the three other countries all reported a decline â[#x20ac]o
Japan from 5,807 to 5,484; Britain from 2,365 to 2,337 and France from 777 to
739.

Higher food miles mean less freshness and more carbon dioxide emissions in the
process of shipping and transportation, the report said.

"Nearly 70 percent of food we eat is imported from overseas and we know little
about how it is produced and processed," Choi Won-byung, chairman of Nonghyup,
or the National Agricultural Cooperative Federation said.

Koreans' newfound interest in local farms also reflects a growing concern over
food security, experts say.

Korea started opening its long-protected food market to foreign agricultural
giants in the '80s. In 2004, the country implemented its first FTA with Chile,
despite fierce opposition from farmers.

Last March, another signature deal went into effect, linking the Korean economy
to the U.S., the world's largest economy and biggest agricultural exporter. Now,
the government is pushing for another mega-deal with China.

Korea's food self-support level was over 80 percent in 1970s, before
industrialization and the market opening, but dropped to as low as 34 percent in
1985.

It stood at slightly over 50 percent in 2009, the lowest among members of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The figure for grains
only, including rice, a staple of Korean cuisine, was 26.7 percent.

Last year, global food crises prompted the Korean government to raise its
self-sufficiency targets and pledge 10 trillion won ($8.4 billion) over the next
decade to reach them.

Its target for grains is 30 percent domestically produced by 2015, up from the
previous goal of 25 percent.

By Lee Sun-young (

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 The Korea Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              520 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Fiji Times (Australia)

                           October 19, 2006 Thursday

Documents typed a year later: Witness

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 240  words


TWO documents claimed to have been typed in July 2000 concerning the
implementation of the farming assistance scheme were in fact typed a year later
but backdated to show the initial date, the High Court heard yesterday.

Vani Leakai, who was the personal assistant of the former Agriculture permanent
secretary Peniasi Kunatuba, was the seventh State witness to the stand.

In her police statement she said the two documents were the same except they had
different dates on them and were typed by her on Mr Kunatuba s instruction.

Mrs Leakai said the documents suggested the implementation of the affirmative
action and copies were given to the then Agriculture minister and the assistant
minister.

She said the dates she was instructed to backdate the documents to July 9, 2000
and July 30, 2000 were in fact Sundays.

She said after checking the daily attendance register of the ministry, she
confirmed she did not work on those days because she had not signed in or out.

Mrs Leakai said she did not question Mr Kunatuba over why he wanted the
documents backdated and could not recall the contents of the documents because
it was a long time ago and she had typed numerous other documents in that
period.

In her three-page statement to police, Mrs Leakai said she learned of the scheme
when there was a huge influx of people coming to the ministry headquarters
requesting assistance.

She said among the items given out were outboard engines and boats.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FIJ


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              521 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                Contra Costa Times

                   December 31, 2003 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

BIO-RAD POISED FOR MAD COW ROLE;
HERCULES FIRM NOW SELLS MORE TESTS IN EUROPE AND JAPAN THAN ANY OTHER AND STANDS
READY TO EXPAND

BYLINE: JUDY SILBER, TIMES STAFF WRITER

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 672 words


Should regulators decide to more carefully monitor U.S. cattle for mad cow
disease, Hercules-based Bio-Rad Laboratories says it is ready to ramp up
manufacture of a test that identifies cattle with the dreaded ailment.

Executives of the company, the world's leader in mad cow testing, would not give
details on any discussions they have had with regulators. But if the need
arises, they can easily meet demand, they said.

"We've made it very clear that we're prepared to go and we're prepared to work
with them," said Bradford Crutchfield, a vice president of Bio-Rad. Bio-Rad's
manufacturing facilities were designed with this type of quick-turnaround
scenario in mind, he said, so the company can easily accommodate an influx of
orders, he said.

Bio-Rad is not alone in wanting a part in future testing authorized by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture. But the company has a few advantages over its
competitors. It presently sells more tests in Europe and Japan than any other
company. It has also worked with the USDA in the past.

Pressure is mounting for a change in USDA policy after last week's discovery
that a Washington cow was afflicted with mad cow disease, the first known
penetration into U.S. beef supplies.

The agency currently monitors only a tiny fraction of the cattle industry. But
supporters of increased testing say it's necessary to monitor more cows because
more cases likely exist. They say the limited analysis of so-called downers,
cattle who exhibit physical signs of the brain-wasting disease before slaughter,
isn't adequate.

To screen additional cows, the USDA will have to adopt a more streamlined
approach. Its present method is onerous and time-consuming. After slaughter,
brain and spinal cord tissues are dissected, sliced thinly and analyzed under
microscopes for the presence of prions, the infectious proteins that accumulate
in the brain and spinal cord to cause mad cow disease.

In contrast, Bio-Rad's test takes a simpler and more automated approach. One
set-up supported by three or four people can process 800 to 1,000 samples a day.

Technicians first extract by hand brain tissues and insert them into test tubes.
After that, robots and computers take over much of the work. The tissue is
ground up, releasing prions if any are present. Antibodies that bind to the
prions are added. Computers detect the antibodies that have stuck to the tissue,
thereby identifying cattle infected with disease.

Bio-Rad is not the only company with an automated mad cow test on the market.
Competitors include Prionics, a Swiss company; Enfer Scientific Ltd., an Irish
company; and South San Francisco-based InPro Biotechnology Inc., a private
company started by Nobel Prize-winner Stanley Prusiner.

But of the four, Bio-Rad manufactures by far the most tests, about eight million
of the approximately 12 million sold in 2003. European countries and Japan have
used the mad cow tests of Bio-Rad and its competitors for years to keep beef
from contaminated animals off the market.

Perhaps just as significant as its track record, the USDA already has first-hand
experience with the Bio-Rad test.

USDA laboratories began using the test in 2002 to identify deer and elk sick
with chronic wasting disease, an ailment similar to mad cow disease. Prions are
the culprit for both illnesses, as well as Creutzfeld-Jakob Disease, the human
counterpart that can be induced by eating diseased neural tissues from cows.

USDA labs will have to slightly alter the process to test for mad cow disease
instead of chronic wasting disease, but the equipment remains the same,
Crutchfield said. And personnel are already trained to use it.

But for now, Bio-Rad doesn't know whether the USDA will ask for its help,
Crutchfield said.

"It's in the hands of the USDA at this point," he said. "We're sitting here
waiting for any indication that we can step up and help."

Judy Silber covers biotechnology and the business of health care. Reach her at
925-977-8507 or jsilber@cctimes.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, BIO-RAD LABORATORIES Vice President Brad Crutchfield, left, and
President Normal Schwartz head top mad cow-screening company (KRISTOPHER
SKINNER, TIMES)

                       Copyright 2003 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              522 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Population Shift to Rural America Passing Farm Areas By, Study Shows

                              July 8, 1996, Monday

By BARBARA F. BRONSTIEN



Despite the highest overall rural population growth rates in 20 years, many of
the nation's agricultural areas aren't sharing the gains, according to a recent
study.

What two demographers reported last month confirms what many agricultural
lenders already knew: There aren't enough younger farmers to replace an aging
customer base.

"Agriculture counties are still the most likely to be experiencing
outmigration," said Kenneth M. Johnson, a sociology professor at Chicago's
Loyola University, who co-authored the rural population report. "It's been going
on for a long time, which has tended to distort the age structure."

Mr. Johnson and Calvin Beale, a senior demographer at the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, studied Census Bureau data to determine rural population trends so
far this decade.

Overall, they found that rural population increases during the time studied,
April 1990 to July 1995, approached the record gains of the early 1970s, after
sharp declines in the 1980s.

More than 75% of the nation's 2,304 rural counties were growing, compared with
45% in the 1980s, thanks to an influx of former urban dwellers coupled with more
people staying in rural areas, they concluded.

Although rural population grew by 1.3 million in all of the 1980s, it jumped 2.6
million in the first five years of this decade, they found.

The fastest-growing rural areas included many retirement destinations, such as
the Sun Belt, coasts, and Upper Great Lakes.

Farm-heavy areas fared worse. "Widespread losses occurred only in the Great
Plains, Western Corn Belt, and Mississippi Delta," the report said.

By economic type, farming and mining counties were among the least likely to
grow, the researchers found.

For instance, just half of farming-dependent counties gained population in the
early 1990s, compared with 90% of rural counties with a manufacturing base.

The stagnant farm population growth, while no surprise to farm lenders, has
troubling implications for farm banks.

"As the farm population dwindles, you're going to need fewer lenders," said
Roger Johnson, vice president for farm loans at $500 million-asset Union Bank
and Trust in Lincoln, Neb. "For the small rural banks, it's going to be harder
for them to find customers."

Banks will have to expand their markets or lending areas, he said. Union now
seeks farm loans throughout Nebraska and in some neighboring states, he said.

The 1980s farm crisis has had a lingering economic impact on rural areas, and
its psychological impact drove many younger people away, Loyola's Mr. Johnson
said. But, he said, the areas are losing less ground than before, and rural
employment has continued to improve.

Moreover, in some cases, trends toward larger farms and technology improvements
require fewer farmers.

SECTION: COMMUNITY BANKING; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 465 words

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1996 American Banker, Inc.


                              523 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                    October 20, 1995, Friday, METRO EDITION

France says it will join no-nuke zone

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 479 words


   WELLINGTON (Reuter) - New Zealand Prime Minister Jim Bolger expressed delight
yesterday at the surprise news that France, Britain and the United States
planned to join the South Pacific nuclear-free zone.

The move, expected to be announced by the three governments by Monday, is an
apparent response to the worldwide denunciation over French nuclear testing and
an effort to help France rebuild its ties in the South Pacific.

France ended a 1992 moratorium on testing last month with a blast at the Mururoa
atoll and has plans for six more nuclear tests.

Rwanda bracing

for food shortage

KIGALI, Rwanda (Reuter) - Ravaged by a genocide last year, Rwanda is facing
acute food shortages with the arrival of 700,000 returning refugees, the U.N.'s
main food agency said.

The Food and Agriculture Organization said in a report that the genocide, which
killed up to 1 million people including many peasant farmers, had proved
disastrous for Rwandan agriculture. And food shortages had worsened with the
influx of returnees and the failure of Western donors to keep aid promises.

Italy's justice minister

ousted by Senate

ROME (AP) - Prosecutors who brought down Italy's corrupt political establishment
received a powerful show of support yesterday when the Senate ousted the justice
minister who challenged them.

A defiant Filippo Mancuso promptly took the Senate to court to try to keep his
job. Since he was appointed in January, Mancuso has launched numerous inquiries
into the performances of prosecutors in Milan who are probing corruption.

Spain to probe alleged

'dirty war' on Basques

MADRID (Reuter) - Spanish Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez looked increasingly
cornered yesterday after the Senate narrowly voted to investigate charges that
his government waged a "dirty war" against Basque guerrillas.

By 128 votes to 127, the upper chamber added its own probe to several judicial
investigations into the accusations over an illegal campaign that claimed 27
lives from 1983 to 1987. The vote late on Wednesday means that in the next 10
days the Senate will appoint a 32-member committee. Gonzalez and other top
Socialists will then be hauled in to testify.

Zambian presidential

investigation halted

LUSAKA, Zambia (Reuter) - The Zambian government has dropped an investigation
into whether former president Kenneth Kaunda ruled the country illegally for six
years and should be deported because of his citizenship status.

State radio quoted Home Affairs Minister Chitalu Sampa in the government which
defeated Kaunda as saying he had told police to stop the inquiry.

10 killed by guerrilla forces in Algeria

PARIS (Reuter) - Suspected Muslim guerrillas in Algeria have killed at least 10
people in separate attacks, stabbing, shooting and in four cases beheading their
victims, an Algerian newspaper said yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              524 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Northern Territory News (Australia)

                          September 12, 2012 Wednesday
                                  1 - Edition

Ideal for corporate and

SECTION: Pg. 36

LENGTH: 295 words


000KUNUNURRA

Valentine Falls Estate

PRICE: Price on application

AGENCY: Landmark Harcourts and Kimberley First National

AGENT: Glenn McTaggart 0429 611 124, Brad Williams 0429 194 920

OPEN: Phone for appointment

KUNUNURRA is the eastern gateway to the beautiful Kimberley region and one of
the fastest growing regions in WA through the development of agriculture,
tourism and mining.

The Federal and State Governments in recent years have invested more than $500m
in major infrastructure upgrades for the region to allow for the anticipated
population growth.

The Valentine Falls Estate is well positioned to capitalise on the future
expansion of the area through industry development and the influx of people. The
estate is for sale under instructions from receivers and managers.

The Valentine Falls Estate development is a parcel of land which will appeal to
property developers, private investors, corporate investors and individual
buyers seeking either investment or rural lifestyle.

Because of the location it is anticipated that the lots on the estate will be
attractive to people working in the resources and agriculture sectors.

The Kimberley Region is well positioned for the FIFO resource sector being
located close to Kununurra and less than eight hours from Darwin city.

The estate also provides the opportunity for professional business people in
Kununurra to relocate from the town area to enjoy a rural lifestyle close to the
town.

As the subdivision currently stands, stages 1 and 2 comprise of 80 lots ranging
from 1ha to 4ha with 31 lots already sold. Stage 3 (undeveloped) consists of 28
proposed allotments (56.424ha in total). Valentine Falls Estate is available as
a whole development, as individual allotments or groups of lots (subject to
seller's approval).

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NTN


                   Copyright 2012 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              525 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           The Advertiser (Australia)

                           October 17, 2015 Saturday
                               Advertiser Edition

GOOD WEEK

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 191 words


DAVID RIDGWAY The Opposition agriculture spokesman secured rare backing from the
State Government for proposed legislation to begin an opium industry.

The state's opium-led recovery could now just be years away.

BARNABY JOYCE The federal Agriculture Minister got control of the bulk of water
policy, amid a Liberal backlash over increased influence by the Nationals over
the Murray- Darling Basin.

JUSTIN TRUDEAU Under the leadership of the son of renowned 15-year prime
minister Pierre Trudeau, the Liberal Party goes into next week's Canadian
election as the favourite to win.

BAD WEEK ANGELA MERKEL Germany's Chancellor is facing a political crisis as her
government struggles to cope with the influx of asylum seekers to Europe.

TOM KOUTSANTONIS The state's Treasurer was not found to have maladministered the
Gillman land deal, but was called to account for some expletive-ridden
flourishes in meetings with public servants. He swears it will never happen
again.

BILL SHORTEN The federal Labor leader spent two days raising questions about
Malcolm Turnbull's Cayman Islands-based investments but failed to unearth any
wrongdoing bythe Prime Minister

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: The Advertiser


                   Copyright 2015 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              526 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                            January 28, 2013 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Liberals paint a rosy picture of legalized, and taxed, pot; Study says
legalization could mean billions in new tax revenues, influx of toking tourists

BYLINE: Peter O'Neil, Vancouver Sun

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


British Columbia's economy would benefit from an influx of toking tourists if
marijuana is legalized in Canada, the Liberal Party of Canada's B.C. branch says
in a new analysis.

And Canada's health care system and law enforcement agencies would gain from
billions in new tax revenues - money now going to organized crime - as a result
of domestic sales of high-quality, low-priced and government-regulated Canadian
weed, according to the 38-page paper.

It was prepared by a party committee in response to the overwhelming vote a year
ago in Ottawa by party members in favour of legalizing, regulating and taxing
marijuana sales.

One of the paper's co-authors, citing evidence from countries with liberal pot
laws, said tok-ers from the U.S. and elsewhere will be drawn to Canada if they
can enjoy a hassle-free high.

And B.C.'s reputation will make it a particularly attractive destination, said
Sangeeta Lalli. "We're known around the world for having good cannabis."

The paper, while citing various concerns ranging from health issues to expected
opposition from the U.S. government, presents an overwhelmingly positive
scenario.

"Thousands of Canadians will ... find direct and indirect employment," the paper
says, citing work in agriculture, an estimated 2,700 specialty retail stores,
manufacturing and distribution outlets, inspection and quality control, health
research, legal and accounting services, marketing and tourism.

Pot tourism is viewed as an important, though controversial, economic engine in
some jurisdictions with liberal drug laws.

It has been estimated that up to a third of Amsterdam's seven million annual
tourists enjoy lighting up at one of the city's ubiquitous cannabis cafes.

The Dutch government, concerned about criminals and other unsavory characters
from countries such as Belgium and Germany showing up in border cities,
announced earlier this year a "weed pass" that would allow only Dutch nationals,
but not visitors, to smoke up in a café.

But resistance from Amsterdam merchants concerned about a tourism drop-off
resulted in the government backing down last month on strict enforcement of the
law.

The authors object to the option of decriminalization of possession, something
advocated by apparent leadership front-runner Justin Trudeau, since that would
still leave production and

FROM PAGE A1 distribution in the hands of organized-crime gangs.

Instead, it proposes full legalization for what it estimates to be roughly three
million users in Canada.

Among the recommendations: . The regulatory regime should be established by the
federal government, in close cooperation with the provinces. A
federal-provincial revenue-sharing agreement will be based on models established
for alcohol and tobacco.

. The legal age would be the same as it is for alcohol in each province, and
people would be allowed to grow their own pot as long as it was in small
quantities for personal use.

. In order to combat black-market sales, people will be limited to buying or
possessing no more than four ounces.

. Citing statistics from a number of studies, including RAND Corporation and the
Fraser Institute, it says Canada's market is $3 billion to $4 billion annually
to a market of roughly three million consumers.

. The private sector would take the lead in producing and marketing pot, and
would have to find a way to produce top-quality pot but sell it at a price well
below the current black market rate, despite a recommended 35-per-cent tax rate.

. Penalties and law enforcement measures should be toughened up to prevent
exports and sales to minors.

. On impaired driving - a major concern given pot's increased potency - the
study advocated tougher penalties as well as more research into how Washington
state, which recently had a referendum vote in favour of legalization, will
handle stoned drivers.

. The paper asserts legalization wouldn't necessarily lead to increased usage,
citing the Netherlands as having a significantly lower rate than that in the
U.S. and several European countries.

poneil@postmedia.com Twitter.com/poneilinottawa Blog: vancouversun.com/oneil

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 The Vancouver Sun, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              527 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        Townsville Bulletin (Australia)

                             March 14, 2014 Friday
                               Townsville Edition

Anglers seeking fair go

BYLINE: with Eddie Riddle

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 817  words


THERE are certain to be interesting times ahead for all stakeholders in the
Queensland fishery.

The Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry John McVeigh recently
announced an overhaul of the state's fisheries management, however precise
details of a nine-month review are regarded by many as sketchy at best.

Mr McVeigh said the review would fix a system that is believed to be complex,
costly to administer, inconsistent and a burden on fishers.

"We need to reduce the masses of red tape that have weighed-down our fisheries
management," Mr McVeigh said.

This review is expected to take nine months to complete and will examine the
entire approach to managing the fishery and will be guided by a Ministerial
Advisory Committee.

"We want to create balance between environmental and economic use, as well as
ensure ongoing access for recreational and indigenous fishing," Mr McVeigh said.
"This review is a chance to modernise the way our Queensland fisheries are
managed, to ensure the future of the resource and the community benefits of
commercial and recreational fishing in Queensland." Precisely how this will be
undertaken and who is included in the Ministerial Advisory Committee will be
anyone's guess and the biggest concern for myself and many readers is that
recreational fishers won't be ably represented.

All that most recreational anglers desire is fair and proportionate management
of the fishery, fair and proportionate access to the fishery and both requests
should take into account recreation fishing numbers and economic benefit yielded
by that participation.

Barras by the bucket DALE Weldon said anglers should be encouraged by the number
of barramundi being caught on dead garfish and mullet baits.

Land-based anglers have been the fortunate recipients of welcome influx of
hungry barras along Pallarenda and Shelley Beach foreshores according to Weldon.

Mr Weldon, proprietor of popular specialist fishing tackle outlet Fishing
Warehouse, said plenty of anglers were recording their very first encounter with
barramundi, an iconic tropical sport and table fish.

"It just shows what a diverse and healthy fishery we have right on the doorstep
of one of Queensland's largest cities," he said.

When asked how anglers would best connect their line to a barra, he said the
answer was not a complicated one.

"I'd recommend that anglers get out there and just have a go â[#x20ac]¦ whether
they have a boat or prefer to fish from the shore. Live baits like mullet,
prawns and herring will stack the odds in the anglers' favour, lures are well
worth a try but don't discount fresh dead bait either," he said. "My tip, if
using dead baits, keep the bait moving by occasionally twitching the rod tip.
This works especially well if using whole prawns and small mullet baits." We're
all right, jacks MANGROVE jack have also proven a welcome land-based catch when
anglers fish from the banks of the Ross River.

Bruising jacks to better than 45cm are falling to mullet and pilchard baits
fished from the retaining walls flanking the National Park boat ramps (Barnacle
Street while fish of similar calibre are stretching lines and testing anglers'
skills when they cast their lines close to the new bridge at the mouth of the
system.

Boaties are also telling of some fine jacks being taken from local creeks
including Sandfly and Alligator creeks.

Again, oily flesh baits including mullet and pilchards have been fooling most
fish while live herring baits are also rarely ignored.

Anglers are reminded that mangrove jack are protected by a minimum legal size of
35cm and a maximum "in possession" bag limit of five fish per angler.

TCFSS saved THE Twin Cities Fish Stocking Society (TCFSS) has been saved with
nearly 30 enthusiastic and passionate supporters of the Ross River barramundi
fishery answering a plea for help from society president Terry McGeachin.

Largely due to a lack of participation and funding, the TCFSS was in grave
danger of folding after 21 years spent stocking the Ross River weirs and
surrounding district with barramundi fingerlings and in later years, juvenile
barras of up to 30cm in length.

However the society has earned itself a reprieve with an influx of new members
vowing to continue the past efforts and perhaps even strive to enhance the local
barramundi fishery even further.

Well done to all those who turned out for the meeting - the next scheduled for
Monday, March 24, 7.30pm at the Upper Ross Community Centre, 1143 Riverway
Drive.

The weather gods might well smile on Townsville's angling fraternity this
weekend with stiff winds set to dissipate quickly from this evening on.

Tides might be considered good for most who wet a line this weekend with 3.3
metre morning high tide periods followed by midafternoon low tides.And with a
full moon peaking on Monday anglers might expect barras, salmon, fingermark,
queenfish and all manner of reef and shoal species to be hungry.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: Townsville Bulletin


                   Copyright 2014 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              528 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           North Queensland Register

                               February 25, 2014

SECTION: BEEF-CATTLE

LENGTH: 274  words


ALMOST 100 submissions have been made to the Senate Inquiry into the collection
and disbursement of grass-fed cattle levies.

As The North Queensland Register went to press on Tuesday morning, the figure
stood at 140 with another influx of submissions likely to occur in the following
days.

It is quite an improvement from three weeks ago, when only 13 submissions had
been made to the Inquiry.

However, graziers have warned, while there has been an increase in submissions,
they still only accounted for a small percentage of the total grass-fed producer
population nationwide.

Cameron McIntyre, Bauhinia Downs, said the Inquiry relied on all producers to
have their say with many pastoral companies run by CEOs who didn't have as great
a vested interest in the industry.

'A lot of these CEOs are schmoozed by MLA and so they aren't going to speak out
against the organisation,' Mr McIntyre said.

He said he was chasing up a few producers in the coming days to ensure they got
their submissions in on time.

The Queensland Department of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries, and the
Department of Agriculture have both made submissions.

Many of the producer's submissions are in the format the Australian Beef
Association (ABA) sent around to ensure time-confined graziers had the
opportunity to make a submission.

Submissions to the Inquiry close this Saturday, March 1.  A public hearing in
Canberra is set for March 7.

For more information, and to make a submission, visit
http://abareview.webs.com/submissions.  All submissions can be viewed online by
visiting the APH website and going to Parliamentary Business, Comittees, Senate
and following the links.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              529 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                            Turan Information Agency

                              June 6, 2014 Friday

Department of Labor expects a further influx of migrants

LENGTH: 308  words


Baku/06.06.14/Turan: The Minister of Labor and Social Protection of Azerbaijan
Salim Muslimov gave an interview to the radio services of the United Nations
under the 103rd Session of the International Labor Conference, held these days
in Geneva.

According to him, Azerbaijan known as a supplier of energy becomes suspect in
connection with the development of a diversified economy, provoked an influx of
migrant workers - only in April of this year, officially the Migration Service
has asked for registration of 47 thousand 694 people, which is 8 thousand more
than last year period. If previously registered rose technical workers, vendors
and laborers, now the championship for qualified personnel, Muslimov said.

With reference to the performance of the Director General of the International
Labor Organization (ILO), Guy Ryder Azerbaijani minister noted that the
establishment of working conditions and social protection of migrant workers and
local discrimination should not be.

As the country's development priorities, he noted the development of domestic
production and social infrastructure to a fundamental change in the tourism
industry, the development of agriculture, the development of the transport
sector and ICT. "All this is already contributing to the creation of many new
jobs requiring skilled labor, but the country still cannot create a
self-sufficient human resource, because there is a need to invite skilled
workers from outside," he said.

According to him, qualified specialists are willing to settle in Azerbaijan and
bring their families because of the country's tolerance. "Representatives of all
religions and faiths feel at home here, many professionals to renew the
contract, thereby also increasing the number of migrant workers," said Muslimov
to UN radio services. - 17D-

Provided by SyndiGate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info).

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1362


                        Copyright 2014 Turan News Agency
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              530 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           January 20, 2016 Wednesday

N.D. population could top 1 million by 2040

BYLINE: Patrick Springer Forum News Service

SECTION: B; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 643 words


FARGO -- North Dakota's population should continue to grow steadily despite the
oil slowdown and could flirt with the 1 million mark by 2040 under a range of
new population projections.

The North Dakota Census Office developed a series of population forecasts from
2020 to 2040, released Tuesday, that predict the state's population could range
from a conservative estimate of 800,000 in 2020 to a high projection of
1,060,000 by 2040.

The Census Bureau estimated North Dakota's population in 2015 at 756,927, up
from 672,591 in the 2010 census.

The state's mid-range, or expected, population forecasts were 824,000 in 2020,
932,000 in 2030 and 992,000 in 2040. Those compared to conservative forecasts of
800,000 in 2020, 879,000 in 2030 and 932,000 in 2040.

The most optimistic projections, assuming the largest influx from people
migrating to the state, were 849,000 in 2020, 984,000 in 2030 and 1,060,000 in
2040.

All of the scenarios assume North Dakota, which recently has led the nation in
its rate of population growth, will continue to draw people in search of jobs,
even with the oil industry no longer booming.

Migration has largely driven the state's rapid population growth in recent
years, though natural population growth -- births over deaths -- also is
increasing, largely because of the influx of young adults, said Kevin Iverson,
manager of the North Dakota Census Office.

Natural growth is expected to peak between 2026 and 2030, then taper off, though
remaining positive.

Still, with oil prices down sharply and difficult to predict, Iverson decided to
project a range of possibilities, with differing levels of optimism or
pessimism.

"I'm guessing our picture down the road is going to be rosier than we see right
now," he said. "That said, there is a high level of uncertainty."

North Dakota has more jobs per capita than any other state, offering an
employment magnet that should continue to lure people in search of opportunity,
Iverson said.

"We still have the highest ratio of jobs to population for any state, by far,"
he said.

The projections came with a note of caution, noting the volatility of oil prices
and agricultural prices, making it difficult to project migration and population
trends.

In 2005, shortly before the oil boom in western North Dakota took off, the
Census Bureau predicted North Dakota would steadily lose population, which would
drop to 606,000 by 2030.

"At this point, these projections look highly unlikely," the new projections
report by the North Dakota Census Office said, with wry understatement.

Also, the report noted, there likely will be considerable variation around the
state. The Williston area, for instance, had the largest population gains, in
percentage terms, in recent years, driven by a huge influx of job-seekers
heading to the oil fields.

State demographers expect the combined western economic regions -- Williston,
Minot, Dickinson and Bismarck -- to reach a population surpassing the four
combined eastern regions, Devils Lake, Grand Forks, Jamestown and Fargo between
2025 and 2030.

That could happen sooner, between 2020 and 2025, under the scenario that assumes
high migration. Under a low migration scenario, however, the four western
regions would fail to surpass the four eastern regions between 2020 and 2040.

Under any of the projections, the Fargo region in southeastern North Dakota,
dominated by Cass County, is expected to continue to see the highest share of
the state's population.

Cass County, with a population estimated at 171,588 in 2015, could increase to
188,810 in 2020, 214,719 in 2030 and 228,895 in 2040 under the expected
migration scenario.

The Bismarck region, led by Burleigh and Morton counties, will continue as the
second most populous region, though Ward County is expected to overtake Grand
Forks County as the third most populous under all but the low-migration
scenario.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2016 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              531 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 8, 2014 Tuesday

South Dakota: Governor's Column: Dealing With The Shortage Of Rail Cars

LENGTH: 324  words

DATELINE: Pierre


Office of the Governor, The State of South Dakota has issued the following press
release:

Agriculture is South Dakota's number one industry. It generates over $21 billion
in annual economic development and employs more than 122,000 South Dakotans.

Some of the success of South Dakota's agricultural development is owed to the
industry's ability to ship products to and from South Dakota via rail. Rail
service allows South Dakota products to enter regional and global markets. When
our products are shipped by rail, it saves money for producers and consumers.

Across the state agriculture shippers are experiencing a shortage of rail cars.
This shortage is caused by several factors: the cold long winter we have
experienced across the Midwest, the influx of traffic to support the Bakken, the
record 2013 harvest, and delays caused by construction on the rail system
outside the state.

I am very concerned about this problem because our agriculture economy is highly
dependent on the state's commodities getting to the market.

Over the last few weeks my staff have been communicating with representatives of
the Burlington, Northern & Santa Fe Railroad, the Canadian Pacific and the Rapid
City, Pierre & Eastern Railroad to urge them to do whatever is possible to
restore service to typical levels. We have also ensured the Surface
Transportation Board, which regulates railroads, is aware.  Next week the
Surface Transportation Board is conducting a hearing about this issue. I will be
submitting testimony for the Board to consider and I have asked Secretary of
Agriculture Lucas Lentsch to attend the hearing and provide additional testimony
about the how the issue is affecting South Dakota.

Much of what has caused the shortage is out of our control. Still, we must do
everything possible to find solutions. Our agricultural producers and shippers
need resolution of this situation.

For further information please visit: http://news.sd.gov/

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              532 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Informer (Monrovia)

                            January 18, 2011 Tuesday

MRU Ministers Convene 2-Day Meeting On Ivory Coast Crisis

LENGTH: 781  words


The Mano River Union (MRU) Ministerial Council yesterday convened a two-day
Extraordinary Meeting on Peace and Security in Monrovia as a result of the
troubling civil crisis in one of its member state, Ivory Coast.

The forum is among others discussing the crisis in Ivory Coast aimed at taking
steps that could lead to peace in the member country that has been engulfed by
crisis since November 28.

The Peace and Security meeting is aimed at saving the MRU Basin from eminent
crisis with the focus of the meeting taking into consideration the importance of
peace in the Basin, reminiscing the recent past.

Speaking during the opening session, Liberia's Planning Minister Amara Konneh,
Chair of MRU Ministerial Council, decried the situation in Ivory Coast, "one of
our member states."

He said the Union was very concerned about the escalating crisis and the Chair
of the Union, Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf had requested the Council
to discuss the security and humanitarian consequences.

He described the crisis as a threat to peace and stability in the region and
feared that it will soon endanger trade, commerce, agriculture production and
revenue generation for countries in the basin.

Mr. Konneh said peace remain fragile in the basin. Guinea, with its newly
elected government is moving ahead slowly, Sierra Leone is making progress with
its democracy, while Liberia is preparing for elections in October.

Minister Konneh warned that if the situation in Ivory Coast is not handled now,
with the level of porous borders in the MRU basin, the crisis to spill over with
a devastating effect on the rest of the region.

"We have come to Monrovia [this meeting] because one of us is in danger,"
Minister Konneh stated, adding that all member state need to work to find an
amicable solution to the Ivorian imbroglio.

Host country Liberia and other MRU member countries are seriously troubled by
the crisis in La Cote d'Ivoire and going to take steps to consolidate the
fragile peace and security in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea and save the MRU
Basin from further political, economic, and social decadence.

UN Secretary General Special Representative Ellen Magarethe Loj said the Ivorian
crisis seriously threatens Liberia's fragile stability and comes at a critical
period when Liberia the her international partners are gearing up for the
country's second postwar elections later this year.

She said the UN was seriously monitoring the situation and has been working with
relevant agencies to respond to the humanitarian crisis posed by the influx of
some 30,000 refugees into Liberia.

Liberian security forces and those of the UN, she s aid, have been deployed to
beef up monitoring and patrols at the borders with Ivory Coast. "No doubt the
situation is challenging on the ground," Madam Loj noted, calling for quick and
serious international interventions to address the humanitarian crisis caused by
influx of refugees in Liberia.

MRU Secretary General Elhadj Chierno Diallo, too, described the Ivorian crisis
as being critical to the basin and called for a concerted effort on finding
solution.

He indicated that whatever affects one country affects the others in the region,
and hoped for a better discussion at the two-day conference.

Delegates are from three of the MRU countries: Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone
except troubled Ivory Coast.

Ivory Coast has been engulfed by serious internal deadlock since a November 28
2010 presidential run-off election conducted between incumbent President Laurent
Gbagbo and opposition leader Alassane Ouattara.

Both Gbagbo and Quattara have claimed the presidency after the elect0ral
commission declared the later winner, but the constitutional court overturned
the results in favor of Gbagbo.

The two men were separately inaugurated as President and the impasse has left
the country with two governments, each with its own group of cabinet ministers,
appointed simultaneously.

The current political standoff between Gbagbo and Quattara has placed La Cote
d'Ivoire at the brink of a full scale civil war.

The United Nations, ECOWAS, EU, AU, and other multilateral institutions as well
as the governments of France, USA, and other western countries are all backing
the results released by the Electoral Commission which announced Quattara as the
winner of the election; and are calling on Gbagbo to relinquish state power.

He has vehemently refused to step down, prompting ECOWAS to threaten military
force to end the crisis after several failed diplomatic intervention.

At least 200, people are reported dead so far. About 30,000 Ivorian refugees
have fled into Liberia for safety and humanitarian crisis is said to be on an
unprecedented rise.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              533 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                Birmingham Post

                           September 5, 2005, Monday

COMMENT: ON OUR DOORSTEP

SECTION: First Edition; COMMENT; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 313 words


Since the scare stories surrounding Sudan I, BSE and GM crops began to hit the
headlines, consumers have shown a real concern about where their food comes
from.

Farmers' markets have thrived, sales in organic produce have soared and Jamie
Oliver's personal campaign to improve school dinners has led to a demand for
better food on our plates.

A desire to eat locally produced food is emerging, and this has to be welcomed
as it can only benefit our local farmers and growers.

And yet despite this renewed interest in the origins of our food, restaurants
appear to be opting for a system of convenience rather than a collaboration with
our local producers.

It would be unrealistic to expect the majority of chefs, who cater for hundreds
of customers each night, to find the time to travel to a nearby farm and pick up
the finest ingredients for their restaurants. But the current complex system,
which puts their choice of produce in the hands of supplier, is not ideal for
our local farmers, as at times it has led to an influx of imported foods being
picked ahead of local produce.

A decline in farming and problems with continuity of supply has added to this
complication, and restaurants cannot be blamed for opting for the best policy,
which ensures they have ample ingredients all year round.

Yet, if they are to keep up with the demands of consumers, a policy of sourcing
as much local produce as they can would not only satisfy their clients but would
help guarantee a future for our producers, who currently cannot compete with the
imports from abroad.

One would urge farmers to pull together in an attempt to ensure they can
guarantee the goods restaurants desire. And a rethink by restaurants to support
local producers would also help secure the future of our farmers and growers,
some of which are creating the finest foods in the world

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

               Copyright 2005 Midland Independent Newspapers plc


                              534 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                            Central Queensland News

                                 April 20, 2011

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 234  words



HIGHLIGHT: Coming termite invasion friend or foe?


TERMITES and ants might be the last pests anyone wants in their home, but a
recent study has shown farmers might welcome the little critters.

With the wet weather and flooding in Emerald over the past few months there is
set to be an influx of insects in and around our homes and Amalgamated Pest
Control Emerald area manager Robyn Swadek is warning residents to be wary.

"Ants, spiders, termites, cockroaches and mosquitoes reproduce in greater
numbers in wet conditions," she said.

"Termites can cause thousands of dollars worth of structural damage in a
relatively small timeframe."

According to Theo Evans from the CSIRO, ants and termites have a significant
positive impact on crop yields in dryland agriculture however.

"Ants and termites perform the same ecosystem service functions in dryland
agriculture that earthworms perform in cooler and wetter areas, but the
potential for ants and termites to provide these benefits has received little
attention until now," Mr Evans said.

But while the pests might have a positive impact on crops, Mrs Swadek said it
was a good idea to prevent them from entering the home by sealing any cracks
from outside.

"Seal doors and windows with tight-fitting screens and weather stripping," she
said.

"Any piles of wood, green waste or bricks that could create a harbourage for
pests should be removed."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RCQ


                    Copyright 2011 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              535 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                      July 14, 1997, Monday, METRO EDITION

Meat market shifts focus to Asian customers Milton company adapts to serve
latest waves of immigrants

BYLINE: By Bob Reguly SPECIAL TO THE STAR

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 646 words


   An influx of Asian immigrants into Canada has brought new prosperity to a
family-owned meat-processing business.

Town and Country Farms of Milton, a business founded by a Hungarian refugee
couple, processes about 1,000 pigs a week into 26 varieties of sausages and an
array of cuts for the Asian market.

Boasting it uses "everything but the squeal," the family operation prepares
products ranging from the big-seller pork butts to bags of blood and whole
heads.

"The Asians like the blood in jelled form to fry it into a noodle dish," said
Michael Dorgo, one of the three co-owners, with twin brother Leslie and
brother-in-law Mario Henry. "They also like the lungs, stomachs and intestines."

Dorgo said other ethnic groups have their preferences. "The Filipinos roast the
whole head while the Chinese like the ears and snouts. The Italian and
Portuguese still like liver, tongue and heart, but mainly sausages."

It was not easy getting those products on the market.

As Dorgo recalled, "We had to fight the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture and Food
to make those products legitimate."

Town and Country also sells suckling pigs for barbecuing, along with sheep and
goats to Latin American and Jamaican immigrants. But pigs are the mainstay.

Before focusing on the Asian market - mainly Chinese, along with the Vietnamese
and Filipinos - the family business was lucky to find buyers for 30 pigs a week.

Demand for their products today goes up to 5,000 hogs a week at Christmas,
Chinese New Year and the November Moon Cake Chinese holiday. The pigs are bought
from farmers in the Kitchener and Welland areas, and slaughtered in the
family-owned abbatoir.

The business had catered for 20 years to Italian, Portuguese and Hungarian
customers. As those older communities faded away, the three owners began
catering to the new waves of immigrants.

The market shift provided new opportunities for the business that Mihaly Dorgo
and Elizabeth Link founded. The couple met and married in Toronto in 1958 after
fleeing Hungary.

In the 1956 Hungarian revolution, soldiers shot Elizabeth's defiant father,
seized the family farm and took the cattle in the name of the restored Communist
regime.

The mother fled with her 16 children to a shelter. Six of the children later
escaped over the mountains to Austria and then Canada.

Elizabeth brought with her the family recipes for making sausages.

In Toronto, the Dorgo couple bought a house, took in boarders and opened a small
grocery.

They later acquired 110 acres near the Toronto airport to raise pigs, ducks and
geese, but sold the farm in 1974 to buy the meat-packing plant in Milton.

Their Town and Country Meats was one of the original vendors in the North St.
Lawrence Market and still operates there every Saturday in downtown Toronto.

The Dorgos' daughter Elizabeth Rosario also runs her own El Gaucho Chorizo
sausage stall in the north market. The matriarch, Elizabeth, died in 1985.

Mihaly, now retired, still keeps a proprietary eye on the business, which
generates total annual sales of under $10 million.

The abattoir part of the business alone generates about $4 million annually, not
including the sausage kitchen and the three retail outlets.

Mario Henry came into the business when he married another daughter, Anne Dorgo.
He's supervisor of the sausage operations.

The recently opened production and retail facility in Milton turns out a
stunning array of sausages, both fresh and smoked.

A computerized smokehouse burns maple, cherry and walnut wood to make German and
Hungarian-style sausages.

One farmer had his big-bird emus transformed into sausage.

Another customer, a hunter, liked ham kolbassa with moose meat in the middle.

"We use old-fashioned R and D - our taste buds," Michael Dorgo boasts.

"We're fourth-generation sausage makers."

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Star Color Photo (JEFF GOODE): FINDING NICHES: Michael Dorgo, left, and
Mario Henry produce specialty meats for immigrant communities and harvest heart
valves for heart surgery.Thinking; Big; entrepreneur; Town; and; Country; Farms;
profile; meat

                  Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              536 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Mail (London)

                            December 19, 2008 Friday
                                  1ST Edition

As dole queues grow, 5,000 more migrants are given work visas;
TELL US WHAT YOU THINK AT www.dailymail.co.uk/debate

BYLINE: Matthew Hickley

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 565 words


THOUSANDS more Bulgarian and Romanian workers will be allowed into Britain next
year, despite soaring unemployment here.

Home Office officials say immigrant agricultural workers are needed to fill gaps
in the unskilled labour market which have left farmers struggling to harvest
crops.

But critics demanded to know last night why unemployed Britons could not be
persuaded to provide the manpower instead of languishing at home on benefits.

Ministers have decided to retain restrictions introduced when Romania and
Bulgaria joined the EU last year - which bar most unskilled labourers from
taking jobs here - because of the worsening economic picture in Britain.

Self-employed or skilled workers must have job offers to be able to come to
Britain from those countries.

But a limited number of sixmonth work permits are issued for low-skilled
labourers to pick crops, under the Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme. This is
to be expanded next year from 16,500 workers to 21,250.

The Home Office decision follows recommendations from the Migration Advisory
Committee, based on evidence from the farming industry.

Sir Andrew Green, chairman of the MigrationWatch think-tank, said: 'It is a pity
there are not stronger incentives for unemployed British workers to do the
agricultural work.

'For a married man with two children, the difference between working at the
minimum wage and unemployment benefits is less than £20 per week. That is hardly
enough to pay the bus fare to work.' UK unemployment hit 1.86million this week,
but despite thousands of Britons losing their jobs in recent weeks, few are
prepared to take low-paid, gruelling work in open fields.

The Migration Advisory Committee urged the Home Office to keep the other
restrictions in place, to avoid another huge influx.

When eight other eastern European states joined the EU five years ago the
Government opted to allow a free-for-all, with open access to the UK jobs
market.

That decision led to an unprecedented influx of more than a million workers from
Poland and other countries - making a nonsense of the Government's prediction
that only 13,000 a year would arrive and putting a massive strain on local
services in many areas.

Yesterday ministers accepted the MAC recommendation that existing curbs on
Romanian and Bulgarian workers should stay for now, although EU rules mean they
must be scrapped completely by 2014.

Committee chairman Professor David Metcalf said the curbs must stay to protect
British jobs during the recession.

There are around 67,000 Romanian and Bulgarian workers in Britain, according to
recent figures. But the countries have a combined population of 30million, high
unemployment and some of the lowest wages in the EU, raising the prospect of
another massive influx here when the restrictions are lifted.

While the crop-pickers quota will grow, a similar scheme for 3,500
food-processing workers will stay the same, and the MAC rejected calls for new
schemes to cover care home workers The cross-party Balanced Migration group
welcomed the decision to keep most restrictions in place.

Co-chairmen Labour MP Frank Field and Tory Nicholas Soames said: 'Now the
Government needs to act to tighten up other immigration controls, so that
foreign workers cannot come here "on spec" to look for work, and also to ensure
that all jobs are advertised in the UK first - and cannot be given straight to
foreign workers'.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              537 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                               November 11, 2004

Britain had influx of eastern Europeans

SECTION: World; European News; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 575 words


BRITAIN: Britain took in massively more eastern European workers than predicted
in the five months after EU enlargement this year, figures showed yesterday.

Research commissioned by the Government estimated that between 5,000 and 13,000
people from the eight former Soviet bloc states would come to the UK annually,
but from May to September nearly 91,000 registered to work there.

Home Secretary, Mr David Blunkett, said the worker registration scheme - created
because of concerns the UK would see a huge influx of migrants - had been a
"win-win situation" for Britain.

But the Conservatives accused the government of "spinning" the figures and said
the immigration system was "a shambles".

New arrivals were taking up hard-to-fill job vacancies, paying tax and had
already contributed GBP 120 million to the UK's Gross Domestic Product, he said,
while thousands of previously illegal workers had gone legitimate.

Figures also showed very few had claimed benefit handouts or council
accommodation.

Mr Blunkett also pledged a new crackdown on immigrants being used as "domestic
slaves".

In just one month this summer, 220 people - mainly from the east African country
of Eritrea - claimed asylum because their passports had been confiscated by
their domestic employers.

"There has been a significant upsurge in asylum claims over the summer for this
reason," said Mr Blunkett.

He has already announced plans for a new criminal offence to tackle the problem.
"We've got to get really tough with those employers who bring people into the
country for this kind of exploitation."

Ministers said up to 45 per cent of the 90,950 on the worker registration scheme
had been in Britain before EU enlargement on May 1, and had possibly been
working illegally.

"Our common-sense approach to EU enlargement has put us at a clear advantage
compared with the rest of Europe," Mr Blunkett told a TUC conference on migrant
working in London.

"Illegal workers have legitimised their status and are contributing to the
economy, benefiting from protection in the workplace and allowing us to focus
resources on other forms of illegal working."

He added: "The contribution that is being made overall by migrants to this
country is something just over a 0.5 per cent contribution to GDP.

"It's a substantial tranche of our well being."

According to Home Office figures, numbers registering on the scheme fell
considerably in August and September from a peak in the early summer. There was
also "anecdotal evidence" that many had already gone home, particularly in the
agricultural sector.

The breakdown of the first five months showed: The largest group came from
Poland (56 per cent), followed by Lithuanians (17 per cent), Slovaks (10 per
cent), Latvians and Czechs (both 7 per cent), Hungarians (3 per cent) and
Estonians (2 per cent). Slovenians were given as less than 0.5 per cent.

Ministers said EU accession state workers contributed GBP 120 million to GDP in
the first five months and paid an estimated GBP 20 million in tax and National
Insurance.

Mr Blunkett declined to consider an amnesty for illegal workers from outside the
EU, following a request by some groups.

"One absolutely certain fact is that until we have an appropriate identity
system and we know who is here legally and entitled to draw down on our free
benefits, then we won't actually be able to monitor and properly register and do
the job.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 2004 The Irish Times


                              538 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Messenger

                            February 24, 2013 Sunday

LDFA 2013 begins: Rs 300 million given to SBP for financing Rice Husking Mills
projects in Sindh

SECTION: Vol. V No. 54

LENGTH: 309  words


Acting governor Sindh and Speaker of the Sindh Assembly Nisar Ahmed Khuhro has
said that the province has a lot of potential in agro-based sectors and it is
need of the hour that local and foreign investors should be invited to invest in
these sectors. This he said while addressing inaugural ceremony of the
Livestock, Dairy, Fisheries, Poultry, Agriculture and Culture Exhibition
(LDFA-2013) at expo center Karachi here on Saturday. On this occasion a cheque
of Rs.300 million was given to Deputy Governor State Bank for modernization and
restructuring scheme for Rice Husking Mills in Sindh. The farmers of the
province can borrow soft loans from National Bank of Pakistan, Sindh Bank,
Allied Bank Limited, HBL, UBL and MCB bank.

He said: "We should try to find out international markets for these agro-based
products to earn foreign exchange. We could not find international markets due
to low quality products. Our country has been bestowed with the countless
resources by the nature, but we have wasted time like 12 years wasted so far and
we could not use the coal reserves we have in Sindh."

Chairman Sindh Board of Investment Muhammad Zubair Motiwala speaking on this
occasion said that rural areas of Sindh have immense potential for investments
and utilizing these opportunities would not only stop influx to cities but
employment opportunities could also be generated. He stressed upon using modern
technology in agriculture sector and urged private sector to tape the potential
of Sindh. He said having overcome the dearth of water, improving infrastructure,
creating awareness we could enhance our growth rate in livestock, dairy,
fisheries, agriculture and other agro-based sectors. He said that the government
offers huge opportunities to investors to attract them in these sectors and SBI
provides financial and technical assistance as well.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2013 The Messenger
                              All Rights Reserved


                              539 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Berwickshire Advertiser

                                August 31, 2006

European migrants boosting Borders economy

LENGTH: 711  words


AN influx of migrant workers from eastern Europe to the Borders - conservatively
estimated at 600 - is helping boost the local economy and reverse a trend of
skill shortages which has threatened to put many companies out of business.

That is the view of Scottish Borders Council leader David Parker, reacting to
the news that the UK government had radically miscalculated the inward migration
figures from countries such as Poland, the Czech Republic and Lithuania, which
acceded to European Union membership in 2004.

He said: "Some sections of the media have portrayed this scale of immigration as
a negative thing and, while we are monitoring the trends and the possible impact
on council services, the feedback so far here has been extremely positive."

The government has been criticised after admitting that more than 600,000 people
from the new states, including 447,000 on the worker registration scheme, have
come to the UK in the past two years. Those now registered in Scotland total
32,000.

The estimate of numbers in the Borders was given by Lesley Crozier, SBC's senior
officer for social justice, equality and diversity. A member of the multi-agency
Borders Migration Group, Ms Crozier revealed that interviews were taking place
this week for the new post of community support outreach migrant worker whose
main job would be to help the assimilation of the incomers as free and equal EU
citizens.

The successful candidate, funded by the Scottish Executive, will also assess and
report on the impact of the influx on public services, including health,
education and housing.

But so far, said Ms Crozier, few adverse comments had been received at the
regular meetings of her group, which comprises representatives of the police,
housing providers, VisitScotland, Scottish Enterprise Borders and NHS Borders as
well as the council.

She accepted that the 600 figure may well be an underestimate and explained the
council had no legal responsibility to keep an exact tally or to track
individuals.

Ms Crozier said: "We are, however, governed by equality legislation, which
ensures they are welcomed here, whether there is one or a million."

The biggest single group is from Poland where the government is under pressure
to introduce incentives, such as tax breaks, to stem the flow of outward
migration and encourage natives to return.

Most work in the Berwickshire and Hawick areas, and the main sectors are fish
processing and filleting, agriculture, public transport, construction, hotels/
restaurants and care homes. NHS Borders is another major employer.

Mr Parker said: "We must remember that although unemployment has been low here,
we are trying to reverse a trend of economic downturn and stagnation,
underpinned by an ageing population, young people leaving and massive skill
shortages in key industries, such as construction and manufacturing.

"Even companies such as fibreoptic specialists Emtel of Hawick have long
complained about not being able to recruit staff locally. Now that problem is
being addressed."

Mr Parker did not believe the present rate of migration would drive down wages
in an area already at the bottom of the Scottish pay league.

"Wages in the Borders have been low because companies, in order to survive, have
had to operate low profit margins. But with a vibrant economy, fuelled by our
new workers, we are already seeing better-paid jobs coming to the Borders. There
is a misconception companies like Tesco and Asda pay low wages: they do not.

"A successful future lies in attracting people who are economically active and
pay taxes like you and me."

Mr Parker conceded there was a knock-on cost for council services, such as
education where children who did not speak English required special assistance.

"However, the block grant we receive annually from Holyrood is based on
population, so I can't foresee a situation of Council Tax going up purely
because of the migrants.

"It will be a matter for central government to decide whether to cap the new
wave from Bulgaria and Romania next year, but I see no reason to discourage
migration at present."

Ms Crozier said the number of crimes perpetrated by or towards the migrants, and
reported by the police to the multi-agency group, was "minimal" and no higher
than for any social grouping.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              540 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                           The Sunday Times (London)

                                 July 12, 2009
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Moving with the times;
A new light on the mass migration of the Dark Ages that changed our world

BYLINE: MARY BEARD

SECTION: CULTURE;FEATURES; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 948 words


EMPIRES AND BARBARIANS: Migration, Development and the Birth of Europe by PETER
HEATHER, Macmillan £25 pp734

In about 2500BC, Britain was invaded by the "Beaker People". This was a mass
migration from continental Europe, which left its clear traces in the
distinctive style of pottery beakers used by the newcomers (hence their modern
name). In a prehistoric version of ethnic cleansing, the old Neolithic
population were driven out. In came a new social order, new techniques of craft
and agriculture, and possibly the first alcoholic drink to be consumed in these
islands.

At least, that is what we used to be taught. There were always problems with the
story as an explanation of cultural change. Why, for example, was it assumed
that new styles of pottery necessarily indicated an influx of foreigners? After
all, the passion for chinoiserie in the 18th century had nothing to do with an
influx of Chinese.

But the idea of prehistoric mass migration seemed to be supported by what was
observed in a much better documented period of European history. For during the
first millennium AD, the face of Europe was changed by a series of invasions or
migrations (it's sometimes hard to tell the difference). As Peter Heather
rightly emphasises in Empires and Barbarians, the old Roman empire had been
focused on the Mediterranean, with a northern hinterland. By AD1000, that
hinterland had become the centre of the new European world - as it remains
today.

A barbarian fighting a

Responsible for this massive change in geopolitics were various "peoples", who
moved into, or across, Roman territory: Huns, Goths, Saxons, Vikings, Magyars
and hosts more. Late-Roman writers have even left us memorable accounts of these
hordes on the move. Ammianus Marcellinus, for example, in the 4th century AD,
described huge numbers of Goths moving towards the banks of the river Danube and
the borders of the Roman empire; they had been driven out of their own
homelands, he claimed, by another mass migration - of Huns.

But that too is what we used to be taught. For recently - following
archeologists who had come to prefer the "chinoiserie" to the "Beaker" model of
cultural change - many historians have challenged any notion that the changing
geopolitics of early medieval Europe could be explained by mass movements of
"peoples". For a start, so this new orthodoxy has it, the idea of peoples with a
clear identity drastically misrepresents what were in reality fluid and unstable
sociopolitical groups. And, if there was some movement, it must have been on a
much smaller scale and less systematic than the old model of migration implied.

What about the written evidence of historians such as Ammianus? Quite simply,
they were wrong. The Romans had a dread fantasy about organised and mobile
groups of barbarians (one that we have inherited). But they could not have had
much reliable information about the societies beyond their borders, let alone
who was a Hun and who was a Goth.

Heather has a fine track record in rescuing historical babies from being thrown
out with the revisionist bathwater. His The Fall of the Roman Empire put a new
case for the old view that barbarian invasions were an important factor in the
collapse of the Roman empire. Empires and Barbarians partly overlaps with that,
reinstating mass migration as an important phenomenon in the first millennium
and one key factor in the formation of modern Europe.

This is not merely an attempt to turn back the historiographical clock. Heather
has no patience with the old "billiard ball" model of migration - in which, as
Ammianus saw it, Huns bumped into Goths and so pushed them towards the Roman
empire. Instead he has tried to look at the first millennium afresh, using
modern theories of migration and its motives. We are not dealing with anything
like the vast Rwandan exodus, but many of the claimed movements would fit the
patterns observed in recent history: people tend to move from poorer to richer
regions; groups with a tradition of migration tend to be more mobile than those
without; people tend to migrate to areas about which they have information. All
those conditions apply to Ammianus's Goths moving

BRIDGEMAN ART LIBRARY towards the Danube.

Roman legionary

In theory, his argument works well. But, as Heather admits, beyond the theory it
is often hard to find conclusive evidence for any of these migrations. Take the
wars of Marcus Aurelius in the AD170s against the Marcomanni tribe on the
Danube, commemorated on his great column in the centre of Rome (twin of the
Column of Trajan). Heather suspects this war was more than "a normal frontier
tiff", but driven by deeper currents of migration. However, the only ancient
hint of that comes from a late-Roman historian, who is flagrantly unreliable
even by the standards of his time. Archeology, it is true, has revealed changing
patterns in barbarian burials and artefacts in the region during roughly the
same period - though whether this was caused by population change or not (the
"Beaker/chinoiserie" problem) is uncertain. Even if it were, the dating is so
vague that we could not tell whether it was a cause or effect of the Marcomannic
war.

At one point, in desperation, Heather has to appeal to Aurelius's column. Surely
he would not have put up such a vast monument to celebrate victory in a
"frontier tiff". He would have been a laughing stock. The truth is that Roman
emperors were capable of vastly disproportionate celebration of tiny victories.
Impressive as it is, the column is very fragile evidence indeed for mass German
migration.

* Available at the Sunday Times BooksFirst price of £22.50 (incl p& p) on 0845
271 2135 and timesonline.co.uk/booksfirst

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A barbarian fighting a Roman legionary
BRIDGEMAN ART LIBRARY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STS


                    Copyright 2009 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              541 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 11, 1994

TYROLEAN DIE-HARDS LEAD NO CAMPAIGN;
With the ballot imminent, Austrians are wrestling with the dilemma of whether to
march to their own tune and risk being left out in the cold or to throw in their
lot with Brussels. Ian Traynor in Mils reports on a country split down the
middle

BYLINE: Ian Traynor

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FOREIGN PAGE; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1391 words


HIGH in the Tyrolean Alps, on the fertile mountain pastures that Franz Hauser's
family has farmed for generations, arguments are raging this weekend in the
chalets and inns that dot the landscape.

Fathers beg to differ with sons, husbands and wives are at odds, ancient
friendships are under strain as Austria wrestles with the dilemma of whether to
march to its own tune in the centre of Europe or to hitch its colours to the
Brussels flag and join the European Union.

In what Anton Pelinka, an Innsbruck political scientist, describes as "the most
important decision for Austria in 40 years", a national referendum tomorrow will
decide whether this small country of 8 million is to become the EU's 13th
member, so opening the way to further expansion embracing Scandinavia and
eventually eastern Europe, or whether a blow will be dealt to the advocates of a
wider union.

Mr Hauser takes a break from mowing the meadows that feed his 18 dairy cattle,
mops his brow, and vents his suspicions: "I'm not so sure. I'm a bit of a
sceptic. Our food is going to have to conform to their rules. Things will be out
of control, there will be brutal competition and anything produced more cheaply
will flood in here, putting us out of business."

The sun beats down, but snow still dusts the peaks towering over Mr Hauser's
farm of mountain, woodland, meadow and orchard at Mils, east of Innsbruck. The
farmer, aged 68, hopes a No vote will help sustain this idyllic lifestyle for
himself and his seven children, keeping butter mountains and wine lakes, the
common agricultural policy and rampaging agribusiness, at bay.

In the Tyrol, Mr Hauser is in good company. For it is in this part of Austria,
where the hill farmers fear for their future, where narrow Alpine valleys are
being choked and destroyed by lorries thundering from Germany to Italy, and
where the locals suspect an imminent influx of rich Germans buying up holiday
homes in the extended EU, that anti-Brussels sentiment is at its height.

"The referendum is clearly going to be very close, but here I think it will be
against," says Wendelin Weingartner, the prime minister of the Tyrol and an
advocate of membership.

The anti-EU argument here is also fuelled by the regions's year-round dependence
on tourism. "The tourists are going to come whether we're in the EU or not,"
says Franz Klug, a local Green MP and anti -Brussels campaigner. "Besides, life
is pretty good around here. We're comfortable enough, we're rich enough. People
are reasonably satisfied. Why should we change?"

The key local issues - the environment, lorry transit, farming and holiday homes
- also loom large nationally and have dominat ed the debate in Vienna and
elsewhere.

But there are bigger issues at stake. Aside from the highly polarised arguments
about the economic benefits of membership, there are cultural and emotional
factors which are likely to swing the vote.  Many pollsters believe the high
number of undecided voters - up to 38 per cent according to surveys this week -
will cast their ballot according to gut instinct, rather than rational choice.

Their concern is with amorphous notions of national identity, insecurity
complexes and fears and prejudices about Austria's place in the world. For if
Europe has been turned upside down in the past five years by revolution, war and
the EU's crisis of purpose, Austria has become confused.

Across its southern border, the Balkan war rages, inviting refugee influxes. To
the north, the reunified German giant stirs.  To the east lies the upheaval and
uncertainty of post-communist Europe, while prosperous Switzerland to the west
remains splendid in its isolation, offering an escapist model. Austria is no
longer sure of its bearings. The EU vote is an answer of sorts.

Like Switzerland, Austria is neutral. But whereas Swiss neutrality is born of
centuries of nose-thumbing at the rest of the world, Austria's "permanent
neutrality" was effectively imposed in 1955 as the price for ending the
Russians' post-war occupation.

Politicians know this neutrality, a cold war product, is an anachronism. But it
is highly cherished, particularly among women, who comprise a majority of the
electorate. It remains an untouchable tenet for any politician aspiring to
office.

"The government is not being honest," Mr Pelinka says. "Privately, the
politicians know neutrality is dead. But they can't say so openly because it's a
symbol of modern Austria."

So while the government, utterly committed to EU membership, argues that
security in a turbulent region is the paramount reason for joining, it also
insists Austria's neutral status remains sacrosanct. As a member, Austria could
count on EU military support if threatened, but its neutrality would prevent it
from going to the aid of fellow EU members.

This kind of disingenuousness is a gift to the far-right tub-thumper, Jorg
Haider, spearheading the No campaign by ridiculing government propaganda. The
cheeky, young Mr Haider unashamedly invokes the spectre of Jewish takeover
plots, Mafia crime waves and unfettered corruption if Austria were to join.

The government is in cahoots with international freemasonry (code for Jews), Mr
Haider has told rallies across the country, while Austria is about to be overrun
by immigrants from the poorer EU south - Portugal, Spain, Greece and southern
Italy.

But while Austrians have come to expect unscrupulous populism from Mr Haider,
they are less used to the naked scaremongering from the sober-suited
establishment politicians of the pro-EU camp.

On Thursday, the defence minister, Werner Fasslabend, invoked Gulf war scenarios
in Austria. Within the EU, he claimed, the country could obtain Patriot missiles
to defend itself against attack. The inference was that if Austria voted No,
Scud missiles could rain down on a defenceless Vienna.

While Mr Haider's message is that the ground beneath the EU will open up and
swallow little Austria if it joins, the government propaganda is that the
Tyrolean Alps will cave in on Austria if it does not.

At Innsbruck university, a spirited debate on membership took place under the
motto "Neither Heaven Nor Hell". The signs are that the public resents the
stridency of the campaigns on both sides.

The last month's opinion polls have revealed a deep ambivalence about the EU,
with those who have decided being almost evenly split, for and against. But in
the final days of the campaign, the Yes voters appear to be pulling away.

Two-thirds of Austria's trade is with the EU - more than 40 per cent being with
Germany alone. Much of Brussels' diktat already holds sway here by virtue of
Austria's membership of the European Economic Area. As a prosperous country,
Austria would be a net contributor to the Brussels kitty to the tune of about
pounds 1 billion. But it might as well join and have a voice in deciding matters
that will in any case affect it, the Yes campaigners say.

The poll's outcome could hinge on such vagaries as the weather's effect on
turnout. A high turnout would almost certainly mean Yes. A low turnout could
defeat the government, because the No camp is more determined to vote.

While Tyroleans look like voting No, the most likely national outcome seems a
grudging and ambivalent Yes - more for negative reasons than positive. Austrians
do not want to be left in the cold, because there seems to be no alternative to
the EU.

"I'm dubious, but I'm still voting Yes because I think the benefits outweigh the
bad," Susan Hauser, Mr Franz's daughter-in-law, says.

Farmer Franz chuckles at her folly. "I've been working this farm since I was a
kid, for 60 years. My father did it before me and my son does it now. He
inherited the farm three years ago. Things will be controlled from far away if
we join. I'm against it. But my son thinks different. He's voting Yes. He says
things will be much harder if we stay outside."

- Austria's EU minister, Brigitte Ederer, was bitten by a horse yesterday when
she stopped in central Vienna for a final pro-membership pep talk with one of
the bowler-hatted coachmen who drive tourists around town.

Ms Ederer was attempting to sway undecided voters as she wound up the government
campaign. The horse left its teethmarks in her arm.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                              542 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Peterborough Evening Telegraph

                                January 16, 2007

More Peterborough residents claiming benefits

LENGTH: 481  words


THE influx of eastern European migrants has been blamed for a sharp rise in the
number of people claiming benefits in Peterborough.

An extra 1,110 city residents claimed jobseekers' allowance, incapacity benefit
and disability living allowance benefits over the last six years.

It takes the total number of claimants to 11,745 - more than a tenth of
Peterborough's entire population.

City MP Stewart Jackson believes the inundation of migrant workers to
Peterborough from the European Union (EU) are partly to blame for the increase.

And he fears the problems will grow if migrants from newly-joined EU countries
Bulgaria and Romania also settle in the city.

Figures released by the Government's Department for Work and Pensions have shed
light on the number of people claiming benefits in 13 areas across the city.

North ward, which includes New England, has seen an extra 195 people claiming
benefit, compared to 2002 figures, when the total was 645.

There are also notable increases in Dogsthorpe, Bretton North and East wards.

The only areas that have seen little change are the Werrington North ward and
West ward, which includes Longthorpe and Netherton.

Mr Jackson, who requested the figures from the Government, said: "The influx of
migrants has created a low skill, low wage society in certain areas.

"Migrant workers are taking the jobs from people who are established in
Peterborough which leads to more benefit claims.

"These transitory workers, who may only stay for 12 months, do not have a
positive impact on the health of Peterborough's economy.

"Unlike London, whose migrants are plumbers, plasterers, IT specialists and
lawyers, Peterborough's are not highly skilled."

"The increase in benefit claims isn't a national problem. It's a Peterborough
problem.

"We need to look to see if we are receiving enough money from the Government to
cope with it. Are we receiving enough cash that we need for education, for
example?"

Mr Jackson believes the situation could worsen because, even though the
Government has imposed tight regulations on Romanians and Bulgarians who come to
the UK, one exemption is for the food packing industry and agriculture - exactly
what thousands of migrants have flocked to Peterborough for.

Leader of Peterborough City Council John Peach said the rise in benefit claims
may signal a downturn in the economy.

He said: "Unemployment, inflation and mortgage rates have all gone up recently,
and with Peterborough not being as prosperous as other parts of the country, the
effects could hit us hardest."

North ward councillor Charles Swift added: "The MP is 100 per cent right. In the
last 12 months the number of European names on the electoral role for my ward
has gone up by 10 per cent.

"People claiming benefits has a knock-on effect on schools and housing and the
whole area becomes run down. It also angers Peterborough people who have lived
here for a long time."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              543 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                      IBNS

                     February 11, 2016 Thursday 6:30 AM EST

UN agriculture agency warns of threat to food security from overuse of
antibiotics

BYLINE: India Blooms News Service

LENGTH: 464  words


New York, Feb 11 (Just Earth News/IBNS) The overuse of antibiotics and other
antimicrobial agents is impacting rural livelihoods and food security, and
requires globally coordinated efforts, the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) said today.

Speaking to European ministers of health and agriculture at a conference on
antimicrobial resistance in Amsterdam, FAO Deputy Director-General Helena Semedo
emphasized that antimicrobial agents foster increasing resistance among the very
microbes that cause the infections and disease they were designed to quell,
thereby threatening to reverse a century of progress in human and animal health.
Antimicrobial resistance is a global threat that in this inter-connected world
cannot be solved in Europe alone, Ms. Semedo said. We have to help save
live-saving drugs, she added. Aside from the human health considerations, Ms.
Semedo underscored that the emergence of microbes resistant to antibiotics and
other pharmaceutical agents puts animal health at risk and consequently has an
impact on rural livelihoods and food security. While resistance develops as part
of natural adaptation, it is exacerbated by inappropriate use of
pharmaceuticals, and the prevalence of resistance in the agricultural sector is
generally higher in animal species reared under intensive production systems.
Although FAO favours prudent regulations and measures to control the influx of
medicines and reduce their use, Ms. Semedo said that many rural smallholders and
pastoralists often face difficult economic choices and that counterfeit drugs
are rampant. How can we eliminate hunger or improve sustainability when we
cannot cure sick animals? How can we reduce rural poverty when the drugs given
to ill farm workers and their families no longer have effect? she asked. While
hailing the Netherlands in particular for reducing the amount of drugs used in
its livestock sector by almost 60 per cent in recent years, Ms. Semedo noted
that the real challenge is to translate such efforts to countries in need with
poor resources. The risk of antimicrobial resistance appears to be particularly
high in countries where legislation, surveillance, prevention and monitoring are
weak or inadequate, she stressed. Broad improvements in hygiene, disease
prevention, veterinary oversight and accurate and affordable diagnostics, as
well as ensuring quality nutrition to improve the overall health of livestock
and fish through safe feed and suitable breeds, are critical in reducing the
overuse of antibiotics, she said. Considering that seven out of every 10 newly
discovered human diseases are of animal origin, she also highlighted the
centrality of farming practices and food systems in the effort to contain
antimicrobial resistance. Photo: FAO/Yanne

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


            Copyright 2016 India Blooms., distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              544 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      August 19, 2001 Sunday, Home Edition

Summer becomes season of hunger;
Food programs provide meals for fewer children once school shut their doors.

BYLINE: REBECCA CARR, RON MARTZ

SOURCE: AJC

SECTION: News; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1156 words


When James Thomas was living alone, his salary as a security guard at a metro
area hospital was barely enough to pay the bills and keep food on the table.

But when his 15-year-old twins, James and Jermaine, and their youthful appetites
moved in with him this summer, the 37-year-old found himself on the edge of
financial ruin.

"It got to be more difficult to keep food in the house," Thomas said. "They like
to eat and play basketball. They eat before they go play, and they eat when they
come home."

For the first time, Thomas decided to call a food bank for help. The next day,
two boxes of food were delivered to his apartment filled with rice, canned
vegetables and what his sons like most --- cereal.

"I was speechless," Thomas said. "Nobody has ever gone the distance for me like
they did on this."

Experts say there simply aren't enough groups signing up to run food programs to
help Thomas and others in need. They say the government needs to do a better job
of recruiting sponsors and informing parents that their children qualify for
free meals during the summer.

"It's a tragedy that children are going hungry when there are resources
available," said Lynn Parker, director of child nutrition programs at the Food
Research Action Center, a nonprofit group in Washington.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture, the main federal agency coping with hunger
issues, agrees that more ought to be done to reach children.

"We recognize that there are children out there who could qualify, but for any
number of reasons they are not receiving a meal," said Jean Daniel, public
affairs director for the USDA's Food and Nutrition Service. "It is of great
concern."

It is also of great concern at the nation's food banks, where requests for help
are rising.

The reasons most often cited by food bank operators are the influx of children
during the summer vacation months, layoffs in the cooling economy and low-income
workers depending on food banks to make ends meet.

"The face of hunger is changing," said Robert Forney, president and CEO of
America's Second Harvest, the nation's largest domestic hunger relief
organization, based in Chicago. "It isn't just the poor person on the street. It
is working families."

"Hunger among children is severe," said Lynette Engelhardt Stott, senior
domestic policy analyst for Bread for the World, a nonprofit group based in
Washington.

Former welfare recipients are in jobs, but often these jobs don't cover the cost
of child care, health care, food and other living expenses, said Bill Bolling,
executive director of the Atlanta Community Food Bank.

As a result, food networks originally built for emergency needs are fast
becoming permanent food suppliers for working families, Bolling said.

"These are working people who are not making enough to live," Bolling said.
"They will give up buying food to take care of child care. So they end up going
to an emergency feeder, month in and month out."

The Atlanta Community Food Bank reported that requests at its 700 food suppliers
are up 18 percent so far this year over last year.

At the same time, the top weapon against hunger --- government food stamps ---
has a declining enrollment. At the program's peak in 1994, there were 28 million
people on food stamps. As of March, there were 17.1 million.

In Georgia, 3.1 percent of all households were enrolled in a food stamp program
in 2000 compared with 8.9 percent of all households in 1990.

On top of that, only 60 percent of those eligible for food stamps actually
receive them, according to America's Second Harvest.

As former welfare recipients move into the job market, many of them are not
aware that they can still receive food stamps and health care from government
programs.

Others don't want to take time off from their new jobs every three months to be
"re-evaluated" for the food subsidy. And food experts say the application can be
up to 36 pages long.

The fact that the number of hungry people, estimated at 31 million, has remained
constant during times of unprecedented economic prosperity frustrates Rep. Tony
Hall (D-Ohio).

"During the heyday, if there was one problem we could have eliminated, it would
have been hunger, but we barely touched the issue," Hall said. "That is an
embarrassment."

Hall, a leading advocate for the hungry on Capitol Hill, said more money should
be pumped into anti-hunger programs.

Believing that most Americans are unaware that one out of five children in
America is hungry, ConAgra Foods' Feeding Children Better Foundation and
America's Second Harvest teamed up with the Ad Council to develop a public
awareness campaign about childhood hunger.

Ads showing hungry children eating soup their mother made from plastic packets
of ketchup are airing across the country with the slogan "The sooner you believe
it, the sooner we can end it."

The good news, though, is that the hardest part of the year is over for families
such as the Thomases.

During the school year, most low-income children receive free breakfasts and
lunches through a USDA program.

But during the summer months, the federal government reaches only a fraction ---
3.2 million out of 15.2 million --- of the students it serves during the school
year.

At least 3 million more children could receive free lunches during the summer if
all states did as well in providing programs as the best states do now, and $191
million in federal funds would be available to provide those meals, according to
Food Research Action Center, a nonprofit group in Washington.

In Georgia, 566,775 children received free lunches during the 2000 school year.
That figure dropped to 115,133 last summer, according to the study. For people
living paycheck to paycheck, like Thomas, a relatively small problem such as a
car breaking down can be the difference between eating and going hungry.

Last month, his car's transmission and brakes went out. His choice, he said, was
to fix the car or to eat. He needed the car to get to his job in Roswell, so it
came first.

Finding money for food became an immediate concern. His $20,000 annual salary
was already strained. Then Thomas remembered that he had met a representative of
a food bank a year earlier.

He still had her card, but he was reluctant to call.

"That 'man thing' kind of kicks in," Thomas said. "You want to say you can make
it no matter what, and don't want to admit you're having problems."

Thomas finally kicked his pride aside and made the call. The next day, the boxes
of food were delivered.

Thomas is considering taking a second job until he gets out from under the
burden of his car repairs. Then he wants to go back to school part time and
become a barber.

ON THE WEB: Food Research and Action Center: www.frac.org ConAgra Feeding
Children Better Foundation: www.feedingchildrenbetter.org America's Second
Harvest: www.secondharvest.org

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo:
James Thomas of Marietta turned to a food bank after twins Jermaine (left) and
James (not pictured) came to visit this summer. / ANDY SHARP / Staff Photo:
When James Thomas (seated) asked help from a food bank, he got two boxes of
rice, canned vegetables and the food twins Jermaine (standing) and James like
most --- cereal. / ANDY SHARP / Staff

                    Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution


                              545 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                            February 8, 1999, Monday

Ballast water plan gets qualified support

BYLINE: BY TIM SANSBURY

SECTION: MARITIME; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 517 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


U.S. ports and shipping lines have given qualified support to a Clinton
administration initiative to expand the battle against unwanted plant and animal
pests that arrive in the United States in the ballast water of cargo ships and
by other means.

While hailing the goals of a plan that the White House unveiled last week,
however, the maritime groups don't want ongoing programs of the Coast Guard and
the International Maritime Organization to be discarded in the rush to address
the problem.

Officials of the American Association of Port Authorities and the Chamber of
Shipping of America said their organizations oppose Interior Secretary Bruce
Babbitt's call for mandatory ballast water exchange at sea for shipping at all
U.S. ports.

The administration, citing estimates from the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, says invasive species cause $123 billion a year in
damage nationwide.

President Clinton kicked off his invasive-species campaign by issuing an
executive order last week establishing a federal task force, called the ""
Invasive Species Council,'' which will be led by the Interior, Agriculture and
Commerce departments.

The order directs the agencies to develop within 18 months a coordinated
management plan, possibly calling for regulatory or legislative changes, to halt
the influx of pests like the zebra mussel and harmful non-indigenous plants.

""This executive order is good news for our ongoing fight against the invasion
of marine alien species. The ocean serves as a highway in transporting these
invasive species into U.S. waters,'' Commerce Undersecretary James Baker said.

""Every minute, 40,000 gallons of foreign ballast water is dumped into U.S.
harbors. This water contains a multitude of non-indigenous organisms which could
alter or destroy America's natural marine ecosystems,'' Mr. Baker said.

Kurt Nagle, president of the AAPA, said invasive species are a ""concern to the
entire country,'' and that U.S. ports will work with federal agencies to find
""feasible, cost-efficient and effective solutions'' to the problem.

Mr. Nagle noted that the IMO has developed voluntary guidelines for ships to
exchange ballast water while at sea and that Congress has directed the Coast
Guard to establish a program for voluntary ballast water exchange and reporting.

""Any further action to regulate ballast water should wait until the
effectiveness of the Coast Guard's program has been determined and the cost and
feasibility of other alternatives have been fully investigated,'' Mr. Nagle
said.

Kathy Metcalf, maritime affairs director of the Chamber of Shipping of America,
said ocean carriers support additional action to combat invasive species and
seek advanced methods of treating ballast water.

Ms. Metcalf said her group ""absolutely disagrees'' with Secretary Babbitt's
mandatory exchange requirement for all ports.

The federal agencies ""need to talk to the (shipping) industry'' to learn about
filtration, thermal and chemical treatments, and other advanced methods of
managing ballast water, she said.''

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1999 Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              546 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                             March 9, 1990, Friday

SOYMEAL-FOR-ELECTRONICS DEAL SQUEEZES JAPANESE CRUSHERS

BYLINE: JENNIFER CODY

SECTION: COMMODITIES, Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


Japan has opened its doors to a huge influx of cheap, Chinese soybean meal at
the peril of its domestic oilseed crushing industry, according to agricultural
and industry sources here and in Hong Kong.

And the unlikely importer of much of the commodity is Matsushita Electric
ndustrial, they said.

The consumer electronics giant - not a traditional player in the agricultural
sector - entered the international soymeal market with a bang in 1988, the
sources said.

Since that time, Matsushita has held a 50 percent or more share of Chinese
soymeal imports to Japan, undercutting domestic prices by as much as 5,000 yen
(about US$ 33), sources in the soybean crushing and trading industries here
said. The standard price for domestically produced meal is 41,000 yen (US$ 272)
per ton, they said.

The effect has been to squeeze out Japan's already debt-ridden oilseed crushing
industry, the traditional supplier of domestic soybean meal, as more and more
feed mills turn to cheaper soymeal imports.

''What you've essentially got is a Japanese electronics company dumping
commodities into its own agricultural market," claimed a U.S. agricultural
expert who asked to remain anonymous.

Japan Ministry of Agriculture figures show a fourfold increase in Chinese
soymeal imports, from 125,870 to 495,742 tons, during 1987 and 1988. Total
imports for the period rose from about 223,000 to 587,000 tons, with Brazil
accounting for most of the difference.

The stream of Chinese soymeal imports, which drifted off slightly in 1989 but
remained strong at 364,210 tons, is widely expected to swell to 500,000 tons for
1990, according to sources in the crushing industry here. Ministry of Finance
customs clearance figures show Chinese soymeal imports for January were already
a steep 84,000 tons, almost seven times what they were last year at the same
time, and Matsushita is again thought to be responsi ble for the gain, the
sources said.

Industry sources said the import deal between Matsushita and the Chinese
government was negotiated in 1987 as a countertrade for electronics goods.

The company sold televisions, refrigerators and other electronic appliances to
China for the local Chinese currency, the yuan, the sources said, adding that
Matsushita was given the option of either converting the government-controlled
currency at the Chinese official rate, or buying commodities in China to sell
abroad for hard currency.

To help China's balance of payments, protect the country's scarce hard currency
reserves and generally foster good relations with the Chinese government,
Matsushita decided to buy soymeal on what sources termed a "fixed program."

Akira Nagano, public relations spokesman for Matsushita Electric Industrial -
maker of such high-profile brand names as Panasonic, National, Quasar and
Technics - confirmed his company has been selling electronic equipment to China
since 1987 and has been importing soybean meal to Japan at the same time. But he
said there was no connection between the two.

''We export our products to China and settle them in yen or U.S. dollars," he
said, adding that the import of soymeal from China to Japan is being settled
"quite separately." The meal imports are not part of electronic sales
negotiations but part of a larger effort towards growing ''international
cooperation," he said.

''Because Japan is opening up so much trade with foreign countries, it is not
unusual that companies other than commodities trading firms are beginning to
import all sorts of things," he said. "And all told, increasing imports is
basically a good thing for Japan."

Mr. Nagano said he did not know how much soybean meal the company was importing.
"Because importing is obviously not our main business, the amount of soybean
meal that we are actually importing really can't be that significant," he said,
adding that he could not give import figures because of company policy.

Japan has historically been mostly self-sufficient in supplying meal for
feed-mill demand, which averages about 2.5 million tons yearly, soy traders
said. Until 1987, soymeal imports stayed within a tight range of about
120,000-220,000 tons, compared with about 3 million tons annual production.
Ministry figures show most of the meal imports came from China, with the rest
supplied by Brazil.

Matsushita is able to buy in greater quantities than other Japanese trading
houses because it has no long-standing agreements or stock in crushing houses.
In turn, industry sources said, this allows Matsushita to sell the meal at
prices not only cheaper than domestically produced meal, but cheaper also than
meal imported to Japan in smaller quantities by other trading houses.

Also contributing to this article was KRF reporter Penelope Hill in Hong Kong.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1990 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              547 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                    October 20, 1995, Friday, FINAL EDITION

France says it will join no-nuke zone

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 474 words


New Zealand Prime Minister Jim Bolger expressed delight yesterday at the
surprise news that France, Britain and the United States planned to join the
South Pacific nuclear-free zone.

The move, expected to be announced by the three governments by Monday, is an
apparent response to the worldwide denunciation over French nuclear testing and
an effort to help France rebuild its ties in the South Pacific.

France ended a 1992 moratorium on testing last month with a blast at the Mururoa
atoll and has plans for six more nuclear tests.

Rwanda bracing

for food shortage

KIGALI, Rwanda (Reuter) - Ravaged by a genocide last year, Rwanda is facing
acute food shortages with the arrival of 700,000 returning refugees, the U.N.'s
main food agency said.

The Food and Agriculture Organization said in a report that the genocide, which
killed up to 1 million people including many peasant farmers, had proved
disastrous for Rwandan agriculture. And food shortages had worsened with the
influx of returnees and the failure of Western donors to keep aid promises.

Italy's justice minister

ousted by Senate

ROME (AP) - Prosecutors who brought down Italy's corrupt political establishment
received a powerful show of support yesterday when the Senate ousted the justice
minister who challenged them.

A defiant Filippo Mancuso promptly took the Senate to court to try to keep his
job. Since he was appointed in January, Mancuso has launched numerous inquiries
into the performances of prosecutors in Milan who are probing corruption.

Spain to probe alleged

'dirty war' on Basques

MADRID (Reuter) - Spanish Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez looked increasingly
cornered yesterday after the Senate narrowly voted to investigate charges that
his government waged a "dirty war" against Basque guerrillas.

By 128 votes to 127, the upper chamber added its own probe to several judicial
investigations into the accusations over an illegal campaign that claimed 27
lives from 1983 to 1987. The vote late on Wednesday means that in the next 10
days the Senate will appoint a 32-member committee. Gonzalez and other top
Socialists will then be hauled in to testify.

Zambian presidential

investigation halted

LUSAKA, Zambia (Reuter) - The Zambian government has dropped an investigation
into whether former president Kenneth Kaunda ruled the country illegally for six
years and should be deported because of his citizenship status.

State radio quoted Home Affairs Minister Chitalu Sampa in the government which
defeated Kaunda as saying he had told police to stop the inquiry.

10 killed by guerrilla forces in Algeria

PARIS (Reuter) - Suspected Muslim guerrillas in Algeria have killed at least 10
people in separate attacks, stabbing, shooting and in four cases beheading their
victims, an Algerian newspaper said yesterday.


LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              548 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Trust (Abuja)

                               November 29, 2016

Govt to Ban Tomato Paste Imports

BYLINE: Musa Abdullahi Krishi

LENGTH: 226 words


The Federal Government will soon ban importation of foreign tomato pastes into
the country, the minister of agriculture, Chief Audu Ogbeh has said.

Ogbeh said based on a report by the National Agency for Food and Administration
and Control (NAFDAC), foreign tomato pastes imported into Nigeria are not good.

He spoke during the oversight visit of the House of Representatives Committee on
Agricultural Production and Services, chaired by Rep Mohammed Tahir Monguno
(APC, Borno) to the ministry yesterday in Abuja.

"The Chinese are the ones messing us up on tomato paste. Each time Dangote tries
to produce, they lower their prices. There's a report by NAFDAC on the quality
of foreign tomato pastes. The report is very bad.

"We think we have every reason in that report to ban foreign tomato pastes into
the country. If you don't ban it on health ground, you have to ban it on any
other ground," he said.

When members of the committee demanded to know the measures government was
taking to avert food crisis next year in view of the influx of foreigners buying
Nigerian grains, the minister said "It's time to fill our silos.

"The export is huge now, but if you stop it, farmers will get very angry. When
you go round, they tell you they get so rich now. But if you stop it and the
prices fall, you discourage farmers. We're in the market now buying and
storing."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              549 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                THE KOREA HERALD

                           December 28, 2006 Thursday

Korea, U.S. agree to discuss beef dispute

BYLINE: Yoo Soh-jung

LENGTH: 379 words


Korea has agreed to hold a meeting with the United States to address issues
concerning current U.S. beef import issues, a Seoul Agriculture Ministry
official said yesterday.

"We will meet (in Korea) early next month to address U.S. beef import issues,"
Kim Chang-seob, chief veterinary officer of the Agriculture Ministry, told The
Korea Herald.

Washington on Dec. 12 proposed holding a consultation meeting on the beef
dispute stemming from import standards, which the U.S. government has criticized
as having been "invented."

The talks will come on the heels of the sixth round of talks for a bilateral
free trade agreement scheduled to begin in Korea on Jan. 15. As a condition for
clinching a successful FTA with the world's largest economy, Washington has
requested that Korea's beef market be fully open to U.S. competition.

Farmers of Asia's third-largest economy oppose more competition in fear of
losing their livelihoods as a result of an influx of cheaper, high-quality
American produce and livestock.

Korea was America's third-largest beef market until it banned imports in
December 2003 following confirmation of a case of mad cow disease.

Seoul and Washington agreed in January to resume imports of de-boned skeletal
muscle meat from cattle less than 30 months of age.

Seoul believes bones pose greater risk for mad cow disease.

The United States argues that such conditions go beyond international rules,
which declare some bone in beef cuts to be safe.

But since the first imports arrived in September, Seoul has rejected shipments
three times after detecting bone fragments in some meat slabs.

U.S. officials are expected to discuss Seoul's quarantine and inspection
procedures.

With regards to Korea's position on the issue, Kim tersely said, "We will have
to wait and see until the meeting."

Food safety regulations and animal health standards, or sanitary and
phytosanitary regulations, have been one of the major challenging areas in the
Korea-U.S. FTA negotiations. Seoul's "strict" regulations have been cited as
barriers to trade.

Both countries had agreed to hold SPS talks on Dec. 19 and 20, separately from
the fifth round of FTA talks, but the meetings were postponed over failure to
agree on an overall agenda for treating various issues.

(sohjung@heraldm.com)

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2006 The Korea Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              550 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       BBC Monitoring Africa - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                            August 5, 2009 Wednesday

US president said seeking 950m dollars for African farmers

LENGTH: 312 words


Text of report by Benson Kathuri entitled "America to give Africa 70bn shillings
for agriculture" published by Kenyan privately-owned daily newspaper The
Standard website on 5 August

US President Barrack Obama is seeking 70bn shillings [about 950m dollars] from
Congress to support agricultural development in Africa, visiting Secretary of
Agriculture Tom Vilsack has said.

Mr Vilsack who is among the top US Government officials attending the African
Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) forum in Nairobi, however, said African
governments must develop strategies to ensure food security. "The president is
anxious to know what Kenyans want from us. This is not America coming in and
saying this is what we will do for you. This is a partnership and we want you to
tell us what you need," said Vilsack after visiting some farmers and Kenya
Agricultural Research Institute (KARI) yesterday.

"From my observations, there is great opportunity. With improved seed
technology, proper use of fertilizer, land cultivation techniques and
sustainable agriculture, productivity can be increased significantly."

Production shortfall

His remarks come at a time when more than ten million Kenyans are facing
starvation due to a maize production shortfall caused by the on-going drought
and displacement of thousands of farmers due to post-election violence witnessed
last year. The situation is worsened by an influx of more than 22,000 Somali and
160,000 southern Sudan refugees seeking refuge in the country.

The country is the second largest food assistance recipient from the US in
Africa after Mozambique having received over 69m dollars in food assistance in
the last four years.

Vilsack said the US government was trying to shed the image of an aid donor and
build partnerships that would ensure the Sub-Saharan Africa is food secure.

Source: The Standard website, Nairobi, in English 5 Aug 09

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2009 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              551 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             October 3, 2016 Monday

Grand Opening Set for Center for the Sciences and Agriculture

LENGTH: 312  words

DATELINE: New York



 Columbus: Wilmington College has issued the following news release:
 After two decades on the wish list, several years in planning and 24 months
under construction, the fully renovated and expanded Center for the Sciences and
Agriculture was open for business when Wilmington College students arrived in
late August.





 The College will officially christen the $14 million facility as its newest
jewel in the crown at a public, grand opening celebration Oct. 8 at 1 p.m. The
event will be held on the campus mall side of the Center, which is located at
the corner of College and Elm streets.



 The grand opening is among the featured activities being held during the
College's Homecoming/Alumni Reunion Weekend. Also, food trucks will be on hand
and a country concert featuring Tana Matz will be held at the grand opening site
just prior to the ceremony.



 The former Kettering Science Hall served Wilmington College students well since
opening in 1960, but its aging infrastructure and the recent influx of students
in agriculture and the sciences brought about a need for a renovation and
expansion. A $19.7 million, low-interest loan payable over 32 years, provided by
the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture's Rural Development division, made the project
possible.



 Also, to date fundraising efforts have eclipsed the $7 million goal with nearly
$8.5 million secured in gifts and pledges.



 The Center for the Sciences includes the renovated 34,000 square-foot Kettering
Science Hall and a 13,500 square-foot addition. The facility hosts 10
classrooms, 10 laboratories, three research labs, two 100-seat lecture halls and
30 offices. The CSA, which was designed for LEED certification as an
environmentally friendly facility, is the College's largest academic building.
 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.info

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              552 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (Nigeria)

                              April 4, 2014 Friday

Why Kogi economy is on track -Gov Wada

BYLINE: Our Reporter

LENGTH: 322 words


Governor Idris Wada of Kogi State has given an insight into the secret behind
the rapid economic growth of the state.

By RAZAQ BAMIDELE

Governor Idris Wada of Kogi State has given an insight into the secret behind
the rapid economic growth of the state.

Wada, during an interactive session with journalists yesterday in Lagos ascribed
the success to high level security in the state, which he said "has naturally
made the environment conducive for investors."

The governor, who said the state's Public Private Partnership (PPP) initiative
was yielding fruitful results, informed that investors, both local and foreign
were making influx into the state.

According to him, Kogi State was strategic to the country economically because
of the vast human,  natural and organic resources available to the state adding,
"in addition to that, the location of the state right at the centre of the
country makes it more strategic for investment."

Wada further disclosed that agriculture was his flagship, maintaining that with
vast fertile land in the state, agriculture was naturally the mainstay of the
state's economy, reminding that, "beside provision of products for consumption,
it is also an avenue for mass employment for the teeming unemployed youths in
the state."

The governor revealed that to empower the youths, a programme codenamed YAP4Kogi
(Youth Advancement Programme for Kogi) was put in place. The governor reasoned
that engaging the youth gainfully would complement the sustainability of the
secured environment in the state.

On the controvertial issue of ownership of oil well between Kogi and Anambra
States, Wada said the matter was being resolved amicably, saying the National
Boundary Adjustment Commission were working on it.

While reporting that the Commission was working very fast on the matter, he
disclosed that "out of seven cardinal points to handle, the Commission has
covered six," saying "it has only one left to go."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1228


                   Copyright 2014 The Sun Publishing Limited
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              553 of 997 DOCUMENTS



               South Burnett Times and Rural Weekly (Queensland)

                               November 14, 2014

Always ahead of the game;
Ag software

BYLINE:  Tara Miko

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 522  words



HIGHLIGHT: Company can predict the future


AUSTRALIA'S largest agricultural software company is facing the same issue as
its clients - internet connectivity.

Despite its Toowoomba city location, AgData is yet to be connected to the NBN,
but that hasn't stopped it from leading the charge in software development.

The family-run company, started 30 years ago by Lance and Jenny Skerman on their
Wandoan property, has ridden the software trend tides, often staying ahead of
the game, and now boasts its leading national status, as well as international

clients.

"We've always tried to look at what is the next trend, where the industry is
headed," director Brendan Skerman said.

"Just because we're in the agricultural space, we haven't tried to use that as
an excuse to wait for the mainstream to do it and then jump on board."

That philosophy has seen the company expand from the McTavish's Cookie Jar
accounting software package designed by Lance and Jenny, with programmer Mark
Leahy in 1984, on a Commodore 64 and KayPro 2 computer, to what it is today -
Phoenix by AgData.

"It's always a juggling act to see when we jump into that technology space.

"Cloud computing is now a buzzword, but we've been monitoring it for about 12 to
14 years," Brendan said.

"We pulled the trigger on it and had a cloud product come out six years ago,
actually before any of the mainstream products.

"The reason we didn't do it earlier - connectivity.

"We have to be mindful that we don't just go and look after the fortunate few
with really good internet."

When the GST forced a lot of people into computerising their businesses in 2000,
AgData flew its own plane around the country holding seminars, educating about
both the new tax as well as the software application.

While some of the older generation of farmers are still reluctant and
software-shy, the influx of younger farmers has forced the company to step up
its game again.

"We've really only seen the influx of the younger generation in the last few
years," Brendan said.

"They're the ones that are chasing the technology as they see the future and the
professionalism of the (agriculture) industry."

Founder Lance Skerman was one such farmer unaware of computers.

"We started simply because we needed it on the farm," he said.

"I knew nothing about computers and had never seen a computer do anything useful
that the average person would use.

"We made this really simple program anyone could follow. We liked it and thought
others would too."

Lance and Jenny have since sold the farm in Wandoan but not before their
children, including directors Brendan and Glenn Skerman, got to know what life
was like on the land.

Brendan, with an agronomy background, and Glenn, who is a qualified engineer,
mark the second generation of the family business.

The company has lately turned its attention to making sense of the wealth of
government and third-party information releases, and incorporating that into a
single platform for its clients.

It will also look to expand its international client base, but not at the risk
of its local clients.

"We could have gone international years ago, but it won't be at the risk of our
bread-and-butter clients," Jenny said.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TRW


                    Copyright 2014 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              554 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Philippines Daily Inquirer

                              June 10, 2016 Friday

Scrapping of irrigation fees eyed to help farmers

LENGTH: 470  words


Rice farmers who till irrigated farms may be in for a windfall in the coming
months as the incoming Duterte administration is considering to scrap irrigation
fees to help lower cost of rice production.

This is according to Emmanuel F. Pinol, whom President-elect Rodrigo Duterte
designated as his alter ego at the Department of Agriculture.

This is a commitment of the Duterte administration, Pinol told reporters. We're
still working out whether we can do it this year or next year, but definitely
(it will be happening) in 2017.

Asked whether the new administration is also planning to provide other subsidies
to farmers, the incoming agriculture chief said he would not call free
irrigation fees and other support as subsidies, saying the Philippines was a
signatory to international agreements that were against the provision of
subsidies.

However, Agriculture Undersecretary Siegfredo Serrano clarified that under the
rules of the World Trade Organization, the government could provide subsidies
worth up to 10 percent of the gross value of the produce.

We are not prohibited from giving subsidies, Serrano said.

In May, Assistant Agriculture Secretary Edilberto de Luna said the domestic rice
industry might be exposed to shocks associated with increased market competition
brought about by tariff reduction or removal as curbs on rice importation were
due to expire in June 2017.

De Luna, who is also director of the National Rice Program, said that while
farmers in Thailand and Vietnam could produce palay at an equivalent of P6.50
per kilo, Filipino farmers were producing at an average of P11 per kilo.

He said the influx of imports might drive milled rice prices down, which could
discourage farmers to continue planting in the succeeding crop seasons.

Asked what needed to be done given such risks, De Luna said this would be up to
the incoming team that would run the agriculture department under the new
administration.

Personally, I think we should opt for support for farmers-whether partial or
full-in terms of seed procurement, irrigation expenses and crop insurance
coverage, he said, adding that farmers in neighboring countries benefit from
such subsidies.

In 2014, the WTO's highest-level decision-making body gave the green light for
the Philippines to keep milled rice import curbs-which should have expired in
2012-over the succeeding three years.

With the WTO's nod, the Philippines raised its import volume to at least 805,200
tons yearly from 350,000 tons in 2012.

Without the quantitative restrictions (QR), any volume of rice may enter the
country, possibly still subject to ordinary customs duties or none at
all-instead of the current 35-percent levy.

But the QR was intended to insulate or protect local farmers from the flood of
imported rice that may be cheaper because locally grown crops cost high.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Philippines Daily Inquirer
                              All Rights Reserved


                              555 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                            January 1, 2005 Saturday

Muted action likely as cattle ban eases

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D03

LENGTH: 572 words

DATELINE: WINNIPEG


There will not be a big influx of Canadian live cattle to the United States once
the border is reopened to cattle trade in March, but it should be easier for
Canada to improve its offshore beef trade, according to Canadian cattle-industry
sources.

"Live cattle trade with the U.S. is expected to resume beginning on March 7,
2005," Dennis Laycraft of the Canadian Cattlemen's Association said yesterday.
He said it's doubtful the numbers will reach the 2 million that Keith Collins,
chief economist with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, or USDA, predicted Dec.
29 with the agency's formal announcement.

"Considering that there are still no rules in place for the movement of Canadian
live cattle over 30 months of age to the U.S., I would expect movement to be
hard-pressed to hit the 1.0 million-head level," he said. "I anticipate it will
actually be well below 1.0 million."

Collins said Canada had been exporting about 1.7 million head of cattle annually
to the United States before trade was banned in May, 2003, after Canada found a
case of mad cow disease.

Laycraft also said the U.S. conditions on feeder cattle are quite restrictive
and could be a deterrent for some importers. He acknowledged, however, that the
agriculture department is considering proposals that could eventually lead to
rules governing the movement of live cattle from Canada over the age of 30
months.

Canada, meanwhile, is expected to benefit in other areas from the resumption of
cattle trade with the United States, Laycraft said.

"With the reopening of live cattle trade with the U.S., the USDA also expanded
the beef products it will allow to be imported. By doing so, it signalled to
other countries that Canadian beef is safe."

Laycraft said a number of other countries are expected to follow suit and expand
the range of beef products allowed for import from Canada.

Mexico was tagged as the country most likely to ease its beef-import
restrictions.

Herb Lock, an Alberta-based livestock analyst with Farm Sense Marketing, said
Canada may even have a chance of resuming beef trade with Japan.

"The talk in the industry is that the Japanese have, to some degree, agreed to
lift their ban on U.S. beef, but the thing to remember is that they may not want
to buy the meat," Lock said.

He said the Japanese may prefer to import Canadian beef products rather than
American, given all the safeguards that have been implemented.

Lock said Canada's inspection services are stricter than those in the United
States. Canada also now has a mandatory trace-back in place for all the
country's cattle. The U.S. process of tracing calves back is still purely
voluntary.

"The U.S. is still a number of years away from having the same safeguards in
place as Canada does, and because of that, Canada's beef may be perceived as
safer" despite the mad cow scare, Lock said.

Laycraft agreed that Canada's age-verification process, traceability and other
safeguards do provide an advantage over practices in other countries.

On balance, however, he did not expect Canada to gain acceptance any faster than
the United States in Japan.

"There are a few companies in Canada which can already accommodate Japan's
certification requirements, but it is never as simple as them or us," Laycraft
said.

Laycraft added that China, Cuba and a few other countries have also expressed
some interest in bringing in Canadian beef, but those markets are still in the
early stages of development.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2005 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              556 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                           The Malakoff News (Texas)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                January 8, 2016

My five cents...

BYLINE: The Malakoff News staff

LENGTH: 761  words


AUSTIN-Happy New Year! I hope your holidays were filled with family and good
food, as mine were.

Here are five things happening around your state this month:

Standing up for Christmas

Over the past few years, various communities and school districts within Senate
District 3 and across the state have been faced with challenges to their
Christmas displays, as well as displays of their Christian faith. I have
continually heard from many constituents who dislike that it is becoming less
culturally acceptable to openly celebrate these holidays in the ways past
generations have.

During the 83rd Legislative Session, I sponsored the "Merry Christmas Bill"
which allows students and teachers the right to celebrate Christmas on school
properly as well as to use traditional greetings such as 'Merry Christmas' on
school grounds without fear of legal action against them. I believe as we stand
at a cultural crossroads in our society, that bill was one step forward in
defending our state's traditional values and beliefs. While you may be reading
this article after Christmas, I wanted to ensure you that I have, and as long as
I am in the Senate, will continue to fight for individuals, communities and
organization's right to celebrate Christmas and to protect their Christian
values. The Border and Sanctuary Cities

Texas has been faced with the immense challenge of dealing with an influx of
illegal immigrants into our state. Recently, during an interim hearing for the
Senate Subcommittee on Border Security, Texas Department of Public Safety
Director Steve McCraw shared with the committee that more than 174,000
undocumented individuals were apprehended entering our state over the past four
years. The number of unaccompanied minors entering the state during October and
November of this year nearly doubled compared to 2014. Because of this, Governor
Greg Abbott has extended the Texas National Guard's mission by ordering them to
stay on the border. The troops were originally scheduled to leave at the end of
this month.

The Subcommittee also addressed whether Texas should allow for Sanctuary Cities
and questioning immigration status, violates a person's rights. In a Sanctuary
City, local law enforcement are not allowed to inquire about an individual's
immigration status or share it with the federal government. Agriculture Fee
Increases

In October, Texas Department of Agriculture (TDA) Commissioner Sid Miller
proposed an increase in the fees for a range of licenses, registrations and
services TDA provides. Since then legislators from both chambers and numerous
industry groups have come out in opposition to this, as the fees could be
increased between 200 and 600 percent from the current fee structure.

I have heard from several individuals and agricultural organizations who have
shared their concerns that these increases could potentially have a serious
impact on individual industries, the state's agricultural economy and consumers.
I have and will continue to support the agricultural industry in Texas and take
the necessary action to ensure TDA operates efficiently and is accountable to
taxpayers. Texas Racing Commission

Last year, the Texas Racing Commission (TRC) voted to allow racing tracks to
implement 'historical racing' terminals, allowing players to bet on digital
simulations of historical races. After a state district judge ruled the
commission had overstepped its authority in allowing these terminals, the
Legislature asked TRC to repeal rules authorizing 'historical racing.' Recently,
TRC initially voted to not repeal its rules and then came back and agreed to
republish the rules and take up the subject again in February.

When I first sought to represent Senate District 3, I made a pledge to oppose
efforts to expand gambling in Texas. As the Racing Commission continues to
bypass the Legislature and oppose the state's constitution, I will continue to
maintain this position.

Resolutions

As I look back on this year and all that was accomplished during the 84th
Legislative Session, I am once again reminded that it could not have been done
without you.

This year will be spent in preparation for the 85th Legislative Session and it
is because of your feedback that I have a better understanding of what is needed
for East Texas.

While you are making your own resolutions for your personal life, business or
organizations, the Senate is doing the same thing through its interim charges
and interim hearings, as we plan for future legislation. I look forward to this
year and working together to make a difference for our state.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Guest Opinion

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MLN

                      Copyright 2016 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2016 The Malakoff News


                              557 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 BusinessWorld

                             April 8, 2014 Tuesday

More Davao land now in commercial use: study

BYLINE: Carmencita A. Carillo

SECTION: Pg. S1/2

LENGTH: 409 words


DAVAO CITY - A study under the city's Comprehensive Land Use Plan shows that
land used for commercial purposes has increased three times over a 16-year
period, or from 520.03 hectares in 1994 to 1,583.32 hectares in 2010.

However, the same land use plan, which was approved only in February this year
by the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board, shows that Davao is still pretty
much an agricultural area, with 46%, or 111,387.49 hectares, of the city's
244,000-hectare total land area classified as such. The rest is under forestry,
institutional, industrial and other special uses.

"Davao's landscape is changing, though, because while the commercial area used
to be largely concentrated in the first district, growth is now more evident in
the other districts," said Mario Luis J. Jacinto, chief of the city's planning
office.

Mr. Jacinto said roughly 80% of the city's estimated 1.5 million population
lives in urban areas while the rest is in rural areas.

Vehicular traffic and congestion problems, including the rising number of
informal settlers, are largely due to the influx of people in urban areas, which
is estimated to have a density of 4,300 persons per square kilometer.

"While our nighttime population is only 1.5 million, our daytime population
reaches 2 million because of the influx of people from adjoining communities who
may be doing business or working here during the day," he said.

"We have a 60-kilometer coastline from Lasang to Bunawan, and this is where most
of the opportunities and problems abound as a third of the population lives
within the coastal zone," Mr. Jacinto said.

Lawrence D. Bantiding, business bureau chief said that, as of 2013, there were
21,457 business establishments in the city, with a capitalization of P187
billion and providing employment to 142,000 people. He said the bulk of these
businesses or 21,000 are small and medium enterprises, providing employment to
96,000 people.

Land use for commercial purposes was lowest in the city's third district,
located north of downtown, though this is where most of the agricultural lands
are located, Mr. Bantiding said.

"The city primarily relies on agriculture for raw material demand of its
industries, and this is why agricultural lands comprise the biggest portion of
the city's total land area," said Mr. Jacinto.

The city is also home to commercial-scale plantations as well as backyard farms
planted with largely high-value crops, specifically tropical fruits.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              558 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                          December 11, 2013 Wednesday

Thriving housing colonies threat to mango orchards

SECTION: Vol. XXVII No. 283

LENGTH: 599  words


The city of saints and mangoes may lose its distinction of being centre of the
king of fruits if a drive by some unscrupulous persons to cut mango trees was
not checked, something upsetting many old gardeners. "My heart aches when I see
cutting of mango trees, which I had planted and nurtured many years ago", said
an old man and famous mango gardener Baba Imaamdin, a resident of suburban
Nawabpur area.

"My shivering hands cannot stop the act of cutting of trees and I cannot
convince the people to refrain from eliminating the mango trees, as the young
generation has become more materialist", Baba Imaamdin said. The old man said
that he had planted thousands of mango trees and also cared the orchards for
several years.

Multan is not only famous for hundreds of tombs of great saints but also for its
exotic mangoes. According to Fruit and Vegetable wing of Agriculture Department,
the mango orchards are spread over nearly 80,000 acres of land and 15,000
farmers are associated with the orchards in Multan district. Almost all the
peasants had mango trees in their agricultural fields.

Multan's unique recognition of mangoes is struggling for its survival due to
massive cutting of the trees in adjacent areas of to cater the growing needs of
residences. A huge influx of people from across South Punjab is making its way
towards Multan, which resulted in shortage of residences. The farmers are
developing residential colonies to cater the growing needs of housing. The
massive cutting of trees is being seen at Mattital, Qadirpur Raan, Band Bossan,
Nawabpur Road, Jhok Wainis, Qasim Bela, Sorij Miani, 17 Kassi, Mukhdoom Rasheed,
Naang Shah Chowk, Hamidpur Kanora other localities.

Mango Growers' Association President Maj (r) Tariq Khan said that Pakistani
mangoes had great appreciation in the entire world due to its taste. He said
that 10,000 tons of mangoes were exported from Multan alone during last season.
He said that with more support from the government mango export could achieve
new targets but cutting of mango orchards posed grave threat to the exports. He
stressed the need for proper planning to establish new residential colonies and
preservation of mango orchards.

Director Town Planning, Multan Development Authority (MDA) Chaudhry Abdul
Ghaffar talking to this agency said that the Town Planning Department was trying
its best to protect mango orchards under Master Development Plan, by
discouraging new residential units at sites of big orchards.

He, however, said that the small farmers were cutting the trees but there was no
law to stop them. He said that people in Multan were not habitual of living in
multi-storey buildings, which was also reason behind annihilation of the
orchards. A mango grower Laeeque Sheikhana, resident of Nawabpur, said that the
poor mango growers could not afford exorbitant inputs for the mango orchards and
low production of mangoes also forcing them to sell their land for residential
purposes to property dealers. Laeeque stated that the farmers were getting
reasonable returns by selling their agricultural land.

"The cutting of trees is not only damaging beauty of Multan but also causing
immense pollution in city", said Jameel Ahmed, President Taraqqi Pasand
Organisation (TPO). Jameel lamented that the district administration was not
paying heed towards the rapid elimination of mango orchards in the district.

The civil society activist Jameel stressed upon district administration to pay
focus on the issue otherwise rapid cutting of the trees would enhance pollution
problems and deprived countrymen from exotic mangoes also.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2013 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              559 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Leadership (Abuja)

                            August 11, 2011 Thursday

FG, Kano Govt to Boost Tomato Paste Production

LENGTH: 360  words


The federal government and Kano State government are set to boost tomato paste
production in Nigeria.

The Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, Dr. Akinwumi Adesina,
disclosed this in Abuja when he received Kano State Commissioner of Agriculture
and Natural Resources, Dr. Baraka Sani in his office.

Adesina recalled the period when the Kadawa River Valley in Kano State was
producing about 640,000 metric tones of tomato as against the current production
rate of 260,000 metric tones.

He noted that with value addition, the current production rate could be enhanced
significantly to produce enough tomato paste which could be processed, packaged
and stored for local consumption and export.

To this end, the minister explained that the federal government would complement
the efforts of the Kano State government in leverage on the private sector to
actively invest in the value chain so as to set up a world-class tomato paste
production plant in Kano to stem massive importation of tomato paste.

He also reiterated his administration's resolve to support women in agriculture
as they constitute the largest percentage of farm labourers in the country,
adding that empowering them means an improvement in household nutrition,
education and general welfare.

In her remark, Sani told the minister that Kano State government was gravely
concerned over the influx of refugees from neighbouring states who continue to
stretch the decreasing resources of the state especially food supplies, hence
the resolve of the state government to encourage and support an all-year round
agricultural activity throughout the state.

To this end, she said Kano state government was already partnering with the
International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA) and the International
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) to develop the
irrigation infrastructure in the state to support irrigation farming.

The commissioner added that women in agriculture in the state were actively
engaged in rice production, poultry, fisheries, and horticulture without value
addition and needs to be fully supported to ensure food security and improved
livelihoods.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              560 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Mail (London)

                             June 19, 2007 Tuesday

The British workers denied jobs 'because they can't speak Polish'

SECTION: 1ST

LENGTH: 504 words


BRITISH job-seekers are being refused work because they do not speak Polish, it
was claimed yesterday.

The influx of Eastern European workers means thelanguage is now vital for jobs
in agriculture, says MP Malcolm Moss.

His North East Cambridgeshire constituency has seen the arrival of a huge number
of migrant workers to pick fruit and vegetables, as well as fill other low-paid
jobs in packing and food processing plants.

Many of the farms and companies involved rely on local job agencies or
gangmasters to supply workers.

Mr Moss told yesterday how a constituent had been denied work at one factory
because she did not speak Polish.

'A woman came to my surgery to tell me about her daughter's experience when she
was looking for work,' he said. 'The daughter was aged 18 or 19 and had been to
the job centre, where there was little work. Instead she was told to try the
local factories in person.

'They, in turn told her they did not recruit directly and referred her on to a
gangmaster who held the contract to supply the staff.' Mr Moss added: 'This
particular gangmaster told the woman, "If you don't speak Polish I can't put you
on the assembly line, because they all speak Polish. They won't accept you, and
you won't be able to communicate with them anyway".

'This is obvious discrimination. It is no wonder that youth unemployment is on
the rise.' Mr Moss, a Tory MP, said the incident was reported to him at a
constituency surgery early last year. He did not remember the woman's name or
the factory involved.

He raised the incident publicly during a House of Commons debate on the effect
of immigration in Cambridgeshire last week.

Mr Moss said it was indicative of the problems caused by large-scale immigration
in his area.

'It is not just Polish workers', he said, 'there are also Estonians, Lithuanians
and others. Local people cannot get jobs in the factories in which historically
they worked. I have tried each and every way to find a solution to the problem.

'Where have the indigenous population gone? These are people who do not have
cars and cannot travel to find a job, so where are they in the local community?'
Mr Moss said it was no good arguing that the migrants were only taking the jobs
that locals didn't want. 'In my constituency, they are doing jobs that my people
did a few years ago. Let us not kid ourselves - there is displacement.' He also
called for action to tackle gangmasters who exploit Eastern European workers by
bringing them to the county, paying them poverty wages, and making them live in
crowded accommodation at exorbitant rents.

Figures released last month revealed a massive influx of immigrants to Britain
from the former Eastern Bloc since 11countries including Poland, Estonia and
Lithuania, joined the EU in 2004.

Around 640,000 Eastern Europeans, most of them Poles, have registered to work in
Britain. But the figure could be as high as 800,000, experts believe, because in
most cases the Government keeps no record of the self-employed, spouses or
children.

a.dolan@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: INFLUX: EU MIGRANTS ARE DOING MANY LOW-PAID JOBS IN EAST ANGLIA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              561 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              North Devon Journal

                               December 15, 2011

Major homes plan goes on show

SECTION: Pg. 22

LENGTH: 460  words


Will toppswtopps@c-dm.co.uk

LINDEN HOMES held a public exhibition of plans for a housing development off
Gunswell Lane in South Molton.

More than 70 people turned up to view early proposals for the plan and despite
some concerns about infrastructure there were no major objections to the
development.

David and Christine Taylor, who live on West Street in South Molton, attended
the exhibition to take a closer look at the plans.

Mr Taylor said his concerns were mainly with the influx of traffic from new
residents. "Presumably there'll be traffic coming on to Gunswell Lane and it
isn't wide enough to take it although I suppose they could widen it," he said.

Mr Taylor also wanted to know how around 250 new homes would affect the town's
water supplies and sewerage.

Mr Taylor said: "The water supply where we live on West Street didn't use to be
very good at all, although it has improved. Sometimes in the morning it runs
slowly but I assume the planning people will take that into account and won't
grant permission if they think it's a problem."

John and Angela Hulne, who also live in South Molton, had similar concerns.

Mr Hulne said: "The big worry is that there won't be the infrastructure to deal
with the residents of 250-odd new homes.

"A lot of the streets are clogged up with traffic now and if you have that
development up there and the supermarket is built too then mums with toddlers
and push chairs in foul weather aren't necessarily going to walk down.

"They're going to jump in their car, quite rightly, and drive, so this small
town will have even more traffic."

Mr Hulne also had concerns that an influx of new residents would have an adverse
effect on the community spirit in South Molton.

He said: "The long term plan is for the town to grow considerably so there's
going to be development, new schools and health care centres. But I personally
don't welcome that because the history of South Molton is as a small market town
with a small historical centre.

"It's traditionally based on agriculture but now it's becoming a huge great
housing estate."

Mr Hulne also wanted to know where new residents would find work.

"Pathfields employs a lot of people now but whether they can soak up this number
of people I'm not sure.

"It's the chicken and the egg - which do you do first, provide jobs or build the
houses? Of course it's easier to build houses than provide jobs."

Richard Ayre, Strategic Land and Planning Director at Linden Homes, said: "We
were delighted with the turnout and it was encouraging that so many people took
the time to attend our exhibition and discuss the proposals with the team.

"We received a lot of valuable feedback, which we will now analyse before
holding a second exhibition in the new year to display the progressed plans."

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 150


                       Copyright 2011 North Devon Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              562 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Business Daily (Nairobi)

                           December 16, 2010 Thursday

Handloom Weavers On Mission to Revive Textile Industry

BYLINE: Wangui Maina

LENGTH: 701  words


The influx of second-hand clothes and cheaper imported fabric in the Kenyan
market in the early 1990s forced Tabitha Muthondu to rethink her business.

Increased competition from the cheaper clothes and fabrics saw her design
business edged out of the market.

However, in 2002 the mother of three, who is a professional designer, decided to
invest in a loom in an attempt to weave her way through the challenges and
revive her business.

"I opted to do something different as my business then became difficult to
sustain. That is when I started weaving," she said at a recent Handloom Weavers
Association (Hawesa) exhibition at the Junction Mall, Nairobi.

Eight years since buying her first cotton yarn to try her hand at weaving, her
enterprise, Charlotte Designers, boasts a wide range of products from shirts,
trousers, table mats and the popular kikoi.

Local weavers and designers have been working towards reviving the textile
industry in the country to its former glory before the coming of second-hand
clothes, popularly known as mitumba, in the early 1990s.

Members of Hawesa, who are drawn from across the country, have been
beneficiaries of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) Competitiveness
Project that aims to increase productivity and employment for these
entrepreneurs.

It is a public private partnership, working with the ministry of
Industrialisation and funding from the World Bank and implementation by
Deloitte.

The weavers are, however, faced with increased costs of cotton, old fashioned
loom technology and the lack of standardisation in the market, leading to
undercutting from unscrupulous players.

Becky Nyagah, chairperson of Hawesa, says that the high cost of cotton thread is
a continuous threat, making business for the entrepreneurs uncompetitive
compared to other markets.

Since the liberalisation of the economy in 1990, the influx of textile goods
into Kenya became a major problem that reduced the average capacity utilisation
in textile mills to about 50 per cent.

Cotton growing today has been left to smallholders, thus reducing the country's
production capacity.

Farmers have been quitting the cultivation of the crop in the face of poor
marketing by the authorities, inferior seed varieties and a lack of affordable
credit and market.

Attempts to grow cotton in more than 30,000 hectares have flopped after a 2005
move by the Cotton Development Authority (CODA) to encourage farming of the crop
and return Kenya to the export field failed to bear fruit.

"Marketing has been a big issue with major bottlenecks in the value chain," said
Mr Alex Mungai, value addition officer at CODA, during the Hawesa exhibition.

Majority of the Hawesa members still use the traditional hand loom that British
inventor John Kay improved by introducing the flying shuttle, enabling weavers
to double the speed of weaving, compared to the one introduced about 2,000 years
ago.

Ms Muthondu calls it "unfriendly" as it hinders mass production due to the time
it takes to complete any given piece.

The weavers make between 10 to 12 kikois per day, and argue that an automated
machine that can produce the same high quality would allow for mass production.

Kenya has not always been the best market for these weavers, mainly due to the
imported clothes.

But change is slowly creeping in, especially with the increasing uptake of the
kikoi.

Today, the colourful fabric has gained popularity with people wearing it as
scarves, wraps and making outfits.

For most of the entrepreneurs, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
and the United States are their main markets.

However, the traders are sometimes forced to change the sizes of some of their
products for their clients outside Kenya.

A kikoi in Kenya measures at least 68 by 42 inches. But for the same wrap to
suit the US market, the length has to be increased to at least 72 inches, said
the weavers.

"We are trying to access the local and international markets through various
initiatives. We hope to get the interest," said Rose Mwathi, a weaver at the
exhibition.

The recent event at the mall this year is part of an annual activity that
showcases various handloom weavers' products.

It is held in December to tap into the shopping season.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              563 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                Dawn (Pakistan)

                          September 21, 2016 Wednesday

Conference discusses megacities, their varied problems

BYLINE: SHAZIA HASAN

SECTION: Vol. 70 No. 261

LENGTH: 657  words


Urban governance, water, health, education, transport and youth were perspective
taken into account while looking at issues related to big and busy cities of the
world with a particular focus on Karachi on the inaugural day of the three-day
International Conference on 'Managing Megacities-2016'.

The conference was organised by the department of public administration,
University of Karachi, and Schar School of Public Policy and Government, George
Mason University USA at the HEJ Auditorium on the university campus on Tuesday.

Architect and town planner Arif Hasan said that the future of Karachi lay in the
region's geopolitical situation and also Karachi's relations with its province:
Sindh. "For agriculture, Karachi now depends on the rural areas in Sindh though
there was a time when it had its own agriculture lands in Malir, Lyari and
Gadap. But then the rural areas of Karachi were colonised. And the rural people
did not have the skills to integrate into the urban fabric," he said.

"Further destruction to our city has come through the lowering levels of the
water table and the depletion of rainwater and this process is continuing. In
the name of greenery we have also brought in a variety of trees not suitable for
the city such as the Cornicarpus. There is also an influx of vehicles as opposed
to the systems of transport. The transport systems we had, we couldn't maintain.
We don't know how to maintain or conserve, that has and is robbing from our
city's socio-economic aspects," he explained.

'Rural people did not have the skills to integrate into the urban fabric'

Dr Rashmi Sadana of George Mason University, while talking about Delhi through
the prism of transport, mobility and the Metro, said that the underground, at
grade and elevated rail network has made a big difference for women in the city.
"The gendered aspect of the Metro in Delhi sees female college and university
students, or women in many different professions commuting by train. It has
changed their visibility in public as they also see it as a safe means of
transport for women to even travel alone," she said.

Dr Tuzin Baycan of Istanbul Technical University spoke about Istanbul's vision
for 2050 and transition and roadmap towards a post-carbon city. "Istanbul is
unique as it the city where Asia and Europe meet giving it a blend of East and
West. Many direct flights go to and from Istanbul, also to Karachi. We are
constructing the world's biggest airport, too. In 2014, it had a population of
14.4 million with 11.8 million international visitors," she said.

"But due to political turmoil including the coup, visitors have somewhat
decreased. Still the situation is expected to improve as is international trade
involving 70,000 local companies is remarkable. Investors see Turkey as a good
opportunity. They compare it to China," she said, adding that they had 53
universities in which 663,000 students were enrolled making the future for young
people bright there.

"Real estate is also booming in Istanbul as it is cheaper to Moscow, Paris and
London, though very expensive when compared to real estate in Karachi," she
said.

"To see Istanbul thrive in the future, we need to raise its resilience. Looking
to make it a post-carbon city is to decrease its vulnerability to carbon
emission, public transport and waste generation all of which are on the
increase, data tells us," she said.

Dr Eduardo Marques of University of Sao Paulo said that academia all over the
world needed to sit together and hold dialogues over the subject of megacities
while sharing their research.

Vice Chancellor of the University of Karachi Dr Mohammad Qaiser said that he has
observed that researchers and scientists are unable to conduct result-oriented
research on the problems of Karachi since the latest and authentic data is
unavailable due to no census being held since 1998. He added that megacities of
the world also faced with serious modern-day challenges.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                              Copyright 2016 Dawn
                              All Rights Reserved


                              564 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               New Era (Windhoek)

                                October 12, 2012

'Katima Mulilo Is a Haven for All' [interview]

BYLINE: George Sanzila

LENGTH: 1201 words


, New Era's reporter in Caprivi Region, interviewed the Mayor of

on a number of issues affecting the town. This is the second and final part of
the interview. The first part appeared last week.

"I have a problem with people who just complain. Namibians have the opportunity
to create wealth, to venture into business but they do not want to take the
opportunities available. Worldwide, Chinese are known for being go-getters.
Whether we like them or not, they will always be there. They look for
opportunities that we Namibians do not want to take. It is a tradition for us
Namibians, that to be seen that you have wealth you buy an expensive car. People
do not want to invest in property, people do not want to invest in franchises
and retail businesses, to travel around the country and explore investment
opportunities in other parts of the country. What do the Chinese do; they find a
place to invest. Namibia is a free market economy. Our own people here who have
warehouses and properties accommodate the Chinese businesses, because Chinese do
not own the buildings.

So I think it is a win-win situation where the local businesspeople make money
from rent and the Chinese conduct business. I would encourage our people to join
the mainstream of the economy so that we resist the influx of the Chinese. If we
remain lazy and non-active in the economy of this country, the influx will be
more and if we are not ready they will outnumber us in terms of population. So
we have to participate fully in the economy, especially small and medium
businesses, so that we can counter the products of China, which we claim are of
poor quality. The choice is however for those who have money, as the poor people
will comment that they prefer buying from Chinese shops."

"We have recently entered into a discussion, if not an agreement, with the
ministry of agriculture, now that the Katima farm is part of the town lands of
Katima Mulilo Town Council. We want to lease the farm from the ministry to at
least start producing fresh produce and all types of products that can be sold
locally and beyond. We can also create employment. It will be a massive project
and we will ensure that young people get employment. We are tarring the town
roads and servicing town land. In a few weeks' time we will be commissioning a
number of serviced land. This is so that the private sector can also participate
in the building of the town. We also have ongoing formalisation of informal
settlements in our four major proclaimed settlements of Choto, Mahohoma, Cowboy
and Butterfly, to ensure that people start building permanent structures.

"We have water and sanitation projects where we are extending our services to
residents in informal areas so that they can have taps in their own homes. My
office will also start a campaign called 'City Changer', which will include
information dissemination and road shows to ensure that every resident is
responsible in developing the town. We are going to have a mayoral civic award
ceremony, for the second time this year, to honour those who have contributed to
the development of this town."

"I do not want to respond on behalf of central government. The initiative is
generally a private-public partnership of which the first phase was done by the
central government to ensure that the project kicked off. I think at the moment
we are moving over the phase where the private sector is involved. Generally the
pace has been very slow. However, in terms of good governance, the project has
its own Board of Directors and full-time administrators. The council has a
permanent seat on the board through which we remain accountable to the residents
of this town.

"Above all, we made a major contribution more than any other person, apart from
central government. We availed land and we need to see that the land we availed
free of charge is fully utilised.

"We have agreed with the management and board of the waterfront to ensure that
at least the first phase is opened before we go into the festive season. Let me
assure you that we are aggressively addressing this issue to ensure the first
phase is complete. However, people have to be patient when it comes to
development because there might be technical issues, financial constraints and
regulatory issues that need to be followed."

JL: "You might be aware that we work closely with the Ministry of Environment
and Tourism. We have ensured that most of the activities regarding environment
and tourism are hosted in our town, especially those at the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC) level and other regional bodies. The KAZA
trans-frontier project was launched here. And it was also here where the five
countries met and officially declared this area to be a conservation area. That
alone puts us on the map.

"Caprivi and Katima Mulilo are the central areas for this project, so to me it
is a big opportunity for the business community especially the private sector to
tap into these initiatives.

"The government and the local authority worked very hard to make sure that we
make the environment viable and feasible for business. However, people do not
want to invest. For example, our town does not have a conference centre that can
house over 400 people. That is not the responsibility of the council; it is the
private sector that needs to take that opportunity. If you look at our hotels,
they have limited menus and packages. People think Chobe River is the only place
to observe wildlife. But there are plenty of wild animals at Kongola and Susuwe.
Yet if you look at the packages offered by our local tourism operators, they do
not include many services."

"I am very impressed with the ongoing understanding of the central government,
especially the ministry of local government and in particular Minister Jerry
Ekandjo. He has an understanding of the needs of regional and local authorities,
that we need more funding to complement central government especially in terms
of infrastructural development.

"Over the last three years, we have seen increasing support from the central
government in terms of funding and other logistical support. I think with this
move, towns can develop. We urge for more resources, and also residents of this
town have to know that the development of this town relies on their pockets,
homes and minds. We need to work together as elected leaders, as responsible
citizens and government agencies to complement each other.

"We take criticism but at the same time we also need positive direction so that
we maintain peace and stability, the betterment of our people and strive for
their survival. Both rich and poor people should feel that Katima Mulilo is a
haven for all. I therefore encourage investors that besides our small
population, they can do business here. Besides the 28 000 Namibians who live in
this town, there is a daily influx of thousands of people from Zambia, Zimbabwe
and Botswana. These people are our daily visitors and their numbers should be
counted. Katima Mulilo is strategically located and many of the businesses here
have benefited from shoppers who come daily from the neighbouring countries.
That is the reason no shop has closed its doors in the last 22 years."

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              565 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                 Yorkshire Post

                                 April 24, 2006

Migrants driving growth - professor

SOURCE: Yorkshire Post

LENGTH: 432 words


Workers from new EU states 'boost economy'

Greg Wright

Deputy Business Editor

BRITAIN is riding the crest of a new immigration wave which is keeping interest
rates down and plugging skills gaps in key industries, one of Britain's most
influential economists claimed today.

Professor Peter Spencer, of York University, argues

that the influx of labour from former communist states is helping our economy
enjoy a "surprisingly robust" growth rate.

He was speaking as the Ernst & Young ITEM Club's spring forecast delivered an
upbeat assessment of Britain's prospects.

Prof Spencer, chief economic adviser to the ITEM Club, said: "The steady flow
from the most recent EU accession countries to the UK has proved remarkably
positive for the economy, keeping interest rates a half a per cent lower than
they would otherwise have been.

"From Poland to Slovenia these individuals have plugged gaps in a variety of
industries, from agriculture to hospitality and catering with nearly 300,000
immigrants taking new jobs in the UK in the last three years.

"Unlike previous occasions that have been confined to major urban centres, this
influx has benefited many regions across the UK including the North East of
England.

"As a direct result the UK workforce has become younger, more flexible and
economical, easing the pensions burden and keeping interest rates lower than
many commentators could have predicted. Even with a modest rise in unemployment
numbers we are looking at a very favourable cost-benefit ratio".


This unexpected consequence of the UK being one of only three EU countries to
sign up to freedom of movement of labour in 2004 is helping to drive economic
growth, Prof Spencer claimed.

ITEM expects GDP growth to pick up to 2.6 per cent in 2007 and three per cent in
2008, even if interest rates stay at 4.5 per cent, which ITEM predicts they
could do until the end of 2006.

"Interest rates have stabilised at a historically low level and that has boosted
consumer confidence and house prices," said Prof Spencer.

"Although the buoyancy of the housing market has made the MPC reluctant to cut
interest rates to stimulate demand, the rise in property and equity prices will
support consumer spending".


A renewal in consumer confidence might suggest that the UK economy continues to
rely on consumer spending to underpin growth. However, the economy is gradually
rebalancing and exports started to outpace imports in 2005 for the first time in
a decade.

According to Prof Spencer recent export figures have been very encouraging.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2006

                       Copyright 2006 Johnston Press Plc


                              566 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          THE JOURNAL (Newcastle, UK)

                 August 14, 2002, Wednesday Edition JL1408-01A

Grouse shooting is big business

BYLINE: By The Journal

SECTION: BUSINESS LOCAL, Pg. 28

LENGTH: 1121 words


   The Glorious Twelfth marks the start of the grouse shooting season the
pinnacle of the field sportsman's calendar.

A sport confined mainly to the wealthy, August 12 also brings a four-month
welcome economic boost to the many associated rural industries, which range from
farmers providing bed and breakfast accommodation to the village garage
providing fuel for the visitors' vehicles.

People from all over the world come to Britain the only place where the red
grouse is found to take part in organised shooting parties, which in turn inject
over 12m into the remotest parts of the British Isles.

According to Tom Warde-Aldam, of North-East property consultant Clark Scott
Harden, sporting-related tourism is crucial to the prosperity of thousands of
local businesses, from hotels and pubs to agricultural contractors and small
farms.

And he pointed out that last year's foot-and-mouth crisis highlighted the
closeness of the link when it closed down various shooting estates.

He said: "The grouse shooting season will see an influx of visitors from all
over the world, which will result in a direct injection of more than 12m into
the rural economy.

"Grouse shooting alone supports around 300 full-time jobs in England, as well as
over 30,000 casual labour days from August to December. This provides vital
employment and income to some of Britain's most isolated areas."

The growing demand for the sport, coupled with the recent economic problems in
rural areas, is encouraging more landowners to shift the use of their land from
agriculture to sporting and leisure activities. Upland rural areas are finding a
new lease of life and many estates are becoming increasingly involved in
commercial sporting and leisure activities to subsidise the more traditional
aspects of estate management. Lowland farms can often attract higher sales
prices if they are split up into lots so that the residential market can be
tapped into. This option is a lot harder for remote hill farms, not in commuting
distance of the city centres.

But Mr Warde-Aldam said he was seeing more and more moorland in the North-East
being bought up for grouse moors instead.

This shift has been encouraged by future European plans to shift agricultural
subsidy payments away from livestock production towards agri-environment
schemes, and landowners are already able to take advantage of Government schemes
such as Countryside Stewardship to remove sheep from the moors and instead
manage the habitat for the benefit of the red grouse.

Mr Warde-Aldam said: "Previously farmers have always been able to rely on food
production as their main source of income but this is no longer the case and
they are investigating alternatives to traditional farming to secure new income
streams.

"On an acre per acre basis the unsubsidised shooting interest is now far more
valuable than the subsidised sheep. The rural economy is undergoing significant
changes and it is essential that land and estate owners look to the future and
consider all the options available to them."

This view has been echoed by Tim Baynes, who is based near Barnard Castle and is
moorland policy and information officer for the Countryside Alliance. However,
he warned that managing a grouse moor was a long-term project which needed
substantial investment.

"There is an opportunity there for upland sheep farmers living near an
established grouse moor who are struggling to earn a living from their flock to
remove the sheep and manage the moorland for the grouse," he said.

"Government schemes are available to help them and once the grouse move into the
area then the farmer could lease it out for grouse shooting.

"Over the last 50 years, up to 20pc of our moorlands have been lost through
intensive sheep grazing, and this is a way for landowners and farmers to turn
this around and bring themselves benefits

"Grouse shooting doesn't depend on subsidies. There is a genuine commercial
demand for it. However it is a long- term project. No-one is going to make a
quick buck out of grouse shooting."

Staff need to be employed to create the right habitat for the red grouse to
flourish this is a game bird that is not suited to being farm-reared, unlike the
pheasant.

And in years when the red grouse hasn't bred well, then a year's income from the
moor may have to be foregone.

Gamekeepers have to regularly burn small batches of heather on a rotational
basis to create new areas where seed is plentiful and more mature areas for the
birds to nest in. Predators such as foxes, crows, stoats and weasels also need
to be controlled.

However the careful management of the moors doesn't just bring benefits to the
red grouse. It creates the ideal habitat for a num- ber of ground- nesting
birds, like the skylark, curlew, golden plover, and lapwing whose numbers are
declin- ing due to loss of habitat.

Anyone wanting to own their own grouse moor will be interested to learn that the
UK's most successful grouse moor has come onto the property market for the first
time in more than three centuries.

CSH Property Consultants is acting for the Featherstone Estate in the sale of
the sporting rights over Knarsdale Moor, a lease over Asholme Moor, the freehold
of two tenanted farms extending to 2,909 acres and the freehold of the shooting
lodge and two keeper's cottages.

Knarsdale and Asholme Moors combined extend to approximately 15,000 acres in
west Northumberland and in part form the county boundary with Cumbria. Knarsdale
is being offered for sale on a 999-year lease and Asholme on a 15-year lease.

The moors have been part of Feather- stone Estate for almost 300 years but the
landlords have not shot them since 1914. A succession of long-term lessees have
run and shot the moors since then, the most recent being Mark Osborne.

Under his management the bag rec- ord has seen dramatic improvements with a
5,300 bag for the 2001 season.

Knarsdale now has a 10 year average of 1,489 brace while Asholme's 10-year
average is 511.

Mark has said the Knarr and Sunshine butts provide some of the most challenging
grouse shooting available and the moor is capable of producing very large daily
bags [400 brace plus].

He said: "Whoever buys Knarsdale will have a great moor capable of showing
stunning sport. A leading grouse expert believes that Knarsdale and Asholme as a
whole could produce 7,000 brace in a season under the right conditions. I look
forward to seeing the next occupier achieving this."

And no doubt residents living nearby will also be looking forward to a
successful manager taking over the moor, with Mr Baynes estimating that
Knarsdale Moor could boost the local economy by 250,000 during a good season.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2002 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd


                              567 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (Nigeria)

                           February 4, 2017 Saturday

Niger seeks N2.5b loan from CBN to purchase grains

BYLINE: Uche Atuma

LENGTH: 385 words


Notice: Undefined index: layout_id in
/var/www/vhosts/sunnews/wp-content/themes/fastnews/library/front.ph p on line
1663
Niger Government on Thursday says it is seeking N2.5 billion loan from the
Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) to purchase grains for sale to the people of the
state at subsidised prices. Alhaj Kabiru Abbas, Commissioner for Agriculture and
Rural Development, said this when addressing newsmen on the outcome of the State
Executive Council meeting...

Niger Government on Thursday says it is seeking N2.5 billion loan from the
Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) to purchase grains for sale to the people of the
state at subsidised prices.

Alhaj Kabiru Abbas, Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development, said
this when addressing newsmen on the outcome of the State Executive Council
meeting in Minna.

Abbas said the attention of government had been drawn to the high cost of food
items in the market due to the influx of buyers from other states.

He said the when buyers purchased the grains at cheaper rates; they usually sell
the commodity at high prices.

"A bag of grain sold at N10, 000 per bag now goes for N13, 000.

"This is because of the activities of middlemen who purchase them at cheaper
rates, stock them to cause artificial scarcity and sell at high prices.

"The N2.5 billion loan will be used to purchase grains in large quantity and
sell to our people at cheaper rates to reduce hardship," Abbas said.

He said the state government would also purchase 30,000 metric tonnes of
fertilizer from the Federal Government intervention programmes for farmers to
increase food production.

Abbas said Federal Government would sell to the state government at N5, 000
while the state government would sell the commodity to farmers at the rate of
N5, 500.

According to the Commissioner, the effort will protect farmers from loss of farm
produce and stabilise market price.

"Our farmers will be able to produce more food, beat inflation and scarcity of
food items."

Meanwhile, Commissioner for Water Resources, Alhaji Idris Azozo, said the state
government had resolved to partner with AG Gold Trust Company to reticulate
water supply to Minna and Suleja.

Azozo said that a committee had been set up to come up with a way forward on how
Minna and Suleja would enjoy constant water supply for the next 30 years.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1228


                   Copyright 2017 The Sun Publishing Limited
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              568 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Regional Times

                            February 24, 2013 Sunday

LDFA 2013 begins: Rs 300 million given to SBP for financing Rice Husking Mills
projects in Sindh

SECTION: Vol. VIII No. 54

LENGTH: 309  words


Acting governor Sindh and Speaker of the Sindh Assembly Nisar Ahmed Khuhro has
said that the province has a lot of potential in agro-based sectors and it is
need of the hour that local and foreign investors should be invited to invest in
these sectors. This he said while addressing inaugural ceremony of the
Livestock, Dairy, Fisheries, Poultry, Agriculture and Culture Exhibition
(LDFA-2013) at expo center Karachi here on Saturday. On this occasion a cheque
of Rs.300 million was given to Deputy Governor State Bank for modernization and
restructuring scheme for Rice Husking Mills in Sindh. The farmers of the
province can borrow soft loans from National Bank of Pakistan, Sindh Bank,
Allied Bank Limited, HBL, UBL and MCB bank.

He said: "We should try to find out international markets for these agro-based
products to earn foreign exchange. We could not find international markets due
to low quality products. Our country has been bestowed with the countless
resources by the nature, but we have wasted time like 12 years wasted so far and
we could not use the coal reserves we have in Sindh."

Chairman Sindh Board of Investment Muhammad Zubair Motiwala speaking on this
occasion said that rural areas of Sindh have immense potential for investments
and utilizing these opportunities would not only stop influx to cities but
employment opportunities could also be generated. He stressed upon using modern
technology in agriculture sector and urged private sector to tape the potential
of Sindh. He said having overcome the dearth of water, improving infrastructure,
creating awareness we could enhance our growth rate in livestock, dairy,
fisheries, agriculture and other agro-based sectors. He said that the government
offers huge opportunities to investors to attract them in these sectors and SBI
provides financial and technical assistance as well.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 Regional Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              569 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Regional Times

                            February 24, 2013 Sunday

LDFA 2013 begins: Rs 300 million given to SBP for financing Rice Husking Mills
projects in Sindh

SECTION: Vol. VIII No. 54

LENGTH: 309  words


Acting governor Sindh and Speaker of the Sindh Assembly Nisar Ahmed Khuhro has
said that the province has a lot of potential in agro-based sectors and it is
need of the hour that local and foreign investors should be invited to invest in
these sectors. This he said while addressing inaugural ceremony of the
Livestock, Dairy, Fisheries, Poultry, Agriculture and Culture Exhibition
(LDFA-2013) at expo center Karachi here on Saturday. On this occasion a cheque
of Rs.300 million was given to Deputy Governor State Bank for modernization and
restructuring scheme for Rice Husking Mills in Sindh. The farmers of the
province can borrow soft loans from National Bank of Pakistan, Sindh Bank,
Allied Bank Limited, HBL, UBL and MCB bank.

He said: "We should try to find out international markets for these agro-based
products to earn foreign exchange. We could not find international markets due
to low quality products. Our country has been bestowed with the countless
resources by the nature, but we have wasted time like 12 years wasted so far and
we could not use the coal reserves we have in Sindh."

Chairman Sindh Board of Investment Muhammad Zubair Motiwala speaking on this
occasion said that rural areas of Sindh have immense potential for investments
and utilizing these opportunities would not only stop influx to cities but
employment opportunities could also be generated. He stressed upon using modern
technology in agriculture sector and urged private sector to tape the potential
of Sindh. He said having overcome the dearth of water, improving infrastructure,
creating awareness we could enhance our growth rate in livestock, dairy,
fisheries, agriculture and other agro-based sectors. He said that the government
offers huge opportunities to investors to attract them in these sectors and SBI
provides financial and technical assistance as well.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 Regional Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              570 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 Indian Express

                              April 5, 2010 Monday

Licences to govern bio-fertiliser trade

BYLINE: Express News Service

LENGTH: 349  words

DATELINE: Vadodara


Move follows amendments in certain provisions of National Fertiliser Policy in
November 2009

Manufacturers and distributors of organic and bio-fertilisers will now need a
licence to operate in Gujarat following amendments in some of the provisions in
the National Fertiliser Policy, in November 2009.

M B Patel, the Joint Director for the Department of Agriculture for Vadodara
circle said the licensing is necessary to put a check on the influx of spurious
organic or bio-fertilisers.

Patel said after the Government of India introduced the new fertiliser policy,
some provisions were amended which took about 8-9 months for implementation.
"Now we are just implementing the licensing in bio-fertilisers after the Union
Ministry for Agriculture made changes in the provisions of the policy,
especially for bio-fertilisers," said an official. The official replied in the
negative on being asked about the presence of spurious manufacturers or sellers
in the local markets in Gujarat.

"Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizer Corporation is among the major manufacturer
of quality organic agro-inputs," said Patel.

He said licensing will help increase food security in the area by assuring that
only quality bio-fertilisers are available in the market.

Patel said it is important to introduce the policy as there has been a trend
among farmers to use bio-fertilisers and vermin-compost for increasing
productivity.

Elsewhere, the users of organic agriculture feel that such a move while ensuring
the quality of the products, may also marginalise the smaller manufacturers of
such products.

Kapil Shah, an organic farmer added: "This is a good move to assure quality
control in the usage of organic fertilisers. The licensing is, however, to be
taken with a pinch of salt as it could breed corruption at various stages."

He added: "The corporate entities producing bio-fertilisers could go to any
extent to achieve a big sale target. Marginal manufacturers, on the other hand,
may have to wait for long till the licensing policy is made foolproof and the
parameters for issuing the licence are clearly defined."

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2010 Indian Express, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              571 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Nottingham Evening Post

                             January 1, 2007 Monday

Notts set for more migrants from EU

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 417 words


Today, the UK opens its doors to migrants from newly-joined EU states Romania
and Bulgaria. JAMES SMITH looks at what impact this could have in Notts

In 2004, the Government predicted 15,000 people would  enter the UK from new EU
states every year.

Just 20 months on and about  600,000 migrants have so far  arrived from the
likes of Estonia, the Czech Republic and, predominantly, Poland.

Notts alone has seen an influx of thousands of Poles, swelling existing Polish
communities and requiring local authorities to adapt services for them.

Today, Romanians and Bulgarians will no longer require visas to visit the UK as
their countries become the latest to join the EU. They will also be able to
travel to the UK to live and work.

Barbara Glass, a member of Mansfield's expanding Polish community, says it is
important that lessons are learned this time round.

"We weren't expecting the influx that came last time so everyone was taken by
surprise," she said.

"There were a lot of difficulties as there was no translation service in place
and people were turning up with no knowledge of English.

"I don't think anything was set up to deal with people coming in and it's only
recently that the council here in Mansfield has started printing information in
Polish on things like elections and what to do with trade refuse."

She believes thousands of Poles have come to Notts, with nearly 400 turning up
at the Polish Catholic Church for the Christmas Eve service.

"We were lucky that there was a Polish community here in Mansfield to help
people when they arrived," she said.

The Home Office has placed tighter restrictions on Romanians and Bulgarians
wanting to come to the UK.

Although they are free to visit, anyone wanting to work must apply for a visa.

Skilled workers, such as nurses, teachers and chefs, will be allowed in for jobs
that cannot be filled by UK residents. Highly skilled workers, including
doctors, can still qualify based on their qualifications. But for lower skilled
workers there is a quota of 20,000, who will be able to work in agriculture or
food processing. The Home Secretary, Dr John Reid MP, has said the situation
will be reviewed annually.

A spokeswoman for the Home Office said: "People want to see that migration is
being properly managed and that is what we are doing by putting in these
restrictions."

In Nottingham, the council is looking at publishing handbooks to help Poles,
which would initially be handed out in St Ann's and Sneinton.

James Smith@nottinghameveningpost.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 Nottingham Evening Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              572 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Mail (London)

                            December 22, 2006 Friday

More teens are jobless than when Labour took power

BYLINE: JAMES CHAPMAN

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 996 words


MORE young people are out of work now than when Labour came to power in 1997, it
emerged yesterday.

Critics said the figures make a mockery of Tony Blair's pledge to end youth
unemployment.

According to the Office for National Statistics there are now 702,000 jobless 16
to 24-year-olds. That is 37,000 more than in May 1997.

The unemployment rate for the age group stands at 14.5 per cent, compared with
14.4 per cent when John Major lost power.

The Tories produced separate figures suggesting that Mr Blair's claim earlier
this year to have 'eradicated long-term youth unemployment' is also false. They
show that the number of 18 to 24-year-olds out of work for six months or more is
75 per cent higher than in 2001.

Labour made tackling youth unemployment a key priority for its flagship New Deal
programme.

But critics say this has become a revolving door back on to welfare for the
long-term unemployed. Half of younger New Dealers are back on benefits within a
year and the proportion leaving the scheme to return to the Jobseeker's
Allowance is six times higher than it was in 1998.

For the New Deal 25 plus, which is aimed at the older unemployed, the picture is
even worse. Only a quarter of leavers now find unsubsidised jobs compared with
almost 40 per cent in June 2001.

More than a third go straight back on to the dole queue.

The increase in youth unemployment has gathered pace in the past two years,
leading to suspicions among Labour MPs that it is a result of the influx of
Eastern European migrants who were given the right to work in Britain in May
2004.

Work and Pensions Secretary John Hutton said this week that lazy Britons are
sitting back on benefits while hardworking migrants fill job vacancies.

The trend has been particularly marked among 16 to 17-yearolds, one in four of
whom are now unemployed.

The influx of cheap labour from Eastern Europe has been welcomed by employers in
construction, catering and agriculture and the archetypal 'Polish plumber' is
widely admired.

Some economists warn, however, that this has depressed wages in low- skilled
jobs, pushing up unemployment in some areas.

The Home Office insists, however, that its research has shown conclusively that
there is no relationship between unemployment and the arrival of workers from
Poland and seven other ex-Soviet states.

Since 1997, youth unemployment has risen across London, the South East and the
Midlands, but is down in the North East and South West.

In London, the proportion of 16 and 17-year- olds who are officially unemployed
is 42.9 per cent, according to the Government's labour force survey.

Shadow work and pensions secretary Philip Hammond said: 'Labour's flagship New
Deal programme is failing.

'These figures are deeply concerning. The programmes are increasingly becoming a
revolving door back onto benefits, not a sustainable route into employment.' He
said ministers were 'more interested in talking tough about clampdowns on those
who are out of work than trying to help those that the New Deal is failing'.

A spokesman for the Work and Pensions Department said: 'Since 1997 the
Government has made tackling youth unemployment a priority.

'There are now 121,000 fewer 18 to 24-year-olds claiming unemployment benefit
than in 1997.

'This is a reflection of both a strong economy which has seen 2.5million jobs
created since 1997 and the New Deal for Young People, which has helped nearly
700,000 18 to 24-year- olds into work.

'We now see record numbers of 16-year-olds in full time education-with close to
nine in ten in some form of education or training. The Government has also
trebled the number of apprentices in learning from 75,000 in 1997 to 255,000
today.

'But we are determined to do more. The Government will be looking at how we can
help them to stay in education or training.' Sweden's parliament yesterday voted
for tough laws to cut unemployment benefit and get the jobless back to work.

Under the new rules, benefit given to newly-graduated students will be abolished
and the amount of time a person has to work to qualify for welfare payments will
be increased.

Working Swedes will also have to contribute more to the unemployment benefits
system.

The measures were proposed by the country's centre-Right coalition that took
power in October. This ended the grip on power held by Left-leaning parties for
nearly 70 years.

Comment Page 14 j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk

THE mechanics of Labour's New Deal programme are simple enough: employers are
paid to offer work to the jobless.

What is controversial is whether this is a good use of taxpayers' money.

Some critics claim the subsidies are unnecessary because 80 per cent of New
Dealers would find jobs anyway as the economy grows.

Between 1997 and 2005, the New Deal for Young People is estimated to have cost
almost Pounds 2billion. The New Deal 25 Plus, for older workers, has cost some
Pounds 1billion more.

But despite this expenditure, 1.24million people in the 16-to-24 age group are
neither working nor studying. This is a higher number than in 1997.

The performance of the programme appears to be getting worse. Figures from May
show that only a third of New Dealers managed to find work and stay off
benefits. This compares with the nearly two-thirds who achieved this in March
1998.

The number leaving the programme and claiming dole has risen sharply. In March
1998, only 4.1 per cent did so but the figure now is 18.6 per cent.

Alarmingly, nearly 50 per cent of young job seekers who have left the New Deal
for Young People end up back on benefits within a year.

WHAT THE PRIME MINISTER SAID

Youth unemployment of a long-term nature has virtually disappeared in this
country.

Nov 24, 2004

Long-term youth unemployment has been virtually eliminated under this
Government.

Oct 19, 2005

Over these past years we have developed economic efficiency, a very strong
economy, low levels of unemployment long-term youth unemployment virtually
abolished.

April 5, 2006

We have eradicated long term youth unemployment

Sept 5, 2006

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              573 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The New Nation (Bangladesh)

                             June 18, 2011 Saturday

Farming cities, feeding urban future

LENGTH: 428 words

DATELINE: Dhaka


Dhaka, June 18 -- As people move from rural to urban settings in search of
economic opportunities, urban agriculture is becoming an important provider of
both food and employment, according to researchers with the Worldwatch
Institute, says a message received from Washington DC. "Urban agriculture is
providing food, jobs, and hope in Nairobi, Kampala, Dakar, and other cities
across sub-Saharan Africa," said Danielle Nierenberg, co-director of the
Institute's Nourishing the Planet project. "In some cases, urban farmers are
providing important inputs, such as seed, to rural farmers, dispelling the myth
that urban agriculture helps feed the poor and hungry only in cities."

The United Nations projects that up to 65 percent of the world's population will
live in cities by 2050, up from around 50 percent today. The rate of urban
migration is particularly high in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where
inadequate urban infrastructure struggles to keep up with the large influx of
people. "Although most of the world's poor and hungry remain in rural areas,
hunger is migrating with people into urban areas," said Brian Halweil,
co-director of the Nourishing the Planet project. Currently, an estimated 800
million people worldwide are engaged in urban agriculture, producing 15-20
percent of the world's food. However, this activity occurs mainly in Asia,
making it critical to place more worldwide emphasis on this vital sector. In
Africa, 14 million people migrate from rural to urban areas each year, and
studies suggest that an estimated 35-40 million Africans living in cities will
need to depend on urban agriculture to meet their food requirements in the
future. "Urban agriculture is an important aspect of the development movement as
it has the potential to address some of our most pressing challenges, including
food insecurity, income generation, waste disposal, gender inequality, and urban
insecurity" said. Nancy Karanja, a Professor at the University of Nairobi,
Kenya, and a State of the World 2011 contributing author. Such projects are not
only helping to provide fresh sources of food for city dwellers, but also
providing a source of income, a tool to empower women, and a means of protecting
the environment, among other benefits," said Mary Njenga, researcher at the
University of Nairobi and the World Agroforestry Centre, the message says.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from The New Nation. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2011 The New Nation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              574 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     June 18, 1992, Thursday, City Edition

Stamp out a health threat: Stomp a cockroach

SOURCE: Toledo Blade

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 637 words



Humans can express revulsion in many ways.

    And there may be no better place to observe the rich diversity of disgust
than an unusual insect exhibit at the Smithsonian Institution's Natural History
Museum in Washington.

    Tourists peer through a large window into a kitchen where the floor,
cabinets and counters are covered with thousands upon thousands of small brown
objects.

    It takes a few seconds for things to register. Then people turn away in
horror, and say something like:

    "Yuucckk Cockroaches Zillions of roaches "

    If you want to worry about a major health threat from insects in America,
forget "killer bees," ticks that might carry Lyme disease, or even mosquitoes.
Worry about cockroaches.

    "People simply cannot continue to view cockroaches as just a nasty
nuisance," says Dr. Richard Brenner, a roach expert with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture.

    Cockroaches have been linked to the spread of salmonella food poisoning,
hepatitis and other diseases that affect millions of people each year.

    Evidence indicates that up to 15-million Americans suffer from roach
allergy. Symptoms range from nasal congestion, sneezing and skin irritation to
serious reactions with difficulty in breathing, shock and, in rare cases, death.


    Some studies suggest that cockroach allergy is increasing with the trend
toward making homes weather-tight and more energy-efficient. With less influx of
fresh air, allergens that cause cockroach allergy are trapped inside the house,
along with a host of other indoor air pollutants.

    Most victims of cockroach allergy don't suspect the reason for the symptoms,
which may result from eating, inhaling or having direct contact with roach
material.

    Cockroaches forage on cookie crumbs, flecks of grease, and other food on
kitchen countertops, in cabinets and in drawers. They leave behind feces and
blood that spread salmonella food poisoning and perhaps other diseases.

    People also inhale roach material in household dust. Contact can be more
intimate. Roaches do crawl over sleeping people to nibble eyelashes, food
residue on the lips, calluses on the feet.

    Yes, you may live in the rare household that really is roach-free.  But
homes with no current roach problem still may harbor allergy-causing roach body
parts from old infestations.

    The vast majority of houses no matter what the social class, occupation, or
income of the occupants have roaches.

    One government study found that 97.5 percent of low-income apartments in the
southeastern United States are infested. On average, there were 33,600 roaches
per dwelling.

    Roaches are masters at escaping detection. They can sense slight
disturbances in the air caused when you enter a darkened kitchen at night.
Roaches scurry for cover in response to air movements, rather than the light
turning on.

    Some estimates suggest that for every roach you see or catch in a trap, 800
to 2,000 may be hiding in nooks and crannies.

    Contrary to popular belief, the area under the kitchen table is not the best
spot to trap roaches. There usually is more roach traffic near the garbage or on
kitchen counters.

    Experts say that simple cleanliness and good sanitation are critical for
keeping roach populations at a minimum.

    One cookie crumb left on the kitchen floor overnight can feed a cockroach
for days. Given enough cookie crumbs, one female cockroach and her progeny can
establish a colony of almost 1-million roaches within one year.  0    mother was
right. Eat only at the table. Take the garbage outside at night. Keep the
kitchen floor clean. And don't leave uncovered food on the countertop at night.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Times files; COLOR DRAWING; A visit to the
Smithsonian insect zoo is always an eye-opening experience as this child shows
by coming face to face with a cockroach; Drawing of a cockroach

                            Times Publishing Company


                              575 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                             June 25, 2011 Saturday

Development of rehabilitation technologies and approaches for multipressured
degraded waters and the integration of their impact on river basin management

LENGTH: 353  words


Within the AQUAREHAB project, different innovative rehabilitation technologies
for soil, groundwater and surface water will be developed to cope with a number
of hazardous (nitrates, pesticides, chlorinated and aromatic compounds, mixed
pollutions, ) within heavily degraded water systems. The technologies are
activated riparian zones/wetlands; smart biomass containing carriers for
treatment of water in open trenches; in-situ technologies to restore degraded
surface water by inhibiting influx of pollutants from groundwater to surface
water; multifunctional permeable barriers and injectable Fe-based particles for
rehabilitation of groundwater. Methods will be developed to determine the
(long-term) impact of the innovative rehabilitation technologies on the
reduction of the influx of these priority pollutants towards the receptor.


A connection between the innovative technologies and river basin management will
be worked out. In a first stage of the project, the technologies and integration
of their impact in river basin management will be developed in three different
river basins (Denmark, Israel, Belgium). In a second stage, the generic
approaches will be extrapolated to one or two more river basins. One of the
major outcomes of the project will be a generic river basin management tool that
integrates multiple measures with ecological and economic impact assessments of
the whole water system. The research in the project is focused on innovative
rehabilitation strategies to reduce priority pollutants in the water system
whereas the generic management tool will include other measures related to flood
protection, water scarcity and ecosystem health.
The project will aid in underpinning river basin management plans being
developed in EU Member States, and will demonstrate cost effective technologies
that can provide technical options for national and local water managers,
planners and other stakeholders (drinking water companies, industry,
agriculture.
Project cost: 8582277 EURO
Project Funding: 6584659 EURO
Duration: 56 months
Start date: 2009-05-01
End date: 2013-12-31

country :Belgium
Ltd.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2011 Tenders Info
                         Syndigate.info, Al bawaba.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              576 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Mail (London)

                           January 11, 2006 Wednesday

How black economy unbalances the books

BYLINE: MATTHEW HICKLEY

SECTION: ED 1ST 04; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 483 words


THE black economy is being swollen by an influx of illegal foreign labourers,
experts claimed yesterday.

The situation distorts official data and makes it harder for the Government to
manage the economy, MPs were told.

The problem is almost certain to be made worse by the construction boom that
will precede the 2012 Olympics in London, the Commons Home Affairs Select
Committee was warned.

The level of 'irregular' immigration showed that the policy of admitting workers
in sectors where there were shortages was failing to meet the needs of the
economy, said Professor Nigel Harris, chairman of the migration committee of the
Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce.

Demand for unskilled or lowskilled labour showed no sign of decreasing, but
sectors such as agriculture, catering and construction could not pay the kind of
wages needed to get jobless Britons back to work.

The professor, from University College, London, warned: 'A larger and larger
part of the British economy is slipping below the statistical threshold.' He
said official economic figures were becoming 'pear-shaped' and added: 'If you
don't have proper figures it is impossible to manage the economy properly.

The Government has to find a way to manage the black economy.' The MPs also took
evidence from Sir Andrew Green, chairman of the Migrationwatch think-tank which
has campaigned for lower levels of immigration. In a series of hostile
exchanges, Labour members accused the former British ambassador of having a
'paranoid and obsessive' view.

Gwyn Prosser, MP for Dover, accused Migrationwatch of ' engendering fear and
alarm in the community' through its campaigning.

But Sir Andrew quoted from an internal Home Office memo, released under the
Freedom of Information Act, in which a civil servant statistician pointed out
that, far from the group's claims over immigration levels being wrong or
exaggerated, they were often lower than the Government's own figures.

Sir Andrew said mass immigration to fill vacancies in the economy was not
working.

The resulting higher population simply created more demand for labour, while the
influx of foreign workers willing to work cheaply pushed down wages in
low-skilled sectors, making it harder to get unemployed Britons off benefits.

Sir Andrew said border controls had been 'crumbling' for ten years, while the
tiny number of prosecutions for illegal working as few as two a year was
'humorous'.

The Institute for Public Policy Research think-tank called yesterday for a new
independent body to oversee immigration policy similar to the Bank of England's
Monetary Policy Committee, which sets interest rates.

Dhananjayan Sriskandarajah of the institute said such a group could help 'boost
public confidence' by advising on the number and type of immigrants the country
needs, and producing statistics independently of the Home Office.

m.hickley@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              577 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                            August 18, 1987 Tuesday
                                  Late Edition

MILK WAR LULL FOLLOWS 'USEFUL' TALKS

BYLINE: PETER FRAY, Rural Writer

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 524 words


The NSW and Victorian dairy industries have backed away from a full-scale
interstate milk price war following "useful talks" in Sydney yesterday.

But, according to dairy industry sources, several smaller NSW retailers have
dropped prices by about 7c a litre to match prices at Jewel Supermarkets, the
company involved in bringing cheap milk to Sydney.

A prolonged period of price-cutting - which could force an estimated 6,000
farmers out of business - is still a distinct possibility if the flow of 18,000
litres of milk a day continues to Jewel from the Victorian processor Midland
Milk.

A spokeswoman for the NSW Minister for Agriculture, Mr Hallam, said yesterday
that the price of milk would not be immediately discounted, but it could occur
if there was an influx of cheap Victorian milk.

Dairy industry leaders discussed yesterday several proposals to increase
Victorian access to the lucrative Sydney fresh milk market as part of a new
industry plan following the virtual breakdown of the national orderly marketing
scheme, the so-called Kerin plan.

But the success of any such agreement would seem to depend on a halt to the
trade between Jewel and Midland.

The executive director of the NSW Dairyfarmers' Association, Mr Winston Watts,
said yesterday's talks were useful, but were overshadowed by the continued flow
of Victorian milk.

"We are talking within a framework of orderly marketing, which is one system,
while Jewel and Midland continue working on the so-called free enterprise
level," he said.

Mr Watts said he believed NSW would remove its $11 million-a-year subsidy to the
Victorian industry - paid under the Kerin plan to support milk product exports -
and cut milk prices if the dairy industry could not sort itself out in the next
two months.

"All hell is going to break out if we don't come to some agreement in 60 days,"
he said.

The meeting discussed taking legal action against Midland and Jewel to stop the
interstate milk trade.

It also considered a proposal to penalise dairy farmers supplying rebel milk
processors, like Midland, by introducing a Federal levy on all farmers and then
paying it back in grants to those not involved in the milk sales between the
States.

A spokeswoman for the Federal Minister for Primary Industry and Energy, Mr
Kerin, said the Government would be reluctant to get involved in such a scheme,
which would be open to a High Court challenge under section 92 of the
Constitution.

She said the Minister would review all options put forward by the dairy industry
at the end of the 60-day discussion period, which started last Friday.

The managing director of Jewel Foods, Mr Jim Fleming, said yesterday the company
would fight any legal moves to deny it access to cheap milk from Victoria.

He said Mr Hallam seemed to have double standards. His Government encouraged
retailers to keep prices to consumers down, but when they did, he attacked them
for attempting to destroy an industry.

"We are under an obligation to buy and sell the cheapest goods. So, if someone
has cheap milk for sale, what am I supposed to say ... I don't want it? I sell
11,000 products, why should milk be any different?" he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1987 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              578 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                           December 4, 2013 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

'Idle' Britons are allowing Romanians to take Jobs;
Workshy should welcome influx, minister says ; 'Idle' are allowing Romanians to
take Jobs

BYLINE: David Charter; Shaun Turton Richard Ford

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,2

LENGTH: 889 words


Romanians and Bulgarians should be welcomed with open arms for doing jobs
shunned by British workers who would rather live off the welfare state, a
Romanian government minister has told The Times.

Britain should be grateful for Romanian migrants who fill vacancies in the
agriculture and hospitality sectors that British people refuse to do, Mariana
Campeanu, the country's Labour Minister, said in a rebuke to what she called
xenophobic and racist attacks on her countrymen.

Young and well-qualified Romanians are also meeting shortfalls in key UK
professions such as nursing and social care, Mrs Campeanu added.

She spoke out as Boris Johnson, the Mayor of London, became the most senior
politician to call for the retention of job restrictions on Bulgarians and
Romanians and a benefits ban of up to a year.

The Romanian minister also revealed that she was negotiating an agreement with
the Department for Work &Pensions to share information on benefit claimants in
the UK to crack down on fraudulent claims.

Restrictions on Romanian and Bulgarians working in Britain will be lifted in
full on January 1, prompting fears of an influx and leading some Tory MPs to
call for the extension of strict quotas imposed in 2007.

The vast majority of Romanians living in Britain are economic migrants who did
not come to claim benefits but to do necessary jobs, Mrs Campeanu said, playing
down the likelihood of a surge in new arrivals next year. She added that she
supported David Cameron's plan to curtail over-generous benefits, turning the
argument on its head by suggesting that welfare payments to British people left
open thousands of low-paid jobs that attracted eager migrants.

For example, almost 22,000 Romanians and Bulgarians came to the UK during the
summer to pick fruit and vegetables on a temporary visa scheme.

"I do not know in depth the British social welfare system, this is an internal
issue of the British Government how generous it can be in its welfare system
towards its citizens," Mrs Campeanu said in an interview in Bucharest.

"This should maybe be a reason why many British people do not access the
vacancies on the labour market for which Romanian citizens, for example, are
going to apply. If there are any vacancies, somebody will fill them, whether
they are from Romania, Italy, Spain or wherever."

There were also shortages for wellqualified staff such as nurses, with 1,471
Romanian nurses registered to work in Britain between April 2010 and March 2013
under an exemption to the restrictions.

"Taking into account the fact that Romanian citizens in the UK contribute
greatly to the GDP and also that many of these people are young and
well-qualified, the UK should be grateful that these people have come to live
there," Mrs Campeanu said.

The Romanian Government has been stung by the British political and media frenzy
about the lifting of all EU work barriers. Victor Ponta, the Prime Continued on
page 2

Continued from page 1 Minister, demanded last week that Romanians were not
treated as "second-rate citizens" by Mr Cameron's proposal to delay benefits for
three months.

On the Ask Boris programme on LBC Radio yesterday, the London Mayor said that
the benefits block "could go for six or 12 months" because of intense
competition for jobs that left "many young Londoners who feel they are not
getting a fair suck of the sauce bottle".

Mr Johnson urged Mr Cameron to push for EU changes so Britain could extend job
limits on Romanians and Bulgarians. "Why not get more freedom to vary the
conditions in which you open your own borders. I think that's the right battle
to have," he said.

Mrs Campeanu, speaking before Mr Johnson's comments, said that Romania was
suffering from staff shortages in some areas because of the EU freedom of
movement policy. Many Romanians have sought work in Germany, Italy and Spain,
which have already opened their borders.

"Many doctors and nurses and other healthcare staff are coming to work in the UK
and these are well qualified personnel that will contribute highly to the
welfare of the British people, at the same time depriving Romanian citizens of
social assistance here," she said.

"We have a deficit of 10,000 care workers and if we look at the entire medical
sector, we are talking of a shortage of over 20,000 people."

In an effort to highlight the Romanians contributing to the British economy, she
said that more than 6,000 students had come to study at university. The Higher
Education Statistics Agency said that 5,915 Romanians and 5,705 Bulgarians were
enrolled in 2011-12.

Mrs Campeanu's department would not give details about the anti-fraud benefits
agreement being negotiated with the British Government, but it is thought to be
similar to deals between Romania and Belgium and the Netherlands.

These created an exchange of information on new claimants to check whether they
were still receiving benefits illegally in Romania.

Mrs Campeanu warned the Tories not to try and match UKIP's "xenophobic" message,
saying: "It is unacceptable in the 21st century that expressions of racism and
xenophobia are taking place and it is more regretful that they are taking place
in Great Britain."

She would not forecast how many Romanians would come to Britain next year.

Continued from page 1 Minister, [...]

'It is regrettable that such expressions of racism are taking place'

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2013 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              579 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                Daily Times (PK)

                          November 17, 2010 Wednesday

Eroding the vote banks: Karachi after the floods

LENGTH: 480  words

DATELINE: LAHORE


LAHORE, Nov. 17 -- Pakistan's largest city and the nerve-centre of its economic
activity, Karachi, is home to tens of thousands of internally displaced people,
victims of the devastating monsoon floods that hit the country in July. Like any
developing metropolis, Karachi is accustomed to prolonged ethnic and political
violence, where various politically-affiliated armed groups struggle to stake
their claim on land, resources and votes. In 2009, the city experienced an
influx of around 5,000 IDPs after the army's operation in Swat. Their presence
was publically denounced by the city's majority party. In a similar incident in
August, the party called for the registration of IDPs, amidst reports of an
attack on a group of IDPs attempting to settle in one of Karachi's public parks.

The suggestion of an extremist "infiltration" of Pakistan in the aftermath of
these floods is prominent in local and international media. This narrative
suggests that the failure of the state to provide for flood victims will cause,
at best, a vacuum for extremist influence in relief camps and at worst, a
"takeover" of parts of flood-stricken Pakistan. An alternative analysis suggests
that anti-incumbent sentiment could cause major unrest in the country,
compounded by an economic meltdown. This report aims at a timely and
comprehensive assessment of both these claims, based on findings from Karachi's
IDP camps.

The findings presented in a report by the Jinnah Institute suggest that local
patrons face serious erosion of popularity due to perceived indifference during
the relief stages of the flood. It is expected that in districts that were
heavily impacted by the disaster, rural-to-urban migration will be determining
factors in the electoral base that particular patrons enjoy. This effect is
likely to be off-set by the absence of a major opposing political force
attempting to capture anti-incumbent sentiment. Therefore, it is unlikely that
the incumbent party on the whole will be "ousted" on the basis of its
performance during the floods.

Second, it is expected that if agriculture and reconstruction do not pick up in
the short- to medium-term, the continued neglect of flood-affected areas will
increase the influx of migrants to Karachi.

Increases in urban crime and begging will be one major fall-out of increased
food insecurity and worsening conditions in rural areas, combined with a paucity
of opportunities in the city. It is likely that economic pressures will
indirectly lead to spikes in political violence, as has been the case in
previous months. The report explores some of the drivers for political and
economic instability in the aftermath of Pakistan's floods. pr Published by HT
Syndication with permission from Daily Times. For any query with respect to this
article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              580 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                             July 7, 2011 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Strong growth in Sask

BYLINE: Leader-Post

SECTION: BUSINESS & AGRICULTURE; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 434  words


Saskatchewan will once again find itself near the top of the provincial heap in
terms of economic growth, with output expanding at an average rate of 3.5 per
cent over 2011 and 2012, according to the latest economic forecast by
Scotiabank.

But Alberta will lead the pack, with an average growth rate of 3.8 per cent
forecast over the new two years, largely due to expansion of the oilsands, the
bank said Wednesday.

Further expansion and development of Saskatchewan's potash and crude oil
industries have fostered job gains and an influx of residents, said the report.
Agriculture, though suffering through another difficult start to the growing
season, will likely contribute positively due to high export prices.

However, the economy's momentum will likely moderate slightly next year, thanks
to a tight labour market and rising costs as the province copes with the strong
pace of growth experienced over the past few years, the report said.

Investment in the Bakken oil play in the province's southeast has grown in line
with the sharp rise in crude oil prices. The province had been expecting to see
another significant increase in oil well drilling following last year's
30-per-cent jump in rig counts, although flooding has delayed the resumption of
drilling in the southeast.

After suffering a difficult spring in 2010, Saskatchewan's agricultural sector
is being hit by poor planting conditions once more, with widespread flooding and
excess moisture conditions, especially in the southeast. That being said,
volumes should improve over last year, with strong commodity pricing over the
forecast period supporting higher levels of production in 2012.

Reversing the declines of the previous decade, the province has seen its
population climb steadily in recent years, increasing by 1.6 per cent in 2010. A
booming economy has attracted both international and inter-provincial arrivals,
fostering above-average population growth and service sector expansion.

Potash production is expected to climb close to its 2007 peak of 11 million
tonnes in 2011, after suffering a dramatic 60-per-cent drop during the recession
of 2009. Farmers' inventories of potash are now quite low, necessitating an
increase in purchases in order to sustain crop conditions this year.

Potash producers have kept pace but now find their inventory levels are
dropping, which is supporting prices.

The long-term demand outlook remains positive, particularly from abroad, and a
flurry of investment will see production nearly double by 2015.

Saskatchewan's post-2000 economic turnaround has seen real GDP per capita jump
nearly 15 per cent.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2011 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              581 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Norwalk Reflector, Ohio

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 2, 2014 Thursday

Great American Milk Drive

BYLINE: Aaron Krause, Norwalk Reflector, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 675 words


Oct. 02--For children, Montvilas said 1 percent milk is recommended after age 2
(whole milk from age 1 to 2). The United States Department of Agriculture is
mandating this in schools so they can serve 1 percent and fat free milk only,
but are allowed to use flavored milks (chocolate, strawberry, etc) as youngsters
these days aren't drinking as much milk as in years past. The influx of readily
available soft drinks, sports drinks and energy drinks is replacing milk as a
common beverage for school-aged children. SOURCE: Michelle Montvilas, RD, LD,
Clinical Dietitian at Fisher-Titus Medical Center

When people think about feeding the hungry, canned foods and other such
edibleready fare come to mind.

But the following question might not have popped into their head: Got milk?

There's a good chance the answer is no.

The Great American Milk Drive wants to remind the public about the importance of
donating milk.

Since April, Feeding America has partnered with the nation's milk companies and
dairy farmers to create The Great American Milk Drive.

"The Great American Milk Drive makes an impact by providing nutrient-rich milk
to America's food banks," reads a press release from Feeding America, described
on its website as a nationwide network of food banks and the nation's leading
domestic hunger-relief charity.

Since April, Feeding America has partnered with the nation's milk companies and
dairy farmers to create The Great American Milk Drive.

Milk is a necessary beverage for people of all ages, said Michelle Montvilas, a
clinical dietitian at Fisher-Titus Medical Center.

"Milk remains the No. 1 food source of Calcium, vitamin D and potassium, plus it
provides eight grams of high quality protein," she said. "Just three 8-ounce
glasses of low-fat or fat-free milk a day can meet most people's daily calcium
and threequarters (of) their vitamin D requirements.

"Not only is it important to building strong bones, but milk is the perfect
postworkout drink because it provides carbohydrates, protein, sodium, potassium
and fluids to replace what is lost during exercise or sporting events.

"You can never outgrow your need for milk. It is a life-long food and as we age
our need for calcium and vitamin D do(es) not go down, in fact, it increases
after age 70."

Milk is in high demand among the less fortunate.

"Nutrient-rich milk remains one of the most requested and least available items
at our food banks," said Bob Aiken, CEO of Feeding America. "The Great American
Milk Drive is helping to change that, delivering thousands of gallons of milk to
families who would otherwise go without. The more Americans support the program
-- from California to Maine, the more milk we can deliver to families who need
it most."

Deb Ebinger, office manager of the Salvation Army's Norwalk Corps., said they
get shelf-ready milk from Second Harvest Food Bank for free.

"Milk is something we really don't have the funding for," she said, adding the
Norwalk corps. also lacks storage space.

But there are ways to donate milk so you ensure it gets in the right place and
is distributed to the people who need it.

Donate gallons of milk to those in your community by logging onto
www.milklife.com/give or text message (text "Milk" to 27722).

"By entering your zip code, you can ensure that the milk is delivered to a local
Feeding America food bank in your community," the press release reads.

Retailers, including more than 2,000 Kroger Stores, will feature The Great
American Milk Drive at the check-out counter.

As an official effort of Feeding America, the color of Hunger Action Month is
"Feeding America orange." Turn your social media profile orange and share a
picture of your orange style with FeedingAmerica using the hashtag
#HungerAction. Check out the milk social channels, www.facebook.com/milk and
@MilkLife on Twitter, for additional information and Great American Milk Drive
success stories.

___ (c)2014 the Norwalk Reflector (Norwalk, Ohio) Visit the Norwalk Reflector
(Norwalk, Ohio) at www.norwalkreflector.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20141002-1NW-Great-American-Milk-Drive-1002-20141002

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1NW


                     Copyright 2014 Norwalk Reflector, Ohio


                              582 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                             January 5, 2015 Monday

Beirut tightens visa restrictions over Syrian influx

BYLINE: Michael Jansen

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 489 words


Beirut is today set to impose visa restrictions on Syrians for the first time
since independence in 1943 as the influx of refugees from Syria's brutal
conflict has reached 25 per cent of the Lebanese population of four million.

In Lebanon there are 1.15 million Syrian refugees registered with the United
Nations and 12,500 awaiting registration, making their presence the greatest
refugee concentration worldwide.

Additionally there are an estimated 500,000 Syrians who are long-term residents
or migrant construction and agricultural labourers not classified as refugees.
Their presence raises the percentage of Syrians to 35 per cent.

New regulations define categories of visas, including business, tourism,
education, medical treatment and transit via Beirut airport. Tourist visas
require a valid passport or identity document, a confirmed hotel reservation and
$1,000.

Visas are also available for Syrians who own property in Lebanon or who are
seeking to enter to apply for visas at foreign embassies in Beirut. Visas are to
be granted at the main Masnaa border crossing between Syria and Lebanon.

Syrians legally resident in Lebanon or registered with the UN will not be
required to apply for visas until their residency permits expire.

Humanitarian reasons Last spring Lebanon began to limit the number of Syrians
granted entry for "humanitarian" reasons. This has cut daily Syrian crossings
into Lebanon from 1,000-1,500 at the peak of the exodus to a trickle.

UN High Commission for Refugees spokesman Ron Redmond said there had been a 50
per cent drop in the number of Syrian refugees registering in Lebanon since last
summer, when the number of entries was already severely reduced.

Social affairs minister Rashid Derbas was quoted in Beirut's al-Akhbar newspaper
as saying: "The goal is to bring the security and economic situation under
control and to monitor the presence of Syrians on Lebanese soil."

The flood of refugees has put massive strain on the country's slender resources
and deteriorating infrastructure, and created serious security problems due to
violent spillover from the nearly four-year- old Syrian civil war.

Lebanon's eastern border with Syria has seen continuous clashes between
insurgents and the Lebanese army, police, Hizbullah fighters who are allied with
Damascus, and Syrian troops.

On Saturday four Hizbullah guerrillas and five Syrian soldiers were killed in
clashes with militants from al-Qaeda's official Syrian affiliate Jabhat
al-Nusra.

As Damascus has increased pressure on Islamic State fighters based in the
Qalamoun mountains on the border they have been trying to capture Lebanese
villages as alternative bases.

In August the two groups attacked the  town of Arsal and took 29 Lebanese
soldiers and police hostage. Amman has also limited the number of Syrians taking
refuge in Jordanand has decreed the country's overburdened health facilities and
schools will no longer accept Syrians..

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              583 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 August 7, 2000, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. D18

LENGTH: 1426 words



Keep marriage out of setting tax rates

Most of us will face a portion of our life as singles, in our early adulthood
and later as widows or widowers. Having been widowed in 1999, my taxes are
taking a big jump in 2000 just because of this change in marital status.

As any widow can attest, this becomes a very expensive year because of the
expense in transferring assets from one spouse to the other. Most of these
expenses are not deductible, though made necessary by law. It shouldn't cost
this much or be so difficult to transfer assets from one spouse to another. Even
worse is the frustration of dealing with transfer agents who lose paperwork and
can't follow instructions. Thank goodness, the Social Security personnel were
very professional and in two weeks the money was in my bank account. The cost of
transferring assets and the increase in my income taxes are what I call the
widow's penalty.

I have long advocated that we should stop taxing people on the basis of marital
status. The only fair and simple way is to tax people as individuals with the
same rate structure applying to all. In my 20 years of tax preparation for
individuals, I have witnessed one case after another of unfairness in taxation
due to filing according to marital status. If Congress really wants to make the
tax code fair and simple it would tax us as individuals. Then there would be no
marriage penalty or widow's penalty.

Joyce M. Guard

Manchester

Paying for a party

On the news the other night, a very disturbing segment was aired about the
Republican Convention. According to the story, special interests, corporations
and wealthy Americans donated a million dollars or more so our members of
Congress could party. Now I'm all for fun but this is quite upsetting for two
reasons.

First, one of the congressmen lobbied for the money for this. Second, and this
is worse, Congress passed an exemption to the rules applying to gifts from the
these sources.

These members of Congress found time to spend on this exemption while major
issues important to everyday life go unresolved. Wouldn't this time have been
better spent on such things as health care, the elderly, the homeless, Social
Security or countless other issues confronting this country?

What's even sadder is that if a constituent has a comment, question or idea, the
only response he or she receives is an e-mail form letter. I recently sent Rep.
Dick Gephardt some concerns on how our elderly citizens who are forced to go on
Medicaid are housed and treated and was totally ignored.

Lawrence R. Janz

Festus

Protests don't work

It has been proven time and time again that violent protests do not work.  If
the protesters in Philadelphia believe in freedom of speech and due process,
doesn't that work for the Republican Convention also? People, get involved in
politics, don't rebel against it!

Gary P. Axelrod

Chesterfield

For the living wage

We'd like to clear up a misconception abut the Living Wage initiative that
voters will decide on Aug. 8. As chair of the Living Wage Campaign, I assure you
that the Living Wage initiative does not intend to cover nonprofits, which we
recognize have unique budgetary constraints.

This ordinance is targeted to those for-profit companies that benefit from our
tax dollars in the form of large grants of economic development assistance and
service contracts. Those big companies would be required to pay their employees
a living wage of $ 8.84 an hour, plus health benefits.

On Aug. 8, vote "Yes" to pass this crucial ordinance that will deliver a
much-needed raise to St. Louis workers struggling to support their families on
low wages. These are the folks who keep our city running -- cleaning bathrooms
at the airport, sweeping floors and providing security in our public buildings
and cleaning our hotel rooms. They deserve a living wage.

Mary Jones

St. Louis

Another gun accident

A 12-year-old boy recently died after accidentally being shot in the head by a
14-year-old friend with a gun owned by the dead boy's mother.

The 14-year-old found the gun, a loaded .22-caliber revolver, in an unlocked
metal cabinet under the mother's bed. He started playing with it, the gun went
off and a bullet struck the 12-year-old in the head, killing him.

When will they ever learn? The mother was careless in leaving a loaded gun in an
unlocked metal cabinet. This is a repetition of so many similar cases with only
the location changed.

The grief suffered by the mother from the loss of her son and from her failure
to properly secure the weapon, along with the friend who fired the shot, will be
so much more punishment than any judge could mete out.

It comes down to strict enforcement of gun locks and education. It's past time
to make sure that gun locks work and that each gun has one. To do otherwise is a
cop-out. I don't advocate disarming the public but taking positive steps to
protect children from the carelessness of family members or others. It goes
without saying that responsible gun owners must start using common sense in the
care of their weapons.

Vic Doder

Rock Hill

Tax or influx?

In the Aug. 2 article, "Bush advisers explain plan to let workers invest Social
Security taxes," it is stated that Rep. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, and former member
of the Bush administration, told the delegation that Democrats were to blame for
ignoring the demographic problems caused by the aging of the baby boomers. "All
they have done is raise the taxes," he said. Later he told a group of reporters
that Bush's plan may need some "general revenue influx," during a "transition
period."

During the Reagan-Bush administration, an income tax was imposed on a percentage
of Social Security benefits for a certain group of taxpayers. I am one of those
taxpayers. At the time, I thought, "I can't believe President Reagan has raised
my income taxes; he always says that it is something Democrats do." Borrowing a
line from Rep. Portman, I should have thought, "Well I guess President Reagan
needs some general revenue influx." Sounds much better than "raise the taxes."

John A. Morrison

Creve Coeur

Still against Clinton

Bill Clinton will soon be history, but the Republican nominees are running
against him as if he were electable again or might somehow be able to control
the next Democratic administration. There are many names for this technique. One
of them is battling windmills.

Norma Claywell

Hazelwood

Vouchers for the rich

It's truly sad that vouchers are being packaged as part of an education platform
when they are really just a tax break for the rich. Not only does the upper
class willingly send their kids to private schools, but now they want to get
paid for doing so! Do the lower classes really believe they will gain access to
the same private schools as the upper class? (Do they think they'd pass an
entrance exam culturally designed to keep them out?) Lower-class private schools
would be separate from -- but not equal to -- upper-class schools and would
eventually be under-funded out of existence. If the rich feel they are currently
subsidizing the public school system, then perhaps we'd better strike "noblesse
oblige" from the English language.

Joe Krozel

Creve Coeur

Farmers for Bush

Twenty-four percent of the people in Illinois are employed in agriculture or an
agriculture-related field. Voters should keep agriculture in mind when casting
votes for the 2000 presidential election.

George W. Bush will protect the agricultural interests of Illinois. Ethanol is
an environmentally sound bio-fuel that could help keep Illinois farmers in
business. Bush sees a double win in ethanol use: a reliable market for farmers
and cleaner air for everyone. Bush supports tax ince ntives for use of ethanol.

Bush's stances on other issues will also be beneficial to Illinois
agriculturists. He would work aggressively to open markets for U.S. products and
producers. He calls upon the European Union to accept findings of the World
Trade Organization and allow importation of genetically modified farm products.
Bush has called for emergency disaster relief, both through direct payments to
farmers and through reforming crop insurance. In November, we need to vote for
Illinois agriculture. The candidate who will best support Illinois agriculture
is George W. Bush.

Carol Keiser

Illinois Farmers for George W. Bush

Carlinville

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                              584 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Early Times (India)

                              May 26, 2013 Sunday

Mir vows youth to participate in development process of State

LENGTH: 418 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, May 26 -- Describing that youth are the strength of the Nation,
Minister for Agriculture Mr. Ghulam Hassan Mir called upon the youth for their
participating in the development process and contribution in socio-economic
development of the country and the state as well. The Minister was addressing a
public gathering at Mamoosa of Pattan area today.

Reiterating the programmes specified for the welfare of the youth, the Minister
said the government has launched various Schemes for their welfare, adding that
they have to come forward and avail the benefits of these schemes. He urged upon
the youth for establishing their own income generating units, adding that they
have to become employment providers, not employment seekers.

Stressing the need for actively participation of youth in election process, Mr.
Mir said that electoral process is meant for the development of the State and
area. He said the youth of the State have enormous potential and the needs is to
mobilize it better way and use for peace and development of the State. The
Minister announced Rs. 30 lakh for repair and upgradation of Lolpora-Mamoosa
road. He said that the upgradation of existing Lolpora-Mamoosa road would
strengthen the road connectivity and boost economic activities in the area as
well.

The Minister said one Agriculture Officer would be retained for three Panchayat
Halqa. He said that this initiative would help in boosting the agriculture
production and improve the financial health of the farmers. He urged upon the
farming community for availing the benefits of farmer friendly schemes launched
by the Agriculture and other allied Departments.

The Minister also invited business tycoons from country and abroad for investing
in the State, adding that this would redress the problems of unemployment and
also open new vistas for the youth for working outside the State.

Referring to the influx of tourists in the State particularly in Valley, Mr. Mir
said that record numbers of tourists are visiting the state. He sought tourists'
cooperation in maintaining the hygienic environ in the State in general and
particularly at tourist destinations. Among others, Chief Engineer, R& B Mr.
Mushtaq Ahmad, Chief Agriculture Officer, Baramulla and other district officers
of line departments were present on the occasion. Published by HT Syndication
with permission from Early Times. For any query with respect to this article or
any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 Early Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              585 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                           November 22, 2004, Monday

Israel abuzz as locusts swarm in

BYLINE: Ian MacKinnon In Jerusalem

SECTION: Overseas news; 35

LENGTH: 321 words


A PLAGUE of locusts has swarmed into Israel across the border from Egypt,
threatening to devastate fields of crops in the country's agricultural
heartland.

Five crop-dusting aircraft and a helicopter are spraying the clouds of insects
that have settled around the southern Red Sea city of Eilat and devoured
everything in their path. An emergency "war room" has been set up by the Israeli
Agriculture Ministry to track the locusts and to exterminate them before they
fly further north, where -unlike in the south, where crops are kept in
greenhouses - fields of ripening tomatoes, water melons, potatoes and onions lie
exposed.

A hotline between the agriculture ministries of Egypt, Israel and Jordan has
been set up so that they can co-ordinate their actions against the worst swarms
of locusts in 50 years.

The swarms of red insects first crossed into Israel from the Egyptian Sinai
desert last Friday, settling on any vegetation they found. The clouds were so
dense that they filled the skies. Eilat residents rushed to take pictures before
the locusts continued northward.

"I was driving when suddenly swarms of locusts surrounded me -I couldn't see the
road," Robert Fisher, who lives in the Negev town of Azuz, said: "It was an
extraordinary spectacle."

More swarms are expected to cross the border from Egypt and the Israeli Air
Force is monitoring the locusts' arrival. Yisrael Katz, the Agriculture
Minister, ordered all possible action to halt the swarms' progress.

Yet it is not bad news for everyone. Some see the influx as a way of spicing up
their cuisine, with crunchy deep-fried locusts.

* PLAGUES

Ten biblical plagues were visited upon Egypt to force the Pharaoh to free Moses
and the Israelites. They were: locusts, frogs, lice, flies, boils, killer
hailstones, darkness, the Nile turning to blood, the death of livestock, and the
death of first-born children and animals


LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2004 Times Newspapers Limited


                              586 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          Business Day (South Africa)

                           September 28, 2012 Friday
                                Surveys Edition

Urban agriculture punted as solution

BYLINE: Neels Blom

SECTION: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE

LENGTH: 308  words


Urban agriculture punted as solution

HOUSEHOLD food insecurity is usually associated with rural poverty and not with
urban areas, partly owing to the perception that people living in cities have
greater access to food. But this assumption skews the true picture, the Africa
Institute of SA says in a 2011 policy brief.

Migration to urban areas is a global trend and SA, too, is experiencing large
numbers of people migrating to the cities. In SA, it is especially inner city
districts that have seen an unprecedented influx of people seeking better
employment and education opportunities. It is now estimated that about

62% of South Africans live in urban areas.

The picture is further skewed by the fact that many rural migrants do not live
in the country's cities, but live in sprawling informal settlements in
peri-urban areas near cities and on the periphery of smaller rural towns. These
areas may be strictly classified as rural, but for the purposes of food
security, the inhabitants of informal settlements should also be regarded as
urbanised.

The main reason is that where rural people, such as those living in SA's former
homeland areas, are, theoretically at least, in the position to undertake some
degree of subsistence agriculture production, this is not the case for urban
dwellers, which means they are in most instances dependent on an income to
achieve household food security.

The institute recommends the development of urban agriculture, though it says it
is unlikely to be of much greater value than poverty alleviation. It also notes
some difficulties in its implementation, such as the absence of policy, access
to land with secure tenure, urban zoning and sufficient water. Adjustment to
policy and intergovernmental co-operation can solve these problems, it says.

SELF HELP: People in informal settlements could grow their own food.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2012 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              587 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                                  May 24, 2002

Supporters warned on foot and mouth disease

BYLINE: By SEAN MAC CONNELL, Agriculture Correspondent

SECTION: CITY EDITION; HOME NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 317 words


A total of 6,000 leaflets advising Irish soccer fans travelling to the World Cup
of the potential dangers of bringing home foot and mouth disease, have been
issued to the FAI and Irish travel agents.

The leaflets have been prepared by the Department of Agriculture Food and Rural
Development against the background of 12 outbreaks of the disease in South
Korea.

Officials there have slaughtered 110,000 animals to try and contain the outbreak
which to date has involved 12 confirmed cases since May 4th.

The Minister, Mr Walsh, said that the outbreak and spread of the disease in
Korea was of concern in the context of the forthcoming World Cup competition,
which will see an enormous influx of visitors to the region, with the
competition being jointly hosted by Korea and Japan.

"I note recent statements by the Korean authorities to the effect that they
believe they have contained the outbreak," the Minister said.

"I very much hope that this is so but these are still early days and it remains
the case that the situation there constitutes a potential risk. For so long as
there remains any risk of carrying the FMD virus from Korea to this country, we
must exercise the greatest care to ensure that this does not happen."

He said that in the event of Irish fans travelling to Korea should the Irish
team progress, he had asked the Department to prepare advice leaflets on FMD.

This had now been done and 6,000 such leaflets have been distributed to the
Football Association of Ireland, to be passed on to travel agents and travelling
fans.

"I want to ask each and every fan travelling from Ireland to the World Cup to
read these short leaflets and to follow the advice given. If they do so, they
will be supporting not only the team but the country and doing a great deal to
ensure that the FMD virus is not unknowingly brought back to this country," Mr
Walsh said.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 2002 The Irish Times


                              588 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                Hull Daily Mail

                                August 13, 1998

Farmland prices hold firm

SECTION: Agriculture: Farms, Pg.5

LENGTH: 171 words


THE market for farmland in East Yorkshire is holding steady in spite of the
dismal outlook for agriculture.

Land prices continue to average GBP 3,047 an acre, according to the Royal
Institute of Chartered Accountants.

Prices in the the farmland market survey for the three months ending in June
where nearly four per cent higher in the same period in 1997.

But the forecast for the next six months is more chilling with predicted price
falls in all categories of farmland - except residential farms.

"Our survey reveals a market which is finely balanced," said RICS rural property
spokesman Anthony Mayell.

"Buyers for residential farms, which is a farmhouse with few acres, continue to
be potent force.

"By contrast the market for commercial farms is extremely price -sensitive.
Buyers are few and far between and a sudden influx of farms on the market could
send prices plunging."

Mr Mayell said there had been much speculation that the polarising market could
sound the death knell for the small family farm.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

                         Copyright 1998 Hull Daily Mail


                              589 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                        December 28, 1995, CITY EDITION

KERRY

SECTION: SUPPLEMENT PAGE 6; Pg. Supplement Page 13

LENGTH: 400 words


THE Kingdom owes much of its wealth to the constant influx of tourists, both
domestic and international, each year.  The tourist industry is worth Pounds
160-Pounds 180 million per annum to the county and 20 per cent of projects so
far approved by the Kerry County Enterprise Board are tourism-based, with over
Pounds 360,000 in grants earmarked so far for the sector.

The board has identified gaps in the area of tourist accommodation, particularly
in the refurbishment of existing old dwellings. A novitiate in Oakpark, Tralee,
formerly a base for the Department of Agriculture, has been converted into a
73-bed hostel by a company called Brecre Leisure Ltd.  Such projects have to be
completed within a Pounds 100,000 budget ceiling.

In a similar vein, the upgrading of caravan sites to four-star status has been
identified as a significant means of developing the tourist accommodation area.
Grant investment of up to 25 per cent is available for upgrading in this sector.

The board is also assisting the development of support services for hill-walking
and climbing along the Kerry Way, including drying huts for clothes and
equipment. A number of pitch and putt courses have also been built in
strategically-sited areas. Funding has also been extended to an equestrian
centre in Listowel.

"The services sector is the biggest growth area there is," says Mr Eamon
O'Mahony, chief executive officer of the Kerry County Enterprise Board.  "That's
generally accredited by government by now." Over Pounds 300,000 had been
approved for service sector grants by the start of this year, and Pounds 1.1
million in total had been approved by the board. It is expected that the
projects involved could yield up to 252 full-time and 92 part-time jobs, in
addition to a further 74 seasonal positions.

The crafts sector continues to grow, including silverwork and handweaving.
Specialist niches in the Irish furniture market have also been identified. As
O'Mahony points out, Kerry has not had a great tradition in furniture making and
the board is hoping to develop the construction of free-standing furniture.

Finally, small food production and organic farming are likely to be growth areas
and grants have already been paid in deer farming, as well as the promotion of
Kerry food products. As Eamon O'Mahony puts it: "Our clean and green image is
one we want to capitalise on."

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1995 The Irish Times


                              590 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                            The Daily Star (Lebanon)

                            September 9, 2016 Friday

Syrians take comfort in familiar foods ... and share with Lebanon

BYLINE: Victoria Yan

LENGTH: 688 words


"I'm from Aleppo, it's a city filled with culture," explained Syrian chef
Mohammad Tadfi from his new Baabdat kitchen, surrounded by the ingredients that
remind him of his homeland.

BEIRUT: "I'm from Aleppo, it's a city filled with culture," explained Syrian
chef Mohammad Tadfi from his new Baabdat kitchen, surrounded by the ingredients
that remind him of his homeland. "You had everything, there was a large
agricultural industry, service, production, everything. That's why Halabi
[Aleppine] cuisine has such flair," Tadfi beamed. Displaced by the ongoing war
in Syria, Tadfi fled Aleppo three years ago to find refuge in Lebanon.

Today, nestled in the mountains, he takes comfort in the kitchen of Qortoba,
where he cooks the food of his country.

Like many Syrian chefs in Lebanon, Tadfi has continued his trade while in exile,
and in the process has helped catalyze cultural diffusion through food.

"Actually, the clientele here is pretty diverse. There are many Syrians, of
course, but quite a lot of Lebanese and tourists come as well," explained Joseph
Aoun, the owner of Qortoba restaurant, which opened in 2015 and remains the only
Syrian eatery in the area.

The growing popularity of the famous Halabi cuisine throughout Beirut makes it
clear that Syrians are not the only ones enjoying a taste of Lebanon's neighbor.

Despite strained relations with both Syria and the Syrian refugee population
sheltering in the country, Lebanese too have flocked to Halabi restaurants to
savor specialties like toshka (stuffed flatbread) and the famous sticky cherry
kebabs.

"In Beirut, there are foreign cuisines, but they were never from the region. I
enjoy eating Syrian food, because it's familiar [but] with a twist," remarked
Joseph Kiwan, a frequent diner at Qortoba who was enjoying a meal Wednesday.

Now, popular restaurants such as Bab Sharki and Beit Halab have sprung up around
Beirut, bringing Syrian food to the streets of the Lebanese capital and beyond.

For many Lebanese restaurants, the influx of Syrian food hasn't worried them.
"There are no Syrian restaurants on my street, so I don't think too much about
it," said Patrick Achkar of Lebanese restaurant Enab in Mar Mikhael.

However, the opportunity presented by the million-plus refugees and numerous
other nationals from the country now living in Lebanon has offered up options
for restaurants.

"Of course, the influx of Syrians influenced my decision to open Qortoba, but
there are also a lot of Syrian families in Broummana that came before the war.
Many have had summer houses here for a while," Aoun told The Daily Star.

Yet for Tadfi and many displaced Syrians in the country, adapting to life in
Lebanon has been far from easy.

"Being Syrian in Lebanon is a social problem of its own. It's complicated and
difficult here," the chef explained wearily.

"Then there's the life I built for myself [in Aleppo], taking my children to
school, going to the market with my wife. ... That [was] my life, and coming
here I lost it all."

In Aleppo, Tadfi worked for a number of different eateries, including Sissi
House - one of the most famous restaurants in Aleppo that was often frequented
by Syrian President Bashar Assad before the 5-year-old civil war erupted.

The chef's pride in the quality of his cooking is clear.

"I use the same techniques that I do in Aleppo. When the suppliers come, I go
through as many products as I can to find the ones most similar to what I used
in Syria," he explained.

"I'll wait until I find the perfect olive oil; it's important to me that my food
is authentic," the chef adds.

Working as a cook in Lebanon not only offered Tadfi an economic opportunity, but
also a visceral way of remaining attached to his home. Cooking Halabi dishes and
being surrounded by familiar ingredients and a Syrian staff keep Tadfi and his
coworkers connected to the land they have left.

"When I work in Lebanon, I always think about my life there [in Aleppo]. The one
thing that makes me feel better is the family I have created here, in this
restaurant. We are all Syrians, we work together, we live together. We
understand. It makes me feel less homesick," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 23


             Copyright 2016 The Daily Star - The Daily Star FZ LLC.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              591 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                            i-Independent Print Ltd

                                 April 25, 2014
                                 First Edition

DNA reveals how hunter-gatherers fell for their farmer rivals;
Study shows the coming together of prehistoric tribes. By Steve Connor

BYLINE: Steve Connor

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 739 words


It was the biggest cultural shift in European prehistory. But the Stone Age
transition from a lifestyle based on hunting animals and gathering wild berries
to one built on farming and livestock was largely a mystery - until now.

A detailed analysis of the DNA extracted from the bones of 11 prehistoric
Scandinavians, who lived thousands of years ago around the Baltic Sea, has shown
that the transition from hunting to farming was more of a one-way takeover than
previously supposed.

The genetic makeup of the people who lived through this cultural revolution has
revealed that the incoming migrant farmers from southern Europe subsumed the
indigenous hunter gatherers of the north, rather than the other way round,
scientists said.

For years, archaeologists and anthropologists have argued over the events that
led to the replacement of Europe's long prehistoric tradition of
hunter-gathering, lasting tens of thousands of years, by the relatively new
practice of farming, which first appeared in the middle-east about 10,000 years
ago and gradually spread west and north across the entire continent.

One suggestion was that the incoming farmers simply pushed the indigenous
hunters further to the fringes, while another proposition was that it was the
technology and ideas of farming, rather than the people, that gradually replaced
the older practice of hunting and gathering.

However, the DNA from the 11 Stone Age skeletons dating from between about 5,000
and 7,000 years ago has revealed that the hunter gatherers actually became part
of the incoming community of farmers, who were genetically distinct from the
people whose lands they eventually occupied.

The study, published in the journal Science, also shows that there was no
apparent influx of genes from the farmers into the gene pool of the
hunter-gatherers. In other words, it was the huntergatherers who joined the
immigrant farming families, and not the other way round, said Professor Mattias
Jakobsson of Uppsala University in Sweden, who led the study.

"We know that there was a mixture and we know it was happening about 5,000 years
ago in this part of northern Europe. But the mixture was not symmetrical - it
was the hunter-gatherers who were assimilated into the agricultural people and
not the other way round," Professor Jakobsson said.

"The asymmetric gene-flow shows that the farming groups assimilated
hunter-gatherer groups, at least partly. When we compared Scandinavian to
central European farming groups that lived about the same time, we see greater
levels of hunter-gatherer gene-flow into the Scandinavian farming groups," he
said.

The DNA analysis of seven hunter-gatherer skeletons and four Stone Age farmers -
who lived alongside one other at about the same time but in separate communities
- immediately showed a genetic difference between the two cultures, Professor
Jakobsson said.

"Stone-Age hunter-gatherers had much lower genetic diversity than farmers. This
suggests that Stone-Age foraging groups were in low numbers compared to
farmers," he said.

"The practice of hunting and gathering was probably more vulnerable to food
shortages which would have led to population crashes that caused a loss of DNA
diversity in hunter-gatherers," he added.

Farming allows people to store grain in times of plenty which would have helped
to keep the farming population high, and so maintaining genetic diversity. But
it is clear from the DNA analysis that agricultural technology came in with an
influx of genetically distinct people, rather than it being an idea passed on
and taken up by bands of hunter-gatherers.

"The study shows that information spreads well when people are moving and it's
not just about the spread of ideas through communication. The change to
agriculture did not happen overnight but over many generations," Professor
Jakobsson explained.

The study was not able to show whether the gene flow into the immigrant
communities of farmers was the result of indigenous women or men mating with
farmers - or people of both sexes. However, there was a clear, asymmetric flow
from hunters to farmers, and not the reverse, said Pontus Skoglund of Harvard
University, who was part of the team.

"We see clear evidence that people from hunter-gatherer groups were incorporated
into farming groups as they expanded across Europe. This might be clues towards
something that happens also when agriculture spread to other parts of the
world," Dr Skoglund said.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: III


                    Copyright 2014 Independent Print Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              592 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Stratford Gazette

                             July 6, 2011 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Producers featured in Ontario cookbook

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 211  words


<span style="font-family: arial; font-size: 16px;">International award-winning
author and culinary activist Lynn Ogryzlo visited the Perth County Slow Food
Sunday Market in Stratford's Market Square last month to unveil her latest
cookbook, The Ontario Table.

The book features several Perth County producers including Soiled Reputation,
Caveman Crops, August's Harvest, Perth Pork Producers, Monforte Dairy and Anne
Slater's Fresh Organic Vegetables.

The book introduces consumers to local growers, culinary regions, and recipes
that use local produce.

Ogryzlo's passion for local food has moved her to issue "The Ontario Table $10
Challenge": If every household in Ontario spends $10 of its weekly grocery
budget on local food, there would be a $2.4 billion influx into the province's
economy each year.

"We all know that good things grow in Ontario," says Carol Mitchell, Minister of
Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs. "As a passionate advocate for local food,
Lynn Ogryzlo takes the time to teach readers how food gets from the farm to
their plate. Her book, The Ontario Table, is a great way to learn about
Ontario's farmers and local food."

The Ontario Table is available for purchase at the Stratford Tourism Alliance
and at select food shops throughout Ontario.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2011 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              593 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                 The Mountaineer (Waynesville, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             January 5, 2007 Friday

EDITORIAL: Money's influx brings numerous challenges for old-timers

BYLINE: The Mountaineer, Waynesville, N.C.

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 979 words


Jan. 5--I've never considered myself prejudiced when it comes to income or
social class, but lately that sense of class prejudice is growing. The prejudice
rises in me for the same reason it does for many people -- I'm feeling
threatened.

Threatened, that is, by the kind of development -- and the kind of money fueling
that development -- in Haywood County.

The Mountaineer just published a story on Persimmon Condominiums, a new complex
under construction as part of the Maggie Valley Country Club, where units sell
for $300,000 to $500,000. It's only the latest in an influx of money for this
county, where million-dollar homes are becoming almost commonplace, where real
estate agents and development reps are sending out mass mailings to communities
asking for land to broker or buy.

Now, I have no problem with rich people. Hope to be one myself, some day. I've
always believed this is a land of opportunity and that one should not envy those
who have wealth. Additionally I recognize that this kind of development infuses
money into the economy, particularly for those in the grading and construction
industry.

There are other effects, however, and those effects are what scare me, what
causes that rise of prejudice, that "us versus them" mentality.

The largest effect has to do with land prices and what it does to the
middle-class. To understand this effect, those who move in from elsewhere must
also understand the intense ties many mountain people hold to the land. For many
of us, land is more than a commodity, an item to be traded for profit. The land
here is a part of us; we have heard stories of ancestors who embraced these
hills and hollows and learned to survive therein when many people skirted these
rugged regions for softer climes. We love the play of light and shadows on the
slopes, the exquisite outline of winter trees silhouetted against a ridgeline.
It hurts us to see these places cut up, homesites chiseled into the
mountainsides like so many toys on a child's chessboard. It scares us to see the
mountains changed in ways that cannot be undone.

But on a more practical side, we also know that the prices being paid for this
land by the wealthy mean our children may never get to own their own piece of
these beloved mountains, that they'll have to look elsewhere for an affordable
place to put a modest home. Also on the practical side, we see that these prices
will place great hardship on middle- and lower-income homeowners who have to pay
property taxes on values set by these major real estate deals and investments.

North Carolina law dictates that the counties set property values by the market.
In other words, the value placed on your land, and to some extent, your home,
will be based largely on what land around you has sold for. As developers pay
mega bucks for property, the retiree on fixed income who has lived in the same
house with three or four acres of land around him may suddenly find his tax
burden impossible to bear.

It's a good thing to have high property values, some of these developers will
say. It means you are worth a lot of money. Oh, but that's only true if you want
to sell that land. And many people here don't want to sell. They simply want to
treasure the land and the modest homes that they have.

Farmers also have to deal with these escalating land values. Farmers with
10-acre or larger tracts can have their property listed as being used for
agriculture, and pay property taxes based on farm value rather than market
value, so they have some relief from the property tax pressure. But farmland in
this county is declining rapidly -- farmers still want to buy land here but find
it practically impossible to do so. With a few exceptions, they cannot pay
nearly what a developer would pay for the same piece of property. It's a safe
bet to state that the amount of farm land in Haywood County will never again be
greater than what it is right now, that every farm lost is lost forever. So this
influx of money will end up changing the very look of the community, potentially
costing us the beauty and heritage that helped draw developers here in the first
place.

How do we deal with this? We cannot keep the investors out of Haywood County,
nor would it be right to do so. But county commissioners have, in the past,
discussed the need to change the way property values are assessed for taxes, so
that middle- and low-income folks are not taxed out of their land. Such a change
would have to come from the state General Assembly, and it's time the county,
and other Western North Carolina leaders, start pressuring the state to do just
that. In addition, farmland conservation and preservation efforts are under way
in the region that need more support than they have received. To some, these
efforts seem like a naÃ¯ve dream, but at least these organizers have recognized
the problem and are trying their best to address it. Finally, the county could
lower the amount of land eligible for farm-use value from 10 to 5 acres, for
many producers are now working on tracts too small be to placed in agricultural
value.

This tension between new development and long-time landowners is one that will
intensify with time, and it's an issue that county commissioners should tackle
soon. The longer we wait, the greater the division will become between
old-timers and new money. Change is coming, and we can't stop it, but we can try
to preserve the best of Haywood County in the process.

Kathy M.N. Ross is a former news editor and reporter for The Mountaineer. She
can be reached at kathymross@bellsouth.net

Copyright (c) 2007, The Mountaineer, Waynesville, N.C. Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20070105-NC-0105-EDITORIAL-Money-s-influx
-brings-numerous-challenges-for-old-timers

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NC


                         Copyright 2007 The Mountaineer


                              594 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             March 26, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

FLORIDA'S VANISHING HEARTLAND

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 226 words


Many Florida farmers favor a specialty license plate bearing

the slogan: "Agriculture Keeps Florida Green."

But for how long?

Citrus and cattle defined Florida, shaped its politics and fueled the state's
economy for years. Now, agriculture is shrinking as economic pressures force
difficult decisions on people whose families have tended the state's pastures
and groves for generations.

At the same time, developers are offering record prices for rural tracts outside
Tampa, Orlando, Jacksonville and other population centers. The offers represent
financial security for many families.

Wilton Simpson, a Trilby farmer who grew up in Pasco County, wants to keep
farming but understands those who are cashing in on the population influx.

This new crop of transplants stands to change Florida in ways that even city
dwellers and suburbanites will feel. Rural advocates say it's time for the rest
of the state to pay attention.

DETAILS, Page 12

Photo credit: Tribune photo by ROBERT BURKE

Photo: The dairy cattle that graze along Balm-Riverview Road in southern
Hillsborough County have a subdivision full of new neighbors. The state's
population is squeezing out farmers' inland communities.

Photo credit: Tribune photo by CHRISTINE DELESSIO

Photo: Wilton Simpson

Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 2
Sunday March 26, 2006 Section NATION/WORLD Page 1 Country Star Ruled The '60s
Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2006 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune


                              595 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                   The Times

                            March 22, 1994, Tuesday

Shephard supports study of suicides

BYLINE: Michael Hornsby, Countryside Correspondent

SECTION: Features

LENGTH: 363 words


A RESEARCH project to find out why so many farmers commit suicide was launched
yesterday by the Department of Health.

Despite living in conditions many town-dwellers would find idyllic, farmers have
a suicide rate that is nearly twice the national average and are the people most
likely to take their own lives after vets, pharmacists and dentists.

Gillian Shephard, the agriculture minister, told a conference of farmers, church
leaders, doctors and social workers at the National Agricultural Centre at
Stoneleigh, Warwickshire: ''Over the past 20 years there has been a net influx
into the countryside of England and Wales of one million people.  Over the same
period more than 120,000 jobs have disappeared from agriculture as the industry
has become more efficient ... We cannot expect that changes of that kind can
take place without some stresses and strains on the people involved.''

The Duke of Westminster, one of Britain's biggest landowners, who chaired the
conference, said that isolation and loneliness were most often found among hill
farmers, who were also under the greatest financial pressure.

Dr Peter Jones, a senior lecturer at the Institute of Psychiatry at the
University of London, said that farmers accounted for only 1 per cent of all
suicides but, relative to their number, they were almost twice as likely to take
their lives as the general population.

Immigrants held at Pentonville prison for up to a year have slashed themselves
with razors in desperation at their plight, the Chief Inspector of Prisons
reports today.

Judge Tumim says that some of the 66 unconvicted detainees in the London jail
had cut their wrists or bodies because they were distraught at their treatment
and at the time taken to deal with their cases. He called for the Home Office's
immigration service to move the detainees out of the prison.

''We have grave reservations about the appropriateness of holding such inmates
in a busy local prison,'' he said. ''Our overriding view was that Pentonville
was an inappropriate place. It had neither the space nor the facilities to cope
with them properly and detainees resented the stigma of prison.''

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1994 Times Newspapers Limited


                              596 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                      July 14, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

Meat market shifts focus to Asian customers Milton company adapts to serve
latest waves of immigrants

BYLINE: BY BOB REGULY SPECIAL TO THE STAR

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 645 words


An influx of Asian immigrants into Canada has brought new prosperity to a
family-owned meat-processing business.

Town and Country Farms of Milton, a business founded by a Hungarian refugee
couple, processes about 1,000 pigs a week into 26 varieties of sausages and an
array of cuts for the Asian market.

Boasting it uses "everything but the squeal," the family operation prepares
products ranging from the big-seller pork butts to bags of blood and whole
heads.

"The Asians like the blood in jelled form to fry it into a noodle dish," said
Michael Dorgo, one of the three co-owners, with twin brother Leslie and
brother-in-law Mario Henry. "They also like the lungs, stomachs and intestines."

Dorgo said other ethnic groups have their preferences. "The Filipinos roast the
whole head while the Chinese like the ears and snouts. The Italian and
Portuguese still like liver, tongue and heart, but mainly sausages."

It was not easy getting those products on the market.

As Dorgo recalled, "We had to fight the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture and Food
to make those products legitimate."

Town and Country also sells suckling pigs for barbecuing, along with sheep and
goats to Latin American and Jamaican immigrants. But pigs are the mainstay.

Before focusing on the Asian market - mainly Chinese, along with the Vietnamese
and Filipinos - the family business was lucky to find buyers for 30 pigs a week.

Demand for their products today goes up to 5,000 hogs a week at Christmas,
Chinese New Year and the November Moon Cake Chinese holiday. The pigs are bought
from farmers in the Kitchener and Welland areas, and slaughtered in the
family-owned abbatoir.

The business had catered for 20 years to Italian, Portuguese and Hungarian
customers. As those older communities faded away, the three owners began
catering to the new waves of immigrants.

The market shift provided new opportunities for the business that Mihaly Dorgo
and Elizabeth Link founded. The couple met and married in Toronto in 1958 after
fleeing Hungary.

In the 1956 Hungarian revolution, soldiers shot Elizabeth's defiant father,
seized the family farm and took the cattle in the name of the restored Communist
regime.

The mother fled with her 16 children to a shelter. Six of the children later
escaped over the mountains to Austria and then Canada.

Elizabeth brought with her the family recipes for making sausages.

In Toronto, the Dorgo couple bought a house, took in boarders and opened a small
grocery.

They later acquired 110 acres near the Toronto airport to raise pigs, ducks and
geese, but sold the farm in 1974 to buy the meat-packing plant in Milton.

Their Town and Country Meats was one of the original vendors in the North St.
Lawrence Market and still operates there every Saturday in downtown Toronto.

The Dorgos' daughter Elizabeth Rosario also runs her own El Gaucho Chorizo
sausage stall in the north market. The matriarch, Elizabeth, died in 1985.

Mihaly, now retired, still keeps a proprietary eye on the business, which
generates total annual sales of under $ 10 million.

The abattoir part of the business alone generates about $ 4 million annually,
not including the sausage kitchen and the three retail outlets.

Mario Henry came into the business when he married another daughter, Anne Dorgo.
He's supervisor of the sausage operations.

The recently opened production and retail facility in Milton turns out a
stunning array of sausages, both fresh and smoked.

A computerized smokehouse burns maple, cherry and walnut wood to make German and
Hungarian-style sausages.

One farmer had his big-bird emus transformed into sausage.

Another customer, a hunter, liked ham kolbassa with moose meat in the middle.

"We use old-fashioned R and D - our taste buds," Michael Dorgo boasts.

"We're fourth-generation sausage makers."


LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Star Color Photo (JEFF GOODE): FINDING NICHES: Michael Dorgo, left, and
Mario Henry produce specialty meats for immigrant communities and harvest heart
valves for heart surgery.

                  Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              597 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                     August 12, 2003 Tuesday Final Edition

Border opening better late than never: bison producers: Same rules apply as to
beef but lost sales still costly

SOURCE: The Edmonton Journal

BYLINE: Allyson Jeffs

SECTION: Business; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 313 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON

EDMONTON - Relieved bison producers learned Monday the U.S. border will be open
to meat from their animals.

U.S. Department of Agriculture spokesman Ed Curlett said bison meat will be
subject to the same conditions affecting beef, meaning the border will open to
boneless cuts of meat from animals less than 30 months of age.

"It's wonderful," said Linda Sautner of the Alberta Bison Centre.

Bison are members of the bovine family, but some documents released by the USDA
on Friday referred to border openings for "bovine meat from cattle." That
created uncertainty for bison producers, who have suffered from border closures
imposed after a single Alberta cow tested positive for BSE (bovine spongiform
encephalopathy) or mad cow disease.

Casey Howard, of Rimbey-based Canadian Rangeland Bison, said the easing of
restrictions is good news, but his company is still losing about $1 million in
sales because of the closure.

The loss is heavy because the closure occurred during the peak May to August
period.

"We have lost the summer market for what we do in the United States," said
Howard, who estimates 80 per cent of his sales were to American customers prior
to the border closure. "We will still have some customers from September on, but
we won't get that big influx of orders again until next March."

He expects some product will begin heading south in September, once permit
requirements and other issues are sorted out.

Gorham Hussey of Calgary-based Canadian Frontier Foods says his U.S. sales are
about $750,000 in an average year. The border closure could cost him up to a
third of the volume he normally sends south to food distributors.

The Canadian Bison Association estimates there are about 200,000 animals and
18,000 producers nationally. Total bison exports for 2002 were valued at $7.1
million.

ajeffs@thejournal.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Colour Photo: The Associated Press, File; Bison got caught in
beef-export ban along with other ruminants.

TYPE: Business

               Copyright 2003 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              598 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                      South China Morning Post (Hong Kong)

                                 March 16, 1994

Province told to boost farming sector

BYLINE: By LINDA CHOY in Beijing

SECTION: News; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 345 words


THE decline in agriculture production in Guangdong has prompted a call for the
local Government to boost farming.

Chen Junsheng, State Councillor in charge of agriculture, said the province
should not rely too much on its neighbours - Jiangxi and Hunan provinces in
particular - for food supplies when the overall production of grain in the
country was dropping.

''Guangdong can rely on Jiangxi province for food but it will be difficult for
other provinces in the country to offer similar support,'' Mr Chen told a
meeting of Guangdong delegates to the NPC yesterday.

The country registered a 10 billion kilogram reduction in rice production last
year.

The southern provinces were responsible for 4.5 billion kilograms of this
shortfall.

Mr Chen said measures must be adopted to increase local food production.

He warned that agriculture should not be sacrificed for developments in the
industrial and commercial sector.

According to the senior Cabinet member, Guangdong has been relying on
neighbouring provinces for up to 30 per cent of its food consumption.

Citing the unsatisfactory grain production situation in the rich province, Mr
Chen said the province could only produce 1.5 million kilograms annually,
compared with the two million kilograms of consumption.


''The Government should introduce measures to stabilise the food supply and
prevent further decline,'' Mr Chen said.


''You cannot form too many economic development zones and cut down on arable
land.''

Mr Chen added the economic order in Guangdong had been worsened by the influx of
a 10 million migrant population, most of whom were job-seekers from other
provinces.

He said that while the development of village and township enterprises might
yield good economic returns, too much reliance on them would undermine social
stability.

''One should not only be concerned with economic returns when calculating the
cost-effectiveness of agricultural activities,'' Mr Chen warned.

''It is as important to take the social impact into account,'' he said.



LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                  Copyright 1994 South China Morning Post Ltd.


                              599 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                           January 29, 2005 Saturday

ISU economist addresses cattlemen's beefs; At Prairie du Chien event, Lawrence
says Canadian imports might not hurt U.S. prices as much as some people fear

BYLINE: JOHN EVERLY

SECTION: Tristate; Pg. a3

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: PRAIRIE DU CHIEN, Wis.


Uncertainty and opportunities await the cattle industry in 2005. That was the
assessment offered Friday at Tri-State Beef Day, an annual industry seminar in
Prairie Du Chien.

Unknown is how the market will react to the expected return of Canadian cattle
to the United States in March.

Iowa State University economist John Lawrence told cattlemen that Canadian
imports might not hurt prices here as much as some on this side of the border
fear.

"Short-term, no doubt, there's going to be some market disruption. Longer-term,
they have more packer capacity. They'll kill more of the animals there; there
will be less of an incentive to send them here," he said.

Cattle imports from Canada were banned following the discovery of a single mad
cow case in Alberta in May 2003.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture set March 7 as the date Canadian cattle
younger than 30 months of age will be readmitted to the U.S. for slaughter. The
department said Canada is fulfilling internationally recognized beef safety
standards.

That could change, though. A lawsuit filed by packer interests seeks to increase
Canadian cattle imports, while another lawsuit filed by a producers' group asks
a court to block imports. Congress, too, could get into the act. Legislation was
introduced to delay the re-entry of Canadian cattle.

Lawrence said beef cattle prices probably will not return to the record levels
seen in late 2003, when they topped $1 per pound. Agriculture department
projections say the Canadian influx will trim U.S. slaughter cattle prices by
about 27 cents per pound. Lawrence estimated prices could fall between 25 cents
and 40 cents.

While they brace for a run of Canadian cattle, beef producers here wonder when
Japan will reopen its borders to U.S. beef. The Japanese market was abruptly
closed when mad cow disease was found for the first time in the United States in
December 2003. Lawrence said negotiators reached an agreement to reopen Japan to
U.S. beef, but it could be months before shipments resume.

"The devil is in the details," he said.

On the positive side, Lawrence said domestic beef demand should remain strong.

"We're kind of assuming that the demand we enjoyed through 2003 and '04 holds,"
he said.  Lawrence's forecast calls for prices to stay higher than 80 cents per
pound for most of the year but possibly dipping to less than 80 cents during the
third quarter.

Still, profits are not guaranteed for cattle feeders, who have been racking up
losses since November.

"Feedlots are going to continue to lose money through the winter," Lawrence
said.

Cattle producers also wondered how a new national animal identification system
would affect them. The first phase of the system, registering all locations with
animals, is under way in Wisconsin and Illinois, and it is expected to begin
soon in Iowa. Wisconsin producers have until Nov. 1 to register their premises.

Leanne Ketterhagen, spokeswoman for the nonprofit Wisconsin Livestock
Identification Consortium, said the system will help improve animal disease
eradication and control.

Ketterhagen said many details of the proposed system have yet to be finalized,
such as what technology will be used to identify animals. The system, which will
be standardized across 50 states, will be phased in, she said.

"We're not just going to turn a switch and everyone's going to know what to do,
and we're going to have everything ready to go," she said.

Ketterhagen said premises registration is free, but producers likely will have
to shoulder some of the future costs for identifying individual animals.

On the other hand, Lawrence said the national ID system could provide marketing
opportunities for producers who already keep records on their livestock. Meat
packers who export beef may pay premiums on cattle from producers who can
document they followed prescribed management practices, he said. Lawrence said a
fully developed identification system may be able to provide that documentation.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Mug - John Lawrence

                  Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                              600 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                            November 26, 2010 Friday

Citizens fleeced, onions selling at double the price

BYLINE: Prashant Dayal

SECTION: AHMEDABAD

LENGTH: 242 words


AHMEDABAD: The unseasonal rainfall that hit the state recently has led to the
onion prices rising through the roof, selling at Rs 40 per kg. Officials say
citizens are being fleeced by the wholesalers and retailers who are taking
advantage of the weather and charging higher prices.

Experts say the unseasonal rainfall cannot affect the prices as onions being
sold in the market currently is the crop of year 2009 which was put in cold
storage. "Unlike green vegetables, onions and potatoes are not sold immediately
in the market. They are put in cold storage and sold till the next year," said
an agriculture produce expert. Experts say that last year, the city market had
received 66,288 metric ton of onions till November 2009. This rose to 91,960
metric ton till November 2010. "When the influx of onions has increased, how can
the prices rise?" quizzed experts.

Meanwhile, the wholesalers and retailers have been making hay while the sun did
not shine the past week.

According to officials in Ahmedabad Agriculture Produce Market Committee (APMC),
the wholesale price of onions on Thursday was Rs 430 for 20 kg.

"The wholesale price of onions in the market was Rs 22. Thirty nine trucks worth
onion stock reached the market on Thursday. Most of this is coming from
Maharashtra. From next month, the stock will start coming from Saurashtra which
will help bring down the prices," said NI Chassatia, secretary of APMC.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              601 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                             June 30, 2005 Thursday

world digest

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 581 words


United States

Mad-cow case traced

to animal born

in Texas 12 years ago

The second case of mad cow disease in the United States has been traced to a cow
born in Texas 12 years ago and slaughtered last November at a plant for pet
food, U.S. Department of Agriculture officials said yesterday.

The department's chief veterinarian, Dr. John Clifford, said the cow was
identified and linked to the herd in Texas through DNA testing. He said the herd
had been quarantined and that none of the infected carcass entered the food
chain or was used as animal feed.

He said officials believe the cow probably was infected before the 1997 ban
forbidding the use of cattle parts in cattle feed. The Agriculture Department
confirmed the case Friday but had to wait for DNA analysis to confirm the cow's
origin. It was killed at a pet food plant in Waco, Tex. The only other BSE case
in the U.S., in 2003, was a cow in Washington state that had come from Canada.

Step toward more power

for states to regulate trash

A measure to give Michigan and other states more power to regulate the influx of
Canadian trash cleared a U.S. congressional committee yesterday.

The bill, which won unanimous approval in the House energy and commerce
committee, would empower states to regulate the shipment of international
municipal solid waste, and require the federal government to implement a 1992
agreement with Canada that calls on Canada to notify the U.S. of trash
shipments.

Michigan's congressional delegation has sought a way to restrict trash from
Toronto for years, urging the Environmental Protection Agency to enforce the
1992 treaty. The bill must be approved by the House and Senate.

Fresno killer deserves

death penalty, jury says

A jury in Fresno, Calif., decided yesterday that Marcus Wesson, the domineering
patriarch of a large clan he bred through incest, should get the death penalty
for the murders of nine of his children.

Wesson, 58, was convicted this month, more than a year after the bodies were
found at his home.

Turkey

Businessman freed

after Iraq kidnapping

A Turkish businessman who was kidnapped in front of a Baghdad hotel in January
was freed by his captors yesterday. Abdulkadir Tanrikulu was taken to the
Turkish Embassy in Baghdad after his release. Tanrikulu was abducted Jan. 13.

South Korea

North can be deterred,

U.S. general says

U.S. and South Korean forces can deter and defeat North Korea even if the
Communist state has several nuclear weapons, a senior U.S. military officer said
in an interview broadcast yesterday. The commander of the U.S. forces in South
Korea, Gen. Leon LaPorte, said the U.S. military believed North Korea had one to
two nuclear weapons at a minimum.

"The U.S. and the Republic of Korea retain our ability to deter North Korean
aggression and, if required, to decisively defeat the North Korean threat if
they were to threaten South Korea," he told South Korea's PBC radio.

Iran

Runoff results approved

despite loser's complaints

Iran's non-elected constitutional watchdog yesterday approved the results of
Friday's runoff election in which Mahmoud Ahmadinejad won a landslide victory
over former president Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, state television reported.

The results gave Ahmadinejad 61.6 per cent of the vote and Rafsanjani 35.9 per
cent. Turnout among Iran's approximately 47 million eligible voters was more
than 59 per cent. Rafsanjani has complained that he was the victim of "organized
intervention" by Iran's ruling hard-line hierarchy.

FROM THE STAR'S WIRE SERVICES

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2005 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              602 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

New Industry for Outer Banks: Home to Retirees

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1266 words

DATELINE: NAGS HEAD, N.C.


Bill and Abelina Reid came here from Vermont for the sea and the solitude. Bill
and Betty Logan came from New Jersey for the memories: the dunes and marshes of
the Outer Banks were the landscape of their honeymoon. Francis Rogallo, an
aeronautical engineer who developed the hang glider, came for the winds, just as
the Wright Brothers did 80 years before.

The Reids, the Logans, Mr. Rogallo and 2,000 or so others who move like them are
part of the Outer Banks' newest industry. All retired, all with some money put
away and all besotted by the timelessness of these elongated islands, they are a
driving force behind the boom that brought about 9,000 new residents to Dare
County, making it one of the fastest-growing rural counties in America.

Dare County is a prime example of one of the demographic trends reshaping the
country: retirement to the scenic corners of rural America. While half of the
country's 2,383 rural counties lost population during the 1980's, the decade was
a period of robust growth for new retirement and recreation areas.

Now Towns Look to Retirement

"Some towns that might have gone after a shirt factory before to boost their
economy are now looking for retirement communities," said Calvin Beale, a senior
demographer at the United States Agriculture Department who follows rural
population trends. "It's a clean industry. It's a renewable resource."

Mr. Beale, who estimated that the population of rural retirement areas grew by
nearly 16 percent over the decade, calculated in an article to be published soom
that "movement of older people into rural and small-town areas has become so
common" that a fifth of all rural counties are classed as retirement counties.

The Outer Banks did not have to seek people. As the sands of the Atlantic
seaboard from New Jersey to Virginia were filling with people, the Outer Banks
began to inherit the overflow. While Mr. Beale classifies the county as
"recreation-retirement," the retirees are only the leading edge of an influx of
urban refugees of all ages.

According to the new census figures, Dare County grew by 70 percent in the past
decade, its population rising from 13,400 to 22,800.

About one in four residents is 55 or older, as against a national average of
slightly more than one in five. But school enrollment, a reflection of the
migration of younger families, also rose by 51 percent in the decade, from 2,150
to 3,250.

The passionate attraction that brings people here to cast for bluefish in the
surf or to soar from high dunes in a hang glider makes the town's inevitable
growing pains all the sharper. As each new person arrives to enjoy the
tranquillity, a little is lost.

"It was only supposed to be a one-year thing, my staying here," said 26-year-old
Carl Curnett, an actor who first visited the Outer Banks as part of the troupe
that performs a summer play about the first English colony in America. "Now I'm
planning on a second year."

Now he is a tour guide on the "Elizabeth II," a model of the 16th century ship
that brought the first colony that brings tourists to its dock on Albermarle
Sound. But the tourists, like the new residents, are changing the landscape.
Each new septic tank strains the marshy, sandy soil, and the more the fishermen,
the fewer the fish.

Development divides the residents into smaller and smaller interest groups with
often conflicting financial and emotional attitudes about growth.

Michael Daniels, a fisherman and scion of one of the oldest and largest families
on the Outer Banks remembers "when you got boats coming in with 80,000 pounds of
fish. Now on a big day you'll get maybe 15,000." He suspects that runoff from
the newly paved areas is carrying chemicals into the offshore waters.

Some Profit From Growth

But his family and other natives, owners of vast tracts of the area two
generations ago, were among those to profit from the growth when real estate
prices soared. Sybil Basnight, a cousin of Mr. Daniels and the president of the
environmental group Friends of Roanoke Island, said many natives used to feel
that restrictions on growth were an intrusion on their property rights. Now, she
says, some are not so sure.

If there were no controls, development could leave wells dry. Maps of the Army
Corps of Engineers indicate that 85 percent of the county is marshland. There
are controls, but they have not always been effective. "We have a coastal
management program approved in Washington, D.C.," said Mrs. Basnight. "These are
public trust waters. There's a tolerance level. You can take only so much
development without real severe deterioration."

There are strong -- and mixed -- feelings among the newcomers, too. Some 10-year
or 15-year residents wince at every new mall that goes up. But other newcomers
are busily building malls or selling imported kites to the tourists who flock
here in the summer by the tens of thousands.

The one binding force is opposition to tax increases. But some newcomers have
arrived in once-rural North Carolina with a taste for the public services
available in the suburbs they left.

A gleaming new adult services center was built about two years ago at a cost of
more than $500,000, so retirees have a place to make pottery or do low-impact
aerobics. Staffing and maintenance of the center cost the county about $150,000
a year. And two new schools have been built; officals are now looking for the
money to furnish them.

The county's overall budget has climbed fourfold since 1980. with the greatest
increases in planning, now $632,000, up thirteenfold from 1980; sanitation
costs, up eightfold, to $1.84 million; schools, up thirteenfold to $11.2
million, and emergency medical services, up sevenfold, to $1.87 million.

There is no local hospital. The state health authorities have turned down two
requests for a certificate of need, said Ray Sturza, the county's planner. said.
Emergency petients are taken either by ambulance to Elizabeth City, more than an
hour away, or by helicopter to Norfolk, Va. The helicopter service costs the
county more than $1 million a year.

Although the pace of growth has slowed in these days of recession, the demand
for services has not slackened.

But Mr. Sturza says the county government's ability to raise revenue is limited
since 84 percent of the land in the county is publicly owned.

The squeeze became intense two years ago and a property reassessment sent taxes
soaring. The anger from that change exploded during the last election, and Mr.
Daniels, chairman of the county board, was voted out of office.

Opposition to new taxes is something all factions in the county can agree on.
Development is not.

"I don't know that there's that much terrible opposition to development," said
Louise Dollard, the new chairman of the county's governing board. Like many
others, Ms. Dollard moved here when she retired. "Frankly, when I first arrived,
there wasn't a doctor and you couldn't get your teeth done. When all these
people started moving in, it improved our life."

But she has become concerned about overbuilding. "It hurts for the county
commissioners to issue permits for what shouldn't be. Certain regulations should
be tighter."

Some newcomers are among the most adamant of those who want to slow the pace of
new growth.

"Once you get in your residence, you don't want any more of that development,"
said Mr. Rogallo said.

"A developer couldn't be elected to the city council in Southern Shores," said
Bob Oliver, 81. How does he feel about the man who built his home? "He is an
artist."

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Once you get in your residence, you don't want any more of that
development," said Francis Rogallo of the boom that brought about 9,000 new
residents, including many retirees, to Dare County, N.C. As an aeronautical
engineer, he developed the hang glider; he retired near the Outer Banks for the
winds. (George Tames for The New York Times)

Map: Map of North Carolina showing location of Nags Head.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              603 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Waterloo Region Record

                            October 31, 2016 Monday
                                 First Edition

For Canada, signing CETA was the easy part

BYLINE: Sylvain Charlebois

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 783 words


Looks like we'll go ahead with CETA after all. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and
European Union leaders have signed it after a few meltdowns and temper tantrums.

Up next, ratification.

In the aftermath of several anti-trade occurrences in recent months, having a
deal with the EU is nothing short of a miracle.

CETA was initially about growth and prosperity, and how both continents can
facilitate more trade across the Atlantic. But in the end, the deal can be
ratified not for what can be gained, but what would have been lost. Europe is
saving its global face while Canada has an opportunity to recalibrate its
foreign trading ambitions in agrifood.

While Canada remains an insignificant trading player globally, Europe needed to
signal to the rest of the world that it remains open for business, despite its
recent union-related woes. Economically, because of Russian embargoes, the EU is
desperate to find new markets for their food products. CETA may likely ease the
deflationary pressures that Europe has been feeling for some time now.

With Brexit, the potential gains from CETA for Canada are not as significant,
but better access to the European market is good news, nevertheless.

Canada's cattle and hog industries are desperate to reach new markets, and CETA
will help to do this in the long term.

Canada's supply management sectors have been needing a wake-up call from outside
its borders, and that is exactly what CETA will deliver. With the influx of
high-quality, more affordable dairy products, Canada's dairy industry will now
have to redefine itself within a more competitive landscape.

In Canada, domestic dairy processors have been preparing for this ratification
for years, as massive investments from Saputo, Agropur and others have changed
the structure of the industry.

In the farming industry, things will be getting much more challenging with CETA.
Most of Canada's 11,000 dairy farmers are concerned about the future of the
quota system. Some adjustments have been made by provincial boards in recent
years, but these has not been nearly sufficient.

More trade-focused programs are needed and boards should think of ways to entice
dairy farmers to become more competitive. A robust vision for the sector must be
realized. Both governments and the dairy sector have been struggling with this
problem for decades.

Supply management is about producing what Canada needs as a nation. The quota
system allows producers to feel confident and get paid well while high tariffs
on imports keep foreign products away from Canadian consumers.

This is a simple system, which has been heavily criticized by most of the
industrialized world for decades. Now CETA will allow thousands of kilos of
cheese to enter the Canadian market, exempt from tariffs.

This influx of products will represent about two per cent of Canada's milk
production, which will no longer be needed. This figure may not seem like much
to the average person, but CETA does in fact create a significant breach in the
quota system; a change which in turn will destabilize Canada's entire
agricultural system.

And, with all provinces having endorsed CETA under the previous government, more
changes are on the way.

CETA will force the issue of supply management reform - which should be welcome
news, for dairy farmers most of all. Most have been led to believe that the
status quo will serve their interests well.

But, given that Canada has lost well over 30,000 dairy farms under supply
management, it is time for governments and industry to work on a comprehensive
plan to allow the Canadian dairy industry to become more competitive.

A recent benchmark report suggests that Swiss dairy farmers are the least
competitive in the world. Canadians are a close second.

If borders open up to allowing more foreign dairy products in the future,
Canada's dairy sector will completely collapse. Any reform would need to be
implemented over the next 15 to 20 years, to give Canadian dairy farmers a
fighting chance to adjust to these market changes.

CETA will be a catalytic force for change, and Ottawa must develop an appetite
for this.

The Canadian government will need to contend with years of fiscal and
socio-political baggage. The mandate letter given to the minister of agriculture
did not mention anything remotely close to reforming Canada's archaic
supply-management practices.

With CETA, Ottawa almost fumbled the ball in the proverbial end-zone at the last
minute of play.

Hopefully the Trudeau government adopts a different, more mature approach
domestically for the betterment of Canada's own dairy farmers.

Sylvain Charlebois is dean of the faculty of management, professor in food
distribution and policy, Dalhousie University

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Metroland Media Group Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              604 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Weekend Australian

                             June 11, 2011 Saturday
                        5 - Weekend Professional Edition

Regions seek an influx of workers

BYLINE: MARGOT SHAVE

SECTION: REVIEW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 968  words


{ EMPLOYEE PROFILE }

The agriculture sector's ageing workforce fuels fears of shortages

AN ageing workforce coupled with a lack of young people ready to fill their jobs
is plaguing the agriculture sector and potentially threatens the future of the
nation's food production businesses.

AgriFood Skills Australia, the peak body representing skills needed in the
agriculture workforce, has released its 2011 Environmental Scan -- Australia's
Regions: Australia's Future, and is calling for greater attention on ways of
replacing many of the retiring workers from the sector over the next decade.

``Our workforce is ageing quite dramatically, probably about five years ahead of
most other workforces,'' says Arthur Blewitt, AgriFood chief executive. ``By
2018, one-third of our agriculture workers look like leaving; that's 100,000 out
of 300,000 people.

``About half our agriculture scientists will be reaching retirement age by the
end of the decade as well, so you're losing your new ideas, your technologists,
your researchers as well as those who are key to running your industry, your
workers,'' Blewitt says.

The agrifood industry generates around $200 billion for the economy each year,
representing 20 per cent of the nation's export earnings, figures that will be
unsustainable without the right workforce, Blewitt says.

Food security is also becoming an issue worldwide and the federal government is
developing the nation's first national food plan this year to ensure a
sustainable supply of safe and nutritious food supply for the future.

``Globally, we're losing land by the day, either through development or other
uses, and I think worldwide food security is fairly fragile,'' Blewitt says.

``I think Australia is in a good position to benefit from this: we export 80 per
cent of our food products and have this enormous potential, but if we don't get
some people to continue to drive it, it's going to be a wasted opportunity.''

Attracting people to regional areas is a large part of the challenge, Blewitt
says, and agriculture producers need to be savvy about marketing their jobs in a
modern way, with benefits that would entice a family to relocate to the country,
such as a house and car, included in the package.

``Producers need to think about designing good jobs and advertising them: [for
instance] farm technician, not farm hand,'' Blewitt says. ``Young people want to
know what the challenge is and how their skills will be utilised and developed.
Young people also want to be close to the business, to learn about profit and
loss, what's efficient and what's not.''

AgriFood is in the process of identifying employers of choice within the sector
as a way of increasing awareness about what the next generation of workers are
looking for in their jobs.

Regional centres such as NSW's seven Evocities (the first three letters stand
for energy, vision and opportunity) -- Albury, Armidale, Bathurst, Dubbo,
Orange, Tamworth and Wagga Wagga -- have the advantage in attracting workers to
swell their their average population of about 30,000 each. Smaller towns with
less than 15,000 people find it a far greater challenge to attract and retain
young workers.

Towns with smaller populations can look to the example set by Narrabri in
northern NSW, which markets its industry and resources along with other
neighbouring towns, Gunnedah and Moree, to get special attention for the region
from state government programs, Blewitt says.

AgriFood hopes to repeat a recent pilot program trialled in Narrabri that
rotated a pool of trained workers through a number of seasonal jobs across the
town's main industries. The skills council has proposed to the federal
government that it should fund a version of this program in five other towns
nationwide, linked with a program of cadetships, scholarships and traineeships,
to give incentives for people to remain in or relocate to these smaller towns.

For fruit and vegetable products manufacturer Mark Napper, chief executive of
Windsor Farm Foods, the dearth of qualified staff is a common problem.

At the Windsor canning facility in Cowra, Napper predicts that at least 22 per
cent of his work force of 130 people will be looking to retire in the next 10
years.

``I've got a tremendous bunch of people and some good young trade guys and
apprentices who we're trying to keep, but there are other positions on the
factory floor that we struggle to find people for,'' he says.

Napper acknowledges that the town loses many of its young male workers to the
mines in Orange or Parkes, and he is working to modernise his factory to make
the work less labour intensive; his aim, ultimately, is to attract a female
workforce to the cannery.

``You've got to invest in mechanising the machinery, which is part of our bind,
because being in the food game is tough, with margins constantly under pressure,
and you're also dealing with the normal climatic conditions, which vary from
year to year,'' he says.

The company has developed links with TAFE in Cowra to entice work experience
students and, hopefully, young apprentices into the business. Napper also joins
the local council for trade shows in Sydney to spread the message that regional
towns would welcome skilled people.

``While it's an older team down here, they have heaps of energy and are
dedicated to keeping the place working because they see the importance in what
they do,'' Napper says.

``We pump about $6 million into the local economy annually, so it's an important
employer in town.

``We're working on some innovative ideas here and try and do a lot of import
replacements and come up with new products in the cannery,'' he says.

``There are also great rewards in this line of work: that you can see your
product on the shelf and feel that you're actually contributing something, not
just pushing paper somewhere.''

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2011 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              605 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                             June 16, 2013, Sunday

Immigration reform will devastate W.Va. workers

BYLINE: Peter Kirsanow

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. P1C

LENGTH: 669 words


The Senate has begun debate on the proposed immigration reform bill. If this
bill becomes law, there is one likely outcome for low-skilled West Virginia
workers: Disaster.

The assurances of the bill's proponents that the bill will somehow help the
economy, obscure copious evidence that the bill will wreak enormous damage to
the employment prospects of American workers who have already seen their wages
and employment rates plummet over the last several years.

Indeed, it is no secret that the employment picture for low-skilled workers is
abysmal. The national unemployment rate has been above 7.5 percent for more than
four years and millions have dropped out of the workforce entirely. Among those
without a high school diploma, the unemployment rate in May reached 11.1
percent, and for blacks without a high school diploma, it is more than 24
percent. The labor-force participation rate is at historic lows and long-term
unemployment is the worst since the Great Depression. The workweek is shrinking,
as well as wage rates. Barely one in two adult black males has a full-time job.
A record 47 million people are on food stamps.

The immigration reform bill has the potential to make things even worse. Not
only will the bill grant amnesty to 11 million illegal immigrants, it will act
as a magnet for future illegal immigration and substantially increase the number
of legal immigrants. It is conservatively estimated that the bill will result in
30 million to 33 million additional immigrants over the next 10 years.

The bill is structured so that most of the immigrants will be low-skilled. These
immigrants will compete with Americans in the low-skilled labor markets. The
competition is most fierce in some of the industries in which blacks
historically have been highly concentrated, such as construction, agriculture
and service. Since the supply of low-skilled workers already exceeds the demand,
the massive influx in low-skilled immigrants bodes ill for all such workers, but
particularly black males. Evidence cited before the U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights shows that immigration accounts for 40 percent of the 18-point percentage
decline in black employment rates over the last several decades - the bulk of
the decline occurring among black males.

The evidence cited by the commission shows that not only does illegal
immigration depress the employment levels of low-skilled Americans, it drives
down the wages for available jobs.

A $960 annual decrease in wages may not seem like much to some members of
Congress, but as President Obama observed when he signed the extension of the
payroll tax cut in 2012, an extra $80 a month makes a big difference to many
families.

Recent history shows that a grant of legal status to illegal immigrants results
in a further influx of illegal immigrants who will crowd out low-skilled workers
from the workforce. Contrary to the mythology promoted by some supporters of the
bill, this isn't because low-skill Americans - regardless of race - are
unwilling to work. It's because they're unwilling to work at the cut-rate wages
(and often substandard conditions) offered to illegal immigrants - a cohort
highly unlikely to complain to the EEOC, OSHA or the Wage and Hour Division of
the Department of Labor. This inexorably increases the number of low-skill
Americans depending upon the government for subsistence, swells the ranks of the
unemployed and reduces the wages of those that do have a job.

Before the federal government grants legal status to illegal immigrants, serious
deliberation must be given to the effect such a grant will have on the
employment and earnings prospects of low-skilled Americans. History shows that
granting such legal status is not without profound and substantial costs to
American workers.

Does Congress care?

Kirsanow is a labor and employment attorney

in Cleveland, a former member of the National Labor Relations Board, a member of
the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, and the former chairman of the

Center for New Black Leadership.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 Charleston Newspapers


                              606 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 9, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CATTLE RANCHERS SUE TO STOP GOVERNMENT SLAUGHTER OF DAIRY COWS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 8


The National Cattlemen's Association filed a suit today in an effort to stop an
Agriculture Department program to slaughter nearly a million dairy cows, saying
the influx of beef was seriously depressing the cattle markets.

A hearing on the suit has been set for April 22 in Lubbock, Tex., before Federal
District Judge Halbert Woodward.

The suit by the association is the second that questions the Government program
in which entire herds of dairy cows are slaughtered or exported in an effort to
end the overproduction of milk.

Earlier this month, a Federal judge in Rochester temporarily blocked the program
after the Humane Society of Rochester and Monroe County complained about the
Federal requirement that an X be branded on the face of each cow.

Temporary Order Extended

The judge in that case, Michael Telesca, today extended his temporary order
barring enforcement of the face branding through April 21. He also set a hearing
for Monday to decide if the injunction should be made permanent.

Representative Frank Horton, Republican of upstate New York, and 19 other
members of the House have introduced a resolution calling on the Agriculture
Department to end the branding requirement. Mr. Horton said the resolution had
been introduced because dairy farmers were not experienced at branding and
risked their own safety as well as that of the animals.

In its suit, the cattlemen's association said the department's decision not to
spread the slaughtering of dairy herds over the 18-month life of the program had
resulted in an oversupply of beef and falling prices in both the live cattle and
futures markets. The beef could be sold in the United States and foreign
countries.

The Agriculture Department, which began the program April 1, will spend about
$1.8 billion over the next 18 months to pay dairy farmers to slaughter their
herds.

Dairy Farmers Need Money

While not commenting on the suit, Daniel Amstutz, Under Secretary of Agriculture
for commodity programs, said cow sales were heavily loaded into the early phase
of the program because many of the dairy farmers needed cash.

Mr. Amstutz said bid levels and cost determined over what period the department
would have the cows slaughtered or exported. ''Had we forced bids into
farther-out programs and forced acceptance of those, we'd have paid more,'' he
said. The department is also buying beef in the early period to offset the glut,
he said.

But Chuck Ball, a spokesman for the cattlemen's association, said the beef
cattle producers who sold animals in the last week lost about $25 million
because of price drops averaging $2 to $3 per 100 pounds.

''Unless the buyout is halted and precisely scheduled marketings are ordered,
losses will mount even higher in the coming weeks,'' the association said in a
statement.

Mr. Ball said the buyout ''has totally disrupted normal cattle marketing,''
adding ''It's just falling apart on us.''

The suit by the association seeks an immediate end to the marketing of dairy
cattle under the program and asks that the department be forced to withdraw its
regulations and rewrite them to lessen the impact on beef markets. The
cattlemen's group was joined in the suit by the Texas Cattle Feeders Association
and the Texas and Southwestern Cattle Raisers Association.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              607 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                               December 29, 2004

Young blood needed on land

SECTION: Business; Farm/Food; Alcohol; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 319 words


Agriculture in Cornwall needs an influx of new, young, keen and energetic
farmers, according to one industry leader.  Next year could see a marked and
welcome boost for agriculture in the county if all the constituent ingredients
of a potential success story can be brought together.

That was the message this week from the chairman of the Cornwall branch of the
Country Land and Business Association, Andrew Baylis, who said that the critical
issue for the future was how to attract new and younger blood into farming.

"There is no doubt that for Cornwall, with its relatively high percentage of
small farms with their particular focus on livestock and dairying, 2005 is
likely to be another challenging year," he said. "The introduction of the Single
Farm Payment could provide the catalyst for change and for many to review their
own future in farming.

"Alongside that, I hope that the farming community in Cornwall will take full
advantage of the Fresh Start programme, due to be launched in January. If it can
be made to work at the same time as the re-assessments consequent upon the SFP
are occurring, there could be a significant improvement in the future prospects
for agriculture in the county," he said.

But the key issue, said Mr Baylis, would be the ability to attract new entrants
into an industry which was notorious for the high age of its workforce.

"The average age of farmers in this region is high and rising, but for the
industry to survive we need new energy and an openness to new ideas.

"The problem is that new entrants are only likely to be people who wish to farm
rather than act as rural groundsmen. That is where this combination of CAP
reform and the Fresh Start initiative could, together, provide the impetus we
need to make 2005 a real year of change.

"All the right ingredients are on the table. We simply need to assemble them,"
he stressed.


LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

                      Copyright 2004 Western Morning News


                              608 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Sentinel (Stoke)

                            October 29, 2006 Sunday

New migration rules may help and hinder

SECTION: Pg. 6

LENGTH: 642 words


Economic migration is not a new phenomenon, but the British Government's
decision to restrict the number of workers from Bulgaria and Romania has marked
a sea change in policy.

After years of being seen as a favourite destination for foreign workers, Home
Secretary John Reid has said lower-skilled workers   will initially only be able
to work in the food processing and agricultural sectors.

Furthermore, a Migration Advisory Council is to be set up to provide guidance on
how low-skilled immigration should be managed.

Why? The key reason for the change is to avoid a repeat of the influx of Polish
migrants that rushed the UK after the Eastern European economy joined the EU.

An illustration of this could be best seen locally at Crewe, where within 12
months, the town became home to around 1,400 Polish workers seeking to work in
factories such as Primebake, distribution centres such as 20:20 Logistics and
restaurants.

In some ways, this should have been a good thing.

After all, there have been a whole host of benefits to consider for the country
as a whole.

The population of people of working age has shot up by its fastest level in 20
years.

This should help boost the productivity of the country, and in particular
companies with problems filling vacancies which UK workers either don't want -
or can't afford - to take up.

Competition from these foreign jobseekers has in turn helped keep a lid on wage
pressures which have stayed low, despite rises in energy costs and commodity
prices.

But the benefits have been outweighed by the problems that have been created by
such large numbers of migrants.

Sure, large numbers of immigrants have come into the country before.

But not on the scale that we have seen this time around.

Before the European Union opened its doors to 10 accession countries in May
2004, the Government predicted that its open-border policy would only bring an
extra 13,000 workers a year until 2010.

In fact, the number of workers who have registered for work in the past two
years is 16 times that level, with 427,000 migrants signed up to June this year.
(And that doesn't include self-employed workers).

In Crewe, for example, the borough council has been forced to introduce new
services to support a new micro-community which needs facilities that don't
currently exist.

The influx of migrant workers also destabilises efforts to get people off
benefits and back to work.

After all, if you are an employer, why would you offer a job to someone who has
been on incapacity benefit, when you could get someone young, keen and willing
to work hard?

Of course, the changes introduced by John Reid have their supporters and
critics.

The British Chambers of Commerce thinks Mr Reid is right, noting that while
migration helps companies, the influx could further exacerbate pressures on the
economy.

On the other hand, the Federation of Small Business (FSB) - the voice of
owner-managed firms - flags up the real risk that its members, already burdened
by mountains of red tape, will be forced to take extra time out to check the
nationality of a migrant worker.

John Walker, the FSB's National EU Affairs chairman, warns that companies could
suddenly become "pseudo-immigration officers".

He said: "After treating the previous new entrants in one way, which was clear
for all to deal with, the differing treatment for Bulgarian and Romanian workers
is unfair to them and to small businesses."

And it is this point about the change in policy that is most important.

There are already enough problems around preconceptions about migrant workers,
without a new change that causes confusion and fuels discrimination.

The Government needs to be clear that its policies reap the economic rewards
that migrant workers can bring, and without the ambiguity which can lead to
exploitation - either of migrant workers, or our own.

david.elks@thesentinel.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 The Sentinel (Stoke)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              609 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                  Western Mail

                          February 6, 2001, Wednesday

LACK OF FUNDING COULD DAMAGE GREEN SCHEME. TIR GOFAL: LONG DELAYS IN
ADMINISTRATION DETER APPLICANTS

BYLINE: Roy Hancock

SECTION: FARMING; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 501 words


LONG delays in processing applications to enter Tir Gofal are damaging efforts
to conserve landscapes and wildlife in Wales, landowners warn.

The Country Land and Business Association (CLA) is calling for the Countryside
Council for Wales to be given more resources.

It says extra personnel are needed to speed up the administration of the
National Assembly's flagship environmental initiative, and break a log-jam of
unresolved applications stretching back nearly a year.

The delays were a major disincentive for farmers attempting to enter the scheme
at a time of increasing Government pressure on agriculture actively to maintain
and enhance attractive countryside and habitats, warns the CLA.

Mid-Wales CLA regional director Julian Salmon said, "The CLA is concerned Tir
Gofal could become increasingly undermined by a backlog of applications.

"The current application period launched this month will end in May. But we have
been told by some farmers that they have yet to receive a conclusive response to
their approaches to join the scheme which they made during the last application
period ending in May 2000.

"All they have received from CCW are letters of acknowledgement. The
applications have not even reached the farm visit stage, with the prospect of
months of uncertainty before they can expect to receive a final 'yes' or 'no' to
their proposals.

"The problem seems to be centred on inadequate resources and insufficient
numbers of experienced conservation advisers employed by CCW to process the
influx of Tir Gofal applications at an acceptable and efficient rate.

"This failure to provide adequate administrative resources has been a long-term
problem for the development of positive conservation initiatives which reward
farmers for positive land management services.

"Producers, who are accepted into environmental schemes, can be frustrated by
delay when they try to re-join at the conclusion of the initial agreements.

"For example, members of Tir Cymen, the pilot initiative for Tir Gofal, can

wait two years for a decision on their applications to join the successor
scheme.

"All these obstacles deter farmers from entering environmental initiatives and
inhibit their involvement in landscape and habitat management. Delays can be
disruptive for the commercial operation of a farm, leaving producers in limbo
and compromising their ability to make decisions."

Call for EU policy reform JULIAN Salmon, the Mid Wales regional director for the
Country Land and Business Association (CLA) said, "The CLA has repeatedly warned
that Tir Gofal is under-funded. It is a pity the Government has not been
prepared to match fully its avowed enthusiasm for conservation and its appeals
to farmers to be more environmentally conscious with the necessary investment in
staff and resources.

"The problem re-inforces our call for a major expansion of agri-environment
initiatives under a radical reform of the EU common agricultural policy."

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2001 Western Mail and Echo Ltd


                              610 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             October 1, 1990 Monday

FROM THE EUROPEAN BUREAU   How is 1992 coming along?   Lately, like a lamb to
the slaughter

BYLINE: EDWARD GREENSPON; GAM

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: Brussels BELGIUM


BY EDWARD GREENSPON
 Brussels
  THE stench of burning flesh hangs over Europe. In the past few weeks,
masked French farmers have hijacked shipments of British lambs, torching
truckfuls of live animals or slaughtering them and scattering their
carcasses around government buildings. Other self-styled peasant
terrorists have broken into warehouses and poured toxic substances on
stocks of imported meat.

In Wales, rural businesses are retaliating by boycotting French cheese
and wine. Unknown assailants savagely beat a French truck driver for no
apparent reason other than his nationality.

At the root of these cross-channel farm hostilities stand hundreds of
hard-pressed French livestock producers who feel they are being driven
from the land. Drought, a health scare, a modest reduction in European
Community subsidies and the influx of meat from Eastern Europe have all
conspired to eat into their incomes. Today, the militancy is centred in
the French countryside; tomorrow, it could be almost anywhere - or
everywhere - in Europe.

With their blockade, the French farmers are challenging the most
fundamental principles of the European common market, as well as throwing
down the gauntlet to its neighbors and trading partners. This is supposed
to be the season of tearing down trade barriers, not of erecting
barricades.

For the past five years, the EC has been on a phenomenal roll, largely
thanks to its program of dismantling impediments to the free movement of
goods, services, capital and people by 1992. But progress has been
accomplished during a period of strong economic growth. Now, if 1992 is to
succeed, Europe must demonstrate that it can resist national protectionism
when economies are not so robust. But if sheep can't be herded from one EC
country to another three decades after the Common Agricultural Policy came
into being, then what hope is there for other industries that run into
difficulty?

Access to the EC markets is not, of course, merely an internal concern.
The community has taken on the main responsibility for shepherding the
fledgling democracies of the former Communist bloc into the world economy.
What countries like Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia need most is the
right to sell their goods, particularly farm products, to the EC's 325
million consumers. In the French countryside, however, the East Europeans
stand accused of unfairly dumping their products at below market prices.
It doesn't bode well for the region's recovery.

If the threat to East Europe weren't so serious, the claims of French
farmers could be considered comic. Unfair dumping is precisely what
countries as diverse as the United States, Thailand, Argentina and Canada
have been accusing the Europeans of doing, in world trade talks in Geneva.
The EC is under tremendous pressure to cut its rich farm-support programs.
If it doesn't, U.S. trade representative Carla Hills reiterated in
Brussels last week, a four-year, 95-nation effort to save the world from a
disastrous bout of protectionism will collapse.

In their heart of hearts, European leaders accept that their
agricultural policy is rotten to the core. The average European family
forks over nearly $1,500 a year in higher food costs and taxes to support
the community's 10 million farmers. The EC devotes nearly two-thirds of
its budget to an industry that produces just 3 per cent of its wealth.

Farmers believe they are about to be sacrificed to other interests.
Peter Howell, a British farmer, Conservative member of the European
Parliament and self-proclaimed friend of the United States, told Mrs.
Hills that European producers will not stand by as their hedgerows are
uprooted to create vast Nebraska-styled farming units.

She advised him and other European leaders to show a bit more political
courage, pointing to the way President George Bush is standing up to the
protectionist demands of the U.S. textile industry.

Well, perhaps. But nobody is setting polymers ablaze in North Carolina
and threatening to dump them on Mrs. Hills' doorstep.

Edward Greenspon is a member of The Globe and Mail's European bureau.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1990 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              611 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Here Comes South Dakota

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 219 words


The appointment calendars of

Washington politicians are

being revised almost daily to accommodate a sudden influx of farmers and their
representatives.

Today farm-state representatives will be among 125 state legislative leaders
scheduled to meet with President Reagan and David A. Stockman, his budget
director, at the White House to discuss, among other things, the credit squeeze
threatening many farmers. This weekend 300 farm leaders, bank executives,
members of Congress and others will participate in a State of the American Farm
Conference, another forum for calling attention to farm woes.

Then on Monday a delegation of South Dakotans, including all 105 members of the
State Legislature, the Governor and other state officials, plan to swarm the
capital to lobby for more farm aid. The Legislature appropriated $95,000 for the
trip, but a campaign by a South Dakota radio station has raised $60,000 in
contributions to replenish the state treasury.

The South Dakotans are to meet with Vice President Bush, Agriculture Secretary
John R. Block and Senate and House leaders. Janice Lechance, a spokesman for
Representative Tom Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, said the Library of
Congress reports that it knows of no other case where an entire state
legislature has converged on Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              612 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Mail (London)

                             June 21, 2007 Thursday

Will Romanians be given free access to British jobs?

BYLINE: James Slack

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 448 words


MIGRANTS from Romania and Bulgaria could be given 'opendoor' access to Britain's
labour market within months.

Lifting the restrictions on them will be the first issue facing a committee,
which begins life today and is supposed to give police and councils a 'voice' in
immigration policy.

But the first item on the Migration Impact Forum's agenda will be whether to
allow more migrants into the UK, not fewer.

This is despite comments made yesterday by Home Office Minister Liam Byrne who
said it was no longer 'good enough' just to listen to businesses - which have
benefited enormously from the flood of cheap labour into the UK. He said some
communities had been 'unsettled' by the influx and must now be given the chance
to 'have their say'.

The Government imposed a 20,000 annual limit on work permits for Romanians and
Bulgarians when the countries joined the EU in January.

It followed public alarm that granting them unrestricted access could overwhelm
public services already struggling to cope with more than 600,000 arrivals from
the eight Eastern European countries including Poland which joined in 2004.

Despite having the option of keeping the limit for two years, ministers have
decided it should be reviewed after one.

Business leaders, particularly in agriculture, are sure to demand the lifting of
restrictions.

The committee's 14 members, including a chief constable, magistrate and council
representatives from places such as Slough, will be asked to produce a report on
whether society can cope with any more Romanians and Bulgarians by September.

Ministers will take the final decision before the end of the year.

Once the issue of Romania and Bulgaria is dealt with, the forum will help decide
how many non-EU migrants are given work permits each year.

It will consider pressures on housing, employment, education, health and social
care, crime and disorder and community cohesion.

The forum will pass its findings to a second panel, called the Migration
Advisory Committee.

This will decide roughly how many migrants should be allowed in from outside the
EU.

A new points system will be used to hand out work permits - although there will
be no fixed upper limit.

Mr Byrne, who will jointly chair today's forum meeting with Communities Minister
Phil Woolas, will point to research showing that 48 per cent of people disagree
with the statement: 'Immigration is generally good for Britain'.

Only 32 per cent agree, according to a Mori poll.

Tory spokesman Damian Green said of the forum: 'Unless the Government adopts our
policy of an explicit annual limit on economic migration, this will be just
another example of tough talk not matched by effective action.'
j.slack@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Influx: Bulgarians queue around the block to apply for work permits at
the British Embassy in Sofia

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              613 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Kashmir Images (India)

                              May 26, 2013 Sunday

Mir vows youth to participate in development process of State

LENGTH: 416 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, May 26 -- Describing that youth are the strength of the Nation,
Minister for Agriculture Ghulam Hassan Mir called upon the youth for their
participating in the development process and contribution in socio-economic
development of the country and the state as well.

The Minister was addressing a public gathering at Mamoosa of Pattan area today.

Reiterating the programmes specified for the welfare of the youth, the Minister
said the government has launched various Schemes for their welfare, adding that
they have to come forward and avail the benefits of these schemes. He urged upon
the youth for establishing their own income generating units, adding that they
have to become employment providers, not employment seekers.

Stressing the need for actively participation of youth in election process, Mir
said that electoral process is meant for the development of the State and area.
He said the youth of the State have enormous potential and the needs is to
mobilize it better way and use for peace and development of the State.

The Minister announced Rs. 30 lakh for repair and upgradation of Lolpora-Mamoosa
road. He said that the upgradation of existing Lolpora-Mamoosa road would
strengthen the road connectivity and boost economic activities in the area as
well.

The Minister said one Agriculture Officer would be retained for three Panchayat
Halqa. He said that this initiative would help in boosting the agriculture
production and improve the financial health of the farmers. He urged upon the
farming community for availing the benefits of farmer friendly schemes launched
by the Agriculture and other allied Departments.

The Minister also invited business tycoons from country and abroad for investing
in the State, adding that this would redress the problems of unemployment and
also open new vistas for the youth for working outside the State.

Referring to the influx of tourists in the State particularly in Valley, Mir
said that record numbers of tourists are visiting the state. He sought tourists'
cooperation in maintaining the hygienic environ in the State in general and
particularly at tourist destinations.

Among others, Chief Engineer, R& B Mushtaq Ahmad, Chief Agriculture Officer,
Baramulla and other district officers of line departments were present on the
occasion. Published by HT Syndication with permission from Kashmir Images. For
any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 Kashmir Images
                              All Rights Reserved


                              614 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                            February 26, 2007 Monday

RP can extend rice import controls, says WTO

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 370 words


"The approval was dated December 27, 2006, but we got it only in mid-February,"
Yap said in an interview last week.

Negotiations for the extension took more than two years, because other WTO
member countries contested it. The previous quantitative restriction on rice
expired in June 2005.

To get the extension, the government had to hold bilateral negotiations with
nine countries: the United States, Thailand, Australia, Egypt, Canada, Pakistan,
Argentina, India and China.

The extension will give the farm sector time to improve efficiency and
competitiveness before full liberalisation of the Philippine rice market in
2012, Yap noted.

Farmers will continue until then to enjoy protection from a possible influx of
lower-priced rice that may come from Thailand and Vietnam, the world's two
largest rice exporters, he said.

As a developing country, the Philippines is allowed by the WTO to give its
agriculture sector a subsidy or support equal to 10 per cent, or about 85
billion Philippine pesos (Bt63.15 billion), of the sector's gross-value
receipts.

However, budgetary constraints prevent the government from implementing support
pro?grammes for the rice sector, Yap said.

The WTO approval of the extension is "very timely, because it is only now that
the government has the political will and the money to boost rice production in
the country", he said.

The Agriculture Department hopes to increase rice output by promoting use of
high-yield hybrid and certified seeds and rehabilitating irrigation facilities
covering close to 250,000 hectares of land planted with rice.

"If we stick with this programme, we will become self-sufficient by 2010," Yap
said.

"Funding for repair and rehabilitation of irrigation facilities needs to be
constant," he noted. "That's the fundamental investment we are looking into so
we can recover at least 200,000 hectares by 2010."

The four-year plan for irrigation repair requires a budget of 14.5 billion
pesos.

He said for this year alone, the department was targeting the rehabilitation of
52,000 hectares of irrigated farmland, which would cost 3.1 billion pesos, based
on a repair cost of 60,000 pesos per hectare.

The Philippines plans to import up to 1.6 million tonnes of rice this year.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 Nation Multimedia Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              615 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Business Recorder

                           October 23, 2010 Saturday

Sindh to begin sowing Rabi crops from November 1

BYLINE:  AAMIR MAJEED

SECTION: Vol. XLVI No. 293

LENGTH: 292  words


The sowing for Rabi crops will start in Sindh from November 1, it is reliably
learnt. Officials in Sindh Agriculture Department told Business Recorder, the
sowing for this Rabi season would start from the first week of November.
Although the process has begun in some areas but proper sowing in Sindh will
start from November 1, they added.

They said sowing for wheat crop has partially started on the left side of the
River Indus while the process would gain momentum with each passing day. Sowing
for other Rabi crops such as barley, sugarcane, sunflower, onion, grams and
lentil would start from November 1, they said.

They said 2.5 million acres cultivatable farmlands has been badly destroyed by
floods in the province. They said sowing in the flood-affected areas would start
late as compared to the safe areas. Some areas are directly hit by devastating
floods, which normally exists on the right side of River Indus. Some were
indirectly affected due to huge influx of IDPs, they added.

They said people have started returning to their houses, but the farmlands in
these areas were still facing inundation due to floodwater. The sowing in these
areas would be delayed but the safe areas would start sowing from first week of
the next month. They said the government has initiated a number of schemes to
enhance productivity of crops to avert likely food crisis, they added. They said
the government has raised wheat support price by Rs 50 per 40 kilogramme from Rs
950 per 40kg to Rs 1000 per 40kg under the 'grow more wheat' programme. The
government has floated a proposal for growing sunflower crop in those
flood-affected areas, which could not become cultivatable by January 31 due to
floodwater, in between February 1 to April 30, they said.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Business Recorder
                              All Rights Reserved


                              616 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        Watertown Daily Times (New York)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 21, 2007 Thursday

Dutch farmers sought for dairy farms

BYLINE: Rachael Hanley, Watertown Daily Times, N.Y.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 742 words


Jun. 21--The Dutch are coming. And what they want most is to buy mid-sized dairy
farms in the north country, according to a company that helps farmers emigrate
from the Netherlands.

Local agriculture groups, meanwhile, welcome the prospect of Dutch farmers in
the area, noting that the immigrants may help fill in the gaps as younger locals
turn away from farming.

"As farmers age and sell off their property, their kids don't necessarily get
into farming," said Anna R. Jensen, executive director of New York
AgriDevelopment Corp. of Syracuse. "Bringing in outside dairymen is a way to
keep the cows in the state."

Since March, Mrs. Jensen and her group have been working with Interfarms
Emigratieservice, an immigration and real estate company based in a rural part
of the Netherlands, to find suitable matches between Dutch farmers and local
farms.

The project is still in the early stages -- there are no immediate plans for
foreign farmers to move to the north country, Mrs. Jensen said. Still, people
such as Jay M. Matteson, Jefferson County agricultural coordinator, see such an
influx as a way to keep area farms from lying fallow or being developed as
housing.

"This is just one example of the opportunity we have here in Jefferson County to
bring in new business," he said. "The more we can grow dairy industry in the
county, the better off we are."

Mr. Matteson said there are currently two local farms for sale that would fit
Interfarm's criteria, out of some 40 in the county. That does not include the
south of the county, where competition for land is so fierce that available
farms are generally not advertised, he said.

"One of the issues that we're trying to overcome is to make sure we have people
coming in to buy dairy farms when farms become available," Mr. Matteson said.
"Whether it's somebody from New York state, somebody from the United States or a
European farmer, as long as the land is staying in production."

There are Interfarms agencies in Canada, Australia and the United States. High
prices, land scarcity and farming restrictions in the Netherlands have spurred
previous exoduses, Mrs. Jensen said. Yet foreign farmers have often dismissed
smaller states in favor of dairy farms in Wisconsin, Michigan or Ohio.

With the permitting process for new farmers tightening in those states, Mrs.
Jensen said, they have now turned to traditionally overlooked areas such as
Northern New York.

"In Europe, they don't even think of New York state as an agricultural area,
because they think of New York City," she said. "The whole push is just to get
somebody to come over here and see it."

Although other areas have seen a large rise in milk production, New York state
has remained stagnant. Between 1995 and 2005, milk production increased 110
percent in New Mexico, 150 percent in Idaho, but just 4 percent in New York,
Mrs. Jensen said.

The AgriDevelopment Corp. has made overtures to the Netherlands in the past; a
group of board members went there in 2003 to talk about north country farming,
and the corporation attempted to work with two other relocation agencies.
Although previous efforts were unsuccessful, Mrs. Jensen, who speaks Dutch, said
she is more optimistic about a successful venture with Interfarms.

The north country has not yet experienced a surge in foreign dairy owners, Mrs.
Jensen said. Even the new push for Dutch farmers would likely start slowly, she
said.

"We're not looking for 100 new dairymen to come into the state," she said. "Ten
or 15 dairymen would probably be a very good number."

Interfarms asked Mrs. Jensen to locate dairies of 200 to 600 cows, a size that
she said was "fairly large" for the state. Once a list is assembled, the company
will advertise it to its Dutch customers, she said.

"There are 639 in the state of the total, existing farms in the size that
they're looking for," Mrs. Jensen said. "How many are going to turn over? Not
many."

Still, if everything works smoothly with Interfarms, Mrs. Jensen said, Dutch
farmers could start touring the area as soon as next year.

To see more of the Watertown Daily Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go
to http://www.wdt.net. Copyright (c) 2007, Watertown Daily Times, N.Y.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20070621-WE-DAIRY-FARMS-20070621

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WE


                      Copyright 2007 Watertown Daily Times


                              617 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Daily Independent (Lagos)

                               February 02, 2015

Come Out With Your Policy Direction, PDP Tells APC

LENGTH: 472 words


The Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) has challenged the All Progressives Congress
(APC) to come out with its policy direction for wealth creation instead of
engaging in unfounded claims.

The challenge is contained in a statement issued by Mr Olisa Metuh, the PDP
National Publicity Secretary, on Monday in Abuja.

Metuh said the APC should also be bold to present its presidential candidate,
Gen. Muhammadu Buhari to face President Goodluck Jonathan, the PDP candidate, in
a debate on the country's economy.

He dismissed APC's claim on the state of the nation's economy as wild and
baseless allegation "anchored on tissues of lies and unreliable social media
posts."

He said the APC had been distorting facts on glaring achievements in the
nation's economy under President Jonathan in spite of the daunting challenges.

The PDP spokesman maintained that the party had continued to maintain high moral
ground in keeping to issue-based campaign.

He, therefore, described the APC statement as a ploy to divert attention from
its lack of acceptable economic blue-print.

He also said it was a cover-up to the refusal of its presidential candidate,
Gen. Muhammadu Buhari, to intellectually engage President Jonathan on economic
and other matters in debate.

"Nobody can deny the fact that we have made improvements in our economy in the
last four years under President Jonathan.

"The APC cannot detract the fact that under President Jonathan our economy has
grown to become the largest in Africa and the third fastest growing in the
world," Metuh said.

This feat, he stressed, did not come by accident but through meticulous
application of policies by President Jonathan as attested to by renowned
economic experts and leading international rating agencies.

Metuh noted that Nigeria had become the primary investment destination in Africa
under the Jonathan administration.

This, he said, was visible in the unprecedented growth of the private sector and
influx of foreign direct investments in manufacturing, agriculture, retail,
construction, hospitality, oil and gas and communication, among others.

According to the PDP spokesman, this has ensured massive employment
opportunities for millions of Nigerians.

He added that the influx of international retail giants and the rebirth of
shopping malls in major cities of the country, attested to the nation's
encouraging demographics and stronger purchasing power of citizens.

He maintained that the business-friendly environment created by the Jonathan
administration had also led to revival of the manufacturing sector.

This, he added, was especially so, as leading car manufacturers such as Nissan,
Hyundai and Kia were now setting up factories in the country.

Metuh said this was in addition to indigenous Innosons, Peugeot Nigeria and
ANAMCO which had been providing business and employment for Nigerians.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              618 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 2, 2017 Thursday

Ancient women found in Russian cave were close relatives of today's indigenous
population

LENGTH: 802  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: American Association for the Advancement of Science has issued the
following news release:



 The ancient DNA of two 7700-year-old women from a mountainous cave in far east
Russia suggests they were closely related to the people who live in this remote
and frigid corner of Asia today. The new discovery also suggests that in this
region, farming spread through gradual cultural changes, rather than by an
influx of farming people.





 "The main significance is this finding of continuity over about 7000 years,"
says Mark Stoneking of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in
Leipzig, Germany, who wasn't involved with the work. This contrasts with many
archaeological sites in Russia, Europe, and the Americas where ancient humans
are rarely directly related to living people nearby, thanks to wholesale
migration and mixing since the invention of agriculture about 12,000 years ago.



 The ancient women were discovered in Chertovy Vorota Cave, known as Devil's
Gate Cave in English. The site was of particular interest to population
geneticist Andrea Manica of the University of Cambridge in the United Kingdom
because the skeletons of five humans were found with pottery, harpoons, and the
remnants of nets and mats woven from twisted blades of wild sedge grass--which
some (but not all) researchers consider a rudimentary form of early agriculture.

 DNA was extracted from the teeth, inner ear bones, and other skull bones from
two of the skeletons from Devil's Cave, and Hungarian graduate student Veronika
Siska was able to sequence enough of the nuclear genome to compare it to
hundreds of genomes of modern Europeans and Asians. The team found that the two
Devil's Gate Cave women were most closely related to the Ulchi, indigenous
people who today live a few hundred kilometers north of the cave in the Amur
Basin where they have long fished, hunted, and grown some of their food. The
ancient women also were related to other people who speak the remaining and
endangered 75 or so Tungusic languages spoken by dwindling numbers of ethnic
people in eastern Siberia and China. They were also related to a lesser extent
to modern Koreans and Japanese.

 <p>A 7700-year-old woman's skull yielded ancient DNA that shows she is closely
related to living indigenous Siberians.</p>



 A 7700-year-old woman's skull yielded ancient DNA that shows she is closely
related to living indigenous Siberians.



 Elizaveta Veselovskaya/Institute of Ethnology and Anthropology, Russian Academy
of Sciences



 The women also looked like people in the Amur Basin today--they had genes that
suggest they had brown eyes; straight, thick hair; skin color similar to the
Asian people; and shovel-shaped incisors, similar to Asians. They also were
lactose intolerant, which meant they could not digest the sugars in milk--and
probably did not herd animals that could be milked.



 The Ulchi and other Amur groups show no evidence of inheriting a significant
amount of DNA from any other, later group of people, the team reports today in
Science Advances. This suggests that they were part of one continuous population
that evolved in the region for at least 7700 years. If so, farming was not
introduced to this remote and frigid corner of Asia by a major influx of
migrants, but adopted instead by local hunter-gatherers who progressively added
food-producing practices to their original lifestyle, Manica says.



 Several paleogeneticists agree that the study has shown remarkable continuity
between the ancient cave women and the Ulchi. Researchers disagree, though,
whether the research shows that farming spread by diffusion of ideas in this
part of Asia rather than being introduced by a major wave of farmers, as in
Europe. There, Anatolian farmers from the Near East swept into Europe with a
package of artifacts including tools, seeds, and domesticated animals, and
replaced or interbred with the local hunter-gatherers 12,000 to 8000 years ago.
"The two Devil's Gate Cave samples are hunter-gatherers and thus the results say
little about the spread of the [fully developed] agricultural package," says
paleogeneticist David Reich of Harvard University.



 Archaeologist Francesco d'Errico of the University of Bordeaux in France,
however, thinks that both the archaeology and genetics in Europe and now, in
Eastern Asia, demonstrate that agriculture spread in different ways in different
places. It "is a complex process in which in some cases people moved with their
ideas and technology; in other cases, only the technology moved," says d'Errico,
not an author of the study. The best way to test this, says Stoneking, would be
to get ancient DNA from the earliest farmers in the region.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              619 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Dion Global Solutions Limited

                          September 19, 2013 Thursday

Food inflation likely to soften in the coming months: Assocham

LENGTH: 259 words

DATELINE: India


India, Sept. 19 -- Food prices are likely to soften in the coming months on
account of good monsoons and the influx of Kharif crop, said Assocham.

"We believe that food inflation pressures are likely to soften in the coming
months on accord of good monsoons and arrival of the Kharif crop," Assocham
President Rana Kapoor said.

Besides, with the August wholesale price inflation being driven by a jump in
food prices, Kapoor said the government must take measures to augment investment
in the agriculture sector to improve supply chains, warehousing and other
related infrastructure, reported PTI.

The investment in supply chains must be coupled with a renewed thrust on
horticulture products, improvement in irrigational facilities to reduce
dependence on monsoon and insurance schemes for agri sector, Assocham said.

"This (investment in agriculture) will ensure adequate supplies of essential
items at reasonable prices to consumers, since food inflation acts as an
inequitable tax on the poor and the Government has to strive to abate prices
pressures in the category," Kapoor said.

With the Rupee gradually gaining back lost ground, pressure from currency
depreciation on headline inflation will ease going forward. However, risks to
fuel inflation remain on the upside, as a sharp adjustment in diesel prices is
expected this month, he added.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Dion Global Solutions Limited.
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Wire


                  Copyright 2013 Dion Global Solutions Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              620 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                            October 30, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Europe closing doors: Britain is latest EU country to shut its borders to some
foreigners

BYLINE: HARRY STERLING, Freelance

SECTION: EDITORIAL / OP-ED; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 891  words


The British have closed their open-door policy toward European migrants.

The government of Prime Minister Tony Blair has announced it will impose
restrictions on Romanian and Bulgarian nationals who attempt to work in Britain
once those two countries formally join the European Union on Jan. 1, 2007.

One Labour politician described the restrictions as a real blow to Britain's
image as a champion of EU enlargement.

Under the new regulations, the only unskilled Romanians or Bulgarians allowed to
work in Britain legally will be those in agriculture and food processing,
effectively blocking jobs in the better-paid construction and manufacturing
sectors. However, highly skilled migrants, the self-employed and students will
be allowed to work in Britain.

British Home Secretary John Reid said the Labour government's about-face was
necessary because of the massive unexpected influx of migrant labourers into
Britain (600,000) from the 10 new EU members joining in 2004. The absorption of
so many migrants resulted in dramatically increased demands on housing, schools
and social-welfare systems. Unrestricted access by migrant Romanians and
Bulgarians would aggravate matters.

Ireland, which received more than 200,000 migrants after EU enlargement - one in
10 workers in Ireland is now a foreigner - also announced new curbs on migrants.

In contrast, Poland, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Latvia, Estonia and Finland
say they'll open their doors to Romanian and Bulgarian labourers,
notwithstanding high unemployment rates and that many of their citizens are
already working abroad, especially Poles.

While London's new regulations are regarded as rising from British concerns over
another uncontrolled wave of workers entering their economy, the move comes at a
time when many older European Union nations are perturbed over the growing
number of illegal migrants, asylum seekers and refugees entering EU nations.

Their large-scale presence has become controversial, resulting in political
gains by anti-foreigner, anti-immigrant political parties in such countries as
France, Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark, Austria, Belgium and Switzerland.
Fear of Islamic extremism has further fuelled anti-foreigner sentiment.

Paradoxically, the country that has experienced the largest influx of asylum and
refugee seekers on a per-capita basis is tiny Switzerland, a non-EU nation.

But that's about to change. In a recent national referendum, 67.8 per cent of
Swiss backed more stringent laws on asylum seekers. Under new legislation,
asylum seekers must produce valid identity papers within 48 hours of their
application for asylum. Welfare payments to those whose applications are
rejected will be reduced.

Swiss Justice Minister Christoph Blocher, billionaire leader of the country's
most conservative political party, the Swiss People's Party (SVP), maintains the
legislation will prevent abuse while still protecting legitimate refugees.

(During Switzerland's October, 2003 election the SVP was denounced for electoral
posters replete with racist and ethnic innuendo, including direct attacks
against Albanians and "negroes," denigrated for their alleged role in drug
trafficking and other criminal activities.)

EU nations such as Spain are preoccupied by a major influx of illegal boat
people, especially West Africans attempting to reach Spain's Canary Islands.
This year alone, close to 24,000 have undertaken the dangerous crossing from
West Africa, 3,000 perishing.

Spain's request for help in coping with the escalation of illegal migrants
received little concrete support from EU colleagues. Austria's Justice Minister
Karin Gastinger criticized Madrid for granting amnesty last year to 500,000
undocumented foreigners, a move, said Gastinger, that sent "the wrong signal,"
contributing to the recent surge in migrants.

Giuliano Amato, Italy's interior minister, said EU funds would be better
directed at improving living conditions in impoverished African nations,
reducing the need for Africans to become illegal migrants. Italy tightened its
regulations, forcibly deporting illegal immigrants en masse to countries like
Libya.

Although EU states have increased measures to stem the flow of illegal migrants,
it's apparent the only way to end such mass migration is to improve living
standards and employment prospects for those living in developing nations,
reducing their willingness to risk the often dangerous journey to Europe.

To achieve this, wealthy Western states should end their current trade practices
that block agricultural and other exports from the developing world and increase
foreign investment and infrastructural assistance in places like Africa, which
is abysmally low.

Unfortunately for Romania and Bulgaria, widespread concern within Europe that
foreign migrants and refugees are threatening traditional social and cultural
values, plus contributing to crime and extremist violence, has undermined
support for further EU enlargement.

However, although Romania and Bulgaria aren't pleased at restrictions on their
nationals working freely in prosperous EU nations like Britain, unlike the
countless migrants attempting to enter the EU illegally, they at least are
gaining entrance and will ultimately be granted the same benefits as other EU
members.

Harry Sterling, a former diplomat who served in Europe, is an Ottawa-based
writer.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: KEVIN SULLIVAN, WASHINGTON POST; Richard Barnbrook (centre), an
anti-immigration candidate for city council, goes door to door in a
working-class area of London.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2006 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              621 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                             April 28, 2009 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Growers worry about labour

BYLINE: Gary Rennie, The Windsor Star

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 418  words

DATELINE: LEAMINGTON


Greenhouse owners and vegetable and fruit growers are worried the offshore
worker program could be temporarily halted by the outbreak of Mexican swine flu.

About two-thirds of the 5,000 migrant workers who come to Essex County for
months at a time are from Mexico.

Larry Verbeke, a vice-president of the Essex County Federation of Agriculture,
said a majority of the Mexican workers needed by local farmers are likely
already here.

However, he said another influx would be expected in several months.

Small numbers of migrant workers are always leaving and arriving as well,
Verbeke said.

So far, Canadian federal health and agriculture officials are content with
increased medical screening of Mexican workers before they leave for Canada, and
no limits have been put on the offshore worker program.

Across Canada, about 20,000 offshore workers are recruited annually for
greenhouses, vegetable and fruit farms in Ontario, Quebec, Manitoba and British
Columbia.

They come from Central America and Jamaica, as well as Mexico.

Leamington Deputy Mayor Rob Schmidt, also a farmer, said there's concern among
local residents about the Mexican swine flu, given the large number of Mexican
nationals, but "nobody's panicking.

"People are waiting to see what's going to happen," Schmidt said.

Bernard Nelson, a Kingsville dairy farmer and president of the Essex County
Federation of Agriculture, expects the Mexican swine flu will be closely watched
in this area because of the numbers of migrant workers from that country.

"That's the first thing I thought of," he said when he heard about the flu.

Since the 1960s, offshore workers have done farm work across Canada that
Canadians frequently shun. They typically make $9 to $12 an hour, depending on
the type of work.

HOSPITAL STEPS

WHAT TO DO

With the World Health Organization raising the alert level on swine flu to a
Phase 4 public health emergency, Windsor Regional Hospital is asking all its
visitors two questions: Are you experiencing a new or worsening cough or
shortness of breath? Are you feverish?

Visitors who answer yes to either or both of the above questions are advised not
to visit family and friends at the hospital. Instead, they should seek medical
attention.

Patients who answer yes to either question will be asked to wear a mask to their
appointments.

WRH said the steps are necessary as part of worldwide efforts to stem the spread
of the disease.

According to WRH, a Phase 4 health alert means the virus is becoming
increasingly adept at spreading among humans.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2009 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              622 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                               November 15, 1996

Malaysia calls for onslaught on world poverty

BYLINE: By Rashid Yusof in Rome

SECTION: World news; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 281 words


MALAYSIA has called for a mega onslaught on world poverty through a global
action plan on agriculture focusing on increasing food production and
confronting the woes of 88 low-income, food-deficit countries.

"The hungry and the malnourished cannot wait any longer," Agriculture
Minister Datuk Amar Dr Sulaiman Daud told the World Food Summit.

He suggested that food-deficit countries, 44 of which are in the
southern part of Africa, be given access to badly needed technologies so
that they can rapidly increase food production.

He said a new wave of initiatives co-ordinated with existing measures on
production increase has to be set in motion, by refocusing international
agenda on agricultural research, including biotechnology and genetic
engineering.

The overall programme can become a North-South strategic alliance co-
ordinated by the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation.

Meanwhile, the Zairean Government appealed to the international
community to help refugees trapped in eastern Zaire return to their home
countries of Rwanda and Burundi.

Prime Minister Leon Kengo wa Dondo told the World Food Summit that the
aid should not be sent to eastern Zaire so that the refugees would return
to their homelands.

He added that Zaire has been depicted as the culprit in the current
turmoil when in July 1994 it had accepted over three million refugees
fleeing death and extermination in Rwanda and Burundi.

The influx of the refugees ignited massive problems such as the
destruction of crops and damage to roads, schools and airports, while the
entry of foreign currency including through humanitarian aid had
destablished its own currency.


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

            Copyright 1996 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad


                              623 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                           July 4, 1989, Tuesday, NOR

Farms hire more migrant workers

BYLINE: By Louise Kinross Toronto Star

SECTION: NEIGHBORS; Pg. N2

LENGTH: 697 words


   Recruiting offshore labor for York Region's vegetable farms has intensified
because the job picture for Canadians in other fields is so rosy, a federal
official says.

Henry Neufeld, regional agricultural programs co-ordinator for Employment and
Immigration Canada, says high national and regional employment levels make it
hard to attract Canadian farm workers.

Farmers in the Holland Marsh, a major vegetable-growing region of Canada, needed
359 offshore laborers from Mexico and the Caribbean in 1988, 61 per cent more
than in 1987, and "we expect further increases in 1989," he says.

A lobby by Ontario farm groups in 1987 led Ottawa to sign a new memorandum of
understanding with supply countries, which lifted restrictions on bringing
seasonal laborers from abroad.

"Given the labor market situation, we felt if we didn't have the product - the
Canadian worker - the employer should be able to access foreign workers,"
Neufeld says.

Hiring requests from employers go out to Canadians first.

The traditional suppliers for Ontario are Quebec and the Atlantic provinces but,
as economies there improve, "we are experiencing more difficulties in attracting
Canadians from these regions."

In York Region itself, "there is no shortage of work," adds Ruth MacLean, a job
counsellor at Newmarket's Canada Employment Centre. As a result, local workers
take higher-paid, less labor-intensive jobs in factories.

"Because of the influx of manufacturing satellite towns here, a lot of unskilled
people now have found full-time jobs," says Jack Rupke, a Holland Marsh celery
farmer and former King Township councillor.

"Farm employers can't compete with local factory wages," says Cathy Szeminski,
manager of Foreign Agricultural Resource Management Services (FARM).

FARM is a non-profit, private-sector group that works with federal officials to
process foreign employment orders.

The average starting salary for basic factory work in York is $8 an hour,
MacLean says.

Long hours

The prevailing 1989 agricultural wage rate - an average of that paid to Canadian
workers in Ontario the previous year - is $5.15 an hour for field and greenhouse
work on the vegetables that flourish in the marsh, Neufeld says.

Weeding, planting and harvesting is seasonal work that parallels crop duration.
The hours are long and the average work period is four to five months a year.

But Barbados, Trinidad, Jamaica, the eastern Caribbean and Mexico offer "a good
supply of workers - ready, willing and able" to take on the work, he adds.

In 1988, Jamaica sent 3,870 workers to Ontario and Mexico 2,100.

Last year, 350 new employers in Ontario were admitted to the foreign farm worker
program and "we're already pretty close to that figure this year," Neufeld says.

Some limits exist on the number of foreign workers a new employer can hire.

But a program liaison official at Mexico's consulate in Toronto says Mexicans
are anxious to be accepted into the program.

"They can make the equivalent of a day's pay (in their own country) in an hour
in Canada," she explains.

"They're very anxious to work as many hours as I can give them," says Rupke, who
will employ seven foreign workers on his 68-acre celery farm this season. On
average, he says, the amount is 50 to 55 hours a week.

Recruiting in supply countries is carried out by the respective foreign
ministries of labor. Selection criteria can be stiff.

"They have to have a background in farming, be 25 to 35 years old and be
married, to bring in income to support their family," the Mexican consular
official says.

As an employer, Rupke says he is responsible for paying his workers' air fares,
providing accommodation, and paying insurance and benefits.

The farm laborers carry temporary work permits while in Ontario, Szeminski says.

"The majority of workers are 'named' workers," individuals requested year after
year by the same employers, Neufeld says.

Demand for offshore workers could change if Canadian labor market forces shift
but Neufeld sees no current threat to the import program.

"I'm certainly satisfied," Rupke adds. "Without it, I'd be in big trouble."

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Star photo (Dunlop) Jack Rupke with laborers in celery field

                  Copyright 1989 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              624 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                Daily News Egypt

                           February 9, 2017 Thursday

Russian trips to Egypt will reactivate the tourism sector: El Zayat

BYLINE: Abdel Razek Al-Shuwekhi

LENGTH: 876 words


The past six years were the most difficult years in the history of the tourism
sector, according to Elhamy El-Zayat, chairperson of Emeco Group. El-Zayat said
that those who work in the tourism industry should not lose hope in its recovery
during the coming period.

El-Zayat noted in his interview with Daily News Egypt that Egyptian tourism is
capable of recovery in a short period, since Egypt is full of diverse tourism
resources such as beaches, antiquates, and safari opportunities. He noted that
we should expect the return of Russian trips to Egypt during the upcoming few
days.

How do you see the future of tourism in the coming period in light of the
challenges experienced by the sector?

Despite the challenges experienced by the sector over the past six years, the
sector is still capable of recovery in light of a significant improvement in
security indicators over the past two years.

An important aspect to be noted is that Egypt is not the only country suffering
from terrorism in the whole world; the only difference is that Egypt is located
in a volatile region in the Middle East, with Libya to the west, and Syria and
Iraq to the east.

Following the improvement of security procedures at Egyptian airports, the
resumption of Russian trips to Egypt is expected in a short period. Germany
resumed its flights to Sharm El Sheikh, which already raised hotels' occupancy
during the last two weeks.

There are complaints from workers in the sector that hotels are suffering,
especially in replacement and refurbishment processes. What do you think about
that?

The complaints are real, and I think that the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE)
launched an initiative worth roughly EGP 5bn to fund the replacement and renewal
processes for floating hotels and car fleets. The initiative will be a step
forward to resolve such problems.

The launch of this initiative indicates that the banking system supports the
state and aims for the sector to recover within a short period of time.

I know that hotel revenues declined during the last period, but the surrounding
circumstances are very difficult. We are better than others, but Egypt is
fighting a media war targeting its tourism sector.

I believe that the recovery of the tourism sector will impact many economic
sectors, such as industry and agriculture.

You need to know that every room in a hotel provides a job opportunity to three
individuals, which is a high employment rate, and this will reduce the
unemployment rate in Egypt.

The employers in the tourism sector invested their revenue surpluses in tourism
projects at the sea or in South Sinai six years ago. The investment at the time
provided more employment opportunities.

How do you evaluate the low ratio of skilled labour in the sector during the
recent period?

During the recent period, the tourism sector has lost one of its most important
elements: skilled labour. Skilled labourers left Egypt and travelled to other
countries in the region to find jobs. The unskilled labour remained, which
necessitates beginning the training operations.

The tourism sector before 25 January 2011 registered more than 3.5 million
workers, whether direct or indirect, but the situation now is completely
different.

Hotels and businesses stopped the training programmes during the last period due
to the decline in tourist influx to Egypt.

How do you judge the tourist influx to Egypt during the last year?

The Ministry of Tourism doesn't provide us with data about the tourist influx,
but it certainly declined; however, I expect the indicators to rise again during
the current year.

In the last period you opposed the offering of lands for the establishment of
new tourism projects. What do you think of the offerings implemented by the
General Authority for Tourism Development?

There were more than 225,000 rooms operating in Egypt during the recent period,
and there are 200,000 rooms under construction. We also saw how high hotel
prices were in Egypt during the past period.

We cannot continue renting hotel rooms in Egypt at a price of $12. What is the
service level provided to guests at such low prices?

The current prices will not continue because of hotels' capacity in light of the
decline of tourism.

I wonder: What if the 200,000 rooms under construction entered operations right
now? Is there a demand in Egypt to capitalise on the current hotel capacity? I
do not think so.

There should be a study of supply and demand, and lands should be offered
according to this mechanism to determine what the sector needs. Egypt needs
three-star hotels, especially in Cairo, Alexandria, and other touristic areas,
such as at the Red Sea and in South Sinai.

I sense optimism in your words. What is behind that?

Egypt is unique in the region as it possesses special tourism resources. In the
winter, tourists wish to enjoy its temperate climate, its proximity to Europe,
and the short duration of the trip with a low cost of transportation.

The cost of accommodation and tourist services provided to guests is affordable.
You can have a week off in one of the excellent tourist areas at the Red Sea for
only $400.

Despite the advantages Egypt possesses, there are still a lot of problems:
traffic, media, travel bans, terrorism in the region, and a lack of encouraging
events.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 11


         Copyright 2017 Daily News Egypt - Egyptian Media Services Ltd.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              625 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Mmegi/The Reporter (Gaborone)

                            February 22, 2010 Monday

Country Needs GMO Legislation [column]

BYLINE: Frederick Kebadiretse

LENGTH: 390  words


A law governing Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) is long overdue in
Botswana.

Panellists at a budget review meeting organised by the Botswana Council of
Non-Governmental Organisations (BOCONGO) raised the issue last week.

Participants said with the influx of GMOs having increased significantly over
the past few years, lawmakers should have long enacted a law governing the
import and sale of GMOs.

They said GMOs have been scientifically proven to have some adverse effects on
consumers and the environment, hence members of the public should know if a
product is a GMO or natural. They proposed something along the model of halaal
and non-halaal product labelling which is done at local retailers.

Inquiries by the Monitor revealed that a National Biosafety Framework (NBF) that
included the Policy and Draft Bill for GMO legislation was completed in 2004. A
workshop on the framework was held in Sebele in 2006 after which a cabinet memo
was consolidated and submitted to the Ministry of Agriculture.

According to the Acting Director in the Department of Agricultural Research,
Balibi Makoba, the Ministry had to submit the consolidated memo and Biosafety
Draft Bill for consideration by the Cabinet, but this never happened.

Makoba said Botswana recognises that modern biotechnology promises improvement
of human well-being and economic advancement of the country. At the same time,
Botswana also recognises the potential risks and adverse effects of modern
biotechnology and thus the need to ensure its safe application.

"Biosafety legislation is necessary to regulate the use and application of
biotechnology and that it is used in an equitable and beneficial manner for
overall socio-economic development and protection of biodiversity," she said.

Botswana has signed the Cartagena Protocol on Bio-safety to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, Makoba said.

In accordance with Article 11 of the Protocol, Botswana has the mandate of
ensuring that all trans-boundary movements of GMOs intended for direct use,
feeding or processing has to be accompanied by documentation with information to
facilitate identification.

However, Makoba said, the NBF - which is a tool for the implementation of the
Cartagena Protocol - is not yet operational, and in the absence of legislation
to regulate GMOs, Botswana has adopted a precautionary principle.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              626 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The Telegraph (India)

                            February 1, 2013 Friday

Missed and derided. Guess what? - Ah, the good ol' days of manifesto

BYLINE: ANDREW W. LYNGDOH

LENGTH: 529  words


Shillong, Feb. 1: This time, like every other time, Assembly elections have
brought with it speculations, campaigns, posters and tension.

Every means that are meant to ensure an aspirant a chair, are out on the street.
But what is missing is the manifesto, the quid pro quo of electoral democracy
for people whom those chairs represent. There is just no promise, at least in
public domain.

Meghalaya prepares to elect 60 legislators to the ninth Legislative Assembly on
February 23, and among the parties, which are in the fray, only the HSPDP has
released its manifesto. The major players like the Congress, UDP, and NPP,
besides the NCP and the KHNAM, are yet to publicise their much-awaited manifesto
though voting will take place three weeks from now.

"It is disheartening to think of an election today, which is devoid of issues
and ideologies. In an election, these are vital for both the candidates and the
electorate, and in order to make democracy more participatory and effective,
debates on issue and ideology should have happened at least a year before the
election and enable the citizens to make an informed decision," social activist
and church leader Rev. Kyrsoibor Pyrtuh told The Telegraph.

However, he said, this is not happening in Meghalaya, especially in the run-up
to the 2013 polls. Except for one party, the electorate are yet to have a glance
at the parties' manifestos, leave alone wider public debates, he added.

"Sadly, elections today are no longer the battlefield of issues and ideologies,
and as a result, we will have a legislative body and governance, which will be
blind to issues which affect the common people," Rev. Pyrtuh said.

KSU president Daniel Khyriem expressed surprise that the electorate was yet to
be informed about the manifesto of the other bigger parties. "Perhaps it is a
fact that parties no longer take their manifesto seriously."

The student leader said issues relating to land, inter-state boundary conflict,
influx, environmental degradation and unemployment, besides a host of others,
are the ones confronting the state.

"The new government, which will assume power after the polls, should immediately
implement the inner line permit (ILP) system in the state as agreed to last
year," he said.

Similarly, Rev. Pyrtuh highlighted land, poverty, inequality, healthcare,
education, sports, arts and culture, agriculture, economy, environmental
degradation, social security, foreign direct investment and influx as the major
issues for Meghalaya.

"Election sans issues and ideologies is no election at all, and it will
certainly make way for money or rather people with money power to determine the
future of the state and its people."

Saying cash is flowing and the people are mesmerised by tamashas and the
hungamas of election, Rev. Pyrtuh expressed apprehension that this election will
be held in the context of "corruption".

"Perhaps our polity in the state today is not only complex but the common people
are perplexed and signs are visible that post-election period will be chaotic."

Perhaps, an election bereft of the basic information on the parties' plan of
action is no election, but a ritual to showcase Indian democracy.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2013 The Telegraph (India), distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              627 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                              April 3, 2006 Monday

Action Line: False alarm over influx of giant Katrina termites

BYLINE: By Dennis Rockstroh

SECTION: B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 482 words


Q An alarming and totally untrue e-mail message making its way around the
Internet warns people that garden mulch made in Louisiana contains giant killer
termites that can eat entire homes in, like, hours.

H.H.San Jose

A There are a number of different versions going around the Internet, H.H.

The experts -- the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry, National
Plant Board, Texas A&M, Louisiana State University and more -- say this is
untrue.

Hoax-slayer.com says this about the e-mails:

``This e-mail warns recipients to be wary of buying cheap garden mulch because
it could have been made from debris left over from Hurricanes Katrina and might
therefore be contaminated with Formosan termites. The message implies that the
widespread distribution of the infested mulch is spreading Formosan termites to
areas of the United States that were previously free of the pests.

``It is true that Formosan subterranean termites can be found in the New Orleans
region of the United States. It is also true that the termites can get into
cellulose debris such as that resulting from Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane
Rita and that such debris could possibly be turned into garden mulch.

``However, it is untrue that mulch contaminated with Formosan termites is being
sold or widely distributed across the United States.

``In October 2005 the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry imposed a
quarantine on the Formosan subterranean termite, which prohibited the movement
of untreated wood or cellulose material from the parishes affected by the
hurricanes.''

Q I called the management of my apartment building about a rat problem.

I was told that they were looking for a warm place to sleep.

I asked what are they going to do about the problem and they said nothing.

Now the rats have eaten the spark plug wires in my cars.

Doesn't the apartment management have to pay for repairs?

B.F.San Jose

A It would be the right thing to do, B.F.

However, you would have to send the manager a demand letter. Then, if he
refused, you could take the matter to small claims court.

You can check out how to do that online (www.sccsuperiorcourt.org/smallclaims).

However, I don't think it would be worth the effort.

But about those rats. You should call the county's Vector Control at (408)
792-5010. They do rats, mosquitoes, fleas, ticks or any animal or insect that
can transmit disease or cause harm to humans.

Here is how to reach Action Line:

Mail: San Jose Mercury News, 750 Ridder Park Drive, San Jose, Calif. 95190

E-mail (most efficient): actionline@mercurynews.com

www.mercurynews.com. Click Columnists, then Action Line.

Phone recording: (888) 688-6400.

Fax: (408) 288-8060.

Please include full name, address and daytime phone number.

Because of the volume of requests, I cannot respond to everyone.

For tips, self-help, news and discussion, see the Consumer Action Line Web log
at http://blogs.mercurynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              628 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                              July 9, 2013 Tuesday

Somalia-Emergency WASH response to most vulnerable IDPs and people living in
humanitarian emergency and crisis to reduce mortality and destitution in Banadir
and middle Shabelle regions project

LENGTH: 503  words


Project Duration : Jan 2013 - Dec 2013
Appealing Agency :
SOMALI HUMANITARIAN AID AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION (SHADO)
Project Title  : Emergency WASH response to most vulnerable IDPs and people
living in
humanitarian emergency and crisis to reduce mortality and destitution in Banadir
and
middle Shabelle regions
Project Code  : SOM-13/WS/56624/R
Sector/Cluster  : WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE
Objectives :  To increase equal and sustained access to safe water, appropriate
sanitation and
hygiene promotion for flood affected HH and IDPs in middle Shabelle and Banadir

regions ;Rehabilitation of productive assests through cash for work and transfer
in
support of Populations in food security crisis in Middle Shabelle region
Beneficiaries Total: 47,910 People in need
Children: 27,788
Women: 8,624
Other group: 11,498 Men
Implementing Partners :  N/A
Current Funds Requested :  $436,902.00
Location :  South Central
Priority  : A - HIGH
Gender Marker Code :  1 - The project is designed to contribute in some limited
way to gender equality
Contact Details  : Abukar, info@shadosomalia.org, 252615100248
Enhanced Geographical Fields :


South Central - Middle Shabelle - Jowhar
South Central - Middle Shabelle - Adan Yabaal
South Central - Middle Shabelle - Balcad
South Central - Banadir - Cabdulcasiis
South Central - Banadir - Hawl Wadaag
South Central - Banadir - Hodan
South Central - Banadir - Shangaani
South Central - Banadir - Yaaqshiid
Needs
The proposed targeted areas of the project intervention is Abadul-Aziis,
Hawl-Wadaag, Hodon, Shangani and Yaqshid
districts in Banadir, as well Bal%ad, AdanYabal, Mahaday and Jowhar districts in
middle Shabelle region who are
amongst worst affected regions due to a sustained combination of the prolonged
severe floods and influx of IDPs who
continue to be in the Very Critical phase nutrition situation. FSNAU & FEWSNET
September (Post GU  ?? 2012) report
confirms increased cases of malnutrition, under-nutrition, AWDs related deaths,
high mortality and morbidity rates, food
insecurity, poor harvest and purely failed rains have not helped the situation.
Children, pregnant and lactating women, the
elderly, the physically and mentally challenged persons are the most affected
within IDP and returnee camps and
gathering centres. Failed deyr rains in most of the districts resulted in severe
shortage of water and pasture in the
grazing land, hence, reduced the agricultural productivity both in the riverine
and agropastoral areas. The situation for

Mogadishu IDPs is linked to the high level of humanitarian response over the
past year. Banadir region where large
displacements are reported due IDP influx fled from droughts and floods in both
Shabelle regions. In particular,
humanitarian needs of IDPs such as access to clean water, appropriate sanitation
facilities, shelter and food are
considerably increasing. Secondary displacements of DPs are taking place in IDPs
camp

country :Somalia
Ltd.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2013 Tenders Info
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              629 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                The Jordan Times

                             June 11, 2013 Tuesday

Syria border still open - official

LENGTH: 397  words


AMMAN - Jordan has not closed its border with Syria, a senior official said
Tuesday.

Minister of State for Media Affairs and Communications Mohammad Momani told The
Jordan Times that no decision has been taken to bar the entry of Syrian refugees
into the Kingdom, but noted that their numbers have dropped over the past days.

He did not give explanation for the shrinking flow of Syrians into Jordan, but
another government source cited the deteriorating security situation in the
southern part of Syria.

The number of Syrians fleeing to Jordan on Monday dropped for the sixth
consecutive day amid a reported rise in violence across southern Syria, where
there is a strong rebel presence.

According to the Jordan Armed Forces, the figure was well below the average
influx, which once numbered some 2,500 persons per day.

The number of Syrians fleeing to Jordan rose on Tuesday for the first time in
over a week amid reports of rising sectarian violence across the country.

Some 650 Syrians crossed into Jordan early Tuesday and an estimated 500 entered
later that evening, according to the Jordan Armed Forces, marking the single
largest daily influx in over a week.

Syrian rebels and local residents said recent military gains by regime forces
have all but "blocked off" major transit routes within Syria and leading to
Jordan, stranding some 7,000 Syrians throughout the border region.

Jordan has opened its borders to over 560,000 Syrians since the Syrian conflict
started in March 2011.

Momani thanked the international community for the assistance it has given to
help the Kingdom cope with the refugee burden, but said the aid is not enough,
citing the significant strain they have put on the country's infrastructure.

Also Tuesday, Planning Minister Ibrahim Saif said that the cost of hosting
Syrian refugees on the Kingdom has reached JD435.6 million since the beginning
of the Syrian crisis, while donor countries have so far provided Jordan with
JD237.3 million to help in its humanitarian assistance to the refugees.

Briefing ambassadors of donor countries and representatives of international
organisations about Jordan's economic situation, Saif said the Syrian refugees
in the Kingdom are placing pressure on the country's energy, water, health,
education, agriculture and investment sectors, said a ministry statement sent to
The Jordan Times.

Taylor Luck contributed to this report

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 62


                        Copyright 2013 The Jordan Times.
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              630 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                                August 14, 1995

Problems from land, sea need attention

BYLINE: By K.P. Waran; Joseph Bingkasan

SECTION: National My Wakil Rakyat and I; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1000 words


THE constituents of Silam, on the east coast of Sabah, face a multitude of
problems and issues which they hope their elected representatives would
take the initiative to solve.

Being predominantly dependent on agriculture, some of their main grouses
are the need to improve basic infrastructure facilities and more
enforcement action against illegal immigrants, pirates, robbers and
unlicensed hawkers.

With the economy perking up and more business ventures being started,
many youths from the plantation sector are moving to Lahad Datu, the major
town in the constituency, to look for employment. The influx of illegal
immigrants has also escalated.

Injil Sali, 57, a commmunity leader and welfare worker

He says the agriculture sector should not be neglected even with more
new business ventures coming into the area.

Since the people of Silam have traditionally been involved in the
plantation sector, the switch to industrial projects would result in a
depletion of workers from the labour-intensive plantation sector.

He also called for more training institutes to ensure the smooth
transition from agriculture to manufacturing and other industries and to
ensure that it would benefit the many youths who are employed in unskilled
jobs.

"With proper training, many of the unemployed can become useful citizens
contributing to the growth of the area and the State," he says.

Chai Kui Ping, 50, the Kapitan China of Lahad Datu

Improvements in the supply of electricity and water is quintessential
and must be looked into as a matter of urgency to hasten the pace of
development in the area.

He says the business community is disappointed that handphones still
cannot be used in the area while it has become an essential communication
tool in the west coast of Sabah.

He believes that improvements in the communication system on the east
coast would coax more investors to start businesses here and Silam can
become the gateway to export products to the Philippines and other
countries.

"The prospects of improved business operations is very good if
communication facilities are upgraded tremendously," he adds.

Latip Abdul, 40, motorboat mechanic

He says there is a need to improve enforcement in the coastal areas to
prevent theft of fishing equipment.

Many of the fishermen lament about the lack of security since their
equipment is often stolen, thus depriving them of the means to earn a
decent living. He adds that police beat bases should be established at the
fishing villages.

He also wants the authorities to establish small and medium scale
industry zones near the waterfront where workshops and fishing equipment
businesses can be concentrated since the fishing community currently has
to travel to the town for this.

Mansor Bakar, 45, fisherman

He wants better enforcement to ensure large trawlers do not compete with
those who use smaller boats.

"We are at a disadvantage because the trawlers harvest everything from
the coast leaving us with only small fishes. The area where the trawlers
and the smaller fishing boats operate should be clearly demarcated," he
says.

Although the problem of pirates has been reduced, he hopes the
authorities will continue their frequent patrols to ensure that pirates do
not return to attack the fishing community.

Sapiah Ahat, 46, a hawker

She wants improved living conditions for those living in the dilapidated
houses on stilts at the waterfront.

She says they live in unhygienic conditions and the danger of fire and
the houses collapsing is very real. Hence, the elected representatives
should look into their problems.

"Since we voted them to power they should take all necessary steps to
improve the living conditions as this is a basic necessity for everyone,"
she says.

Lai Chun Men, restaurant owner

This owner of a seafood restaurant in Lahad Datu says the MP and State
Assemblymen should take steps to ensure that the local business community
be given more opportunities for new business ventures in the area.

"Since we have been very loyal to this area through the good times and
the bad times, the people here should be given first preference when it
comes to new business ventures. With the steadily improving economy, many
businessmen from other areas are flocking to this area to buy up land and
properties.

"The local authorities should approve more business licences for those
who have been living here for longer periods while the local businessmen
should be given preference for construction and other contracts," he says.

Lai also hopes that the electricity, water supply and transportation be
improved tremendously.

"Nearly every week, we face electricity and water disruptions which is
bad for me since I have to close my restaurant. Improving these services
should be the top priority of the elected representatives," he adds.

Shamsul Baharun Abdul Rahman, 42, district officer

He says the elected representatives should have more dialogues with the
district office if they want to get a clearer picture of the needs of the
people in the area.

As administrator of the district, his staff is well versed with the
issues affecting the people and are in a good position to give their
opinion and feedback, including those on projects that can benefit the
people.

He says closer co-operation between the politicians and the district
office is important to ensure well-organised development for the whole
area.

Abdul Mali Abas, 50, Lahad Datu OCPD

He says there is close co-operation between the police and the elected
representatives since they usually pass on information and security
problems faced by the constituents.

"We attend the dialogues between the politicians and the rakyat and in
matters pertaining to security, we take immediate action. The situation
here has improved tremendously over the last few years with intensive
police operations against pirates, robbers and other offenders," he says.


LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: (STF) - Silam's coastal location has both been a blessing and a bane,
offering both opportunities and problems. Besides the usual demands associated
with emergent development, its constituents also want their wakils rakyat to
address their maritime-related needs.  Picture - Injil ... don't neglect
agriculture.  Picture - Unhygienic ... Sapiah wants better living conditions.
Picture - Lai ... more businessess for locals.  Picture - Abdul Mali ...
situation has improved.  Picture - Shamsul ... dialogues should be held.
Picture - Chai ... better facilities needed.

            Copyright 1995 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad


                              631 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Citizen (Dar es Salaam)

                            November 28, 2010 Sunday

Tibaijuka Pick Draws Praise

BYLINE: Zephania Ubwani

LENGTH: 1651  words

DATELINE: Arusha


For the past one decade or so, Nairobi's Kibera slums, notorious as one of the
filthiest in Africa, had a regular visitor who could in a way fathom the
deplorable spectacle every time she was there.

The visitor would not only bring with her cakes or juices for the poor and
perennially hungry and homeless people, but also engaged the local officials in
discussions on how to make things better and save endangered lives.

She was none other than Anna Tibaijuka, the newly-appointed minister for Lands,
Housing and Human Settlements Development. By that time Prof. Tibaijuka was the
head of the global agency for cities, UN-Habitat based in the Kenyan capital.

The Kibera slums became one of her key daily concerns after she was appointed
Habitat's executive director in 2000 by the former UN Secretary General Kofi
Annan.

If not visiting the area once described as the largest slum in sub-Saharan
Africa, she was in meetings in various parts of the world spearheading the
struggle to tackle urban squalor, one of the serious global development
challenges.

She would plead with donors for increased support to upgrade or improve the
living conditions of people not only Kibera but other similar informal
settlements in Africa, including Tanzania, her home country.

It was surely during her tenure at the UN Habitat, that the 60- year-old
graduate of the former University College of Agriculture (later Sokoine
University of Agriculture) made impact in the world. At one time she was the
highest ranking African woman to head the UN body.

She became widely known for her spirited fight to improve the lot for slum
dwellers all over the world; from Africa to the equally worse informal
settlements in Asia and favelas in Latin America.

While abroad she did not forget her motherland--she took regular trips home and
took time to visit and chat with the dwellers of poor neighbourhoods in various
towns.

I remember during her first visit to the country in October 2000, immediately
after assuming the duty in Nairobi as the UN agency's chief, she did not go
around for high-profile familiarization reunions with government bureaucrats as
person of her ranking could be expected to have done.

Rather, she paid a low-profile courtesy call to the University of Dar es Salaam
( her former employer) and the then UCLAS (now Ardhi University) , an
institution much closely linked to the work of UN Habitat, and later she headed
for Hananasif, a suburb with improved low-cost housing project in Kinondoni
District.

The Hananasif neighbourhood was being upgraded by the local authorities with
technical support from the UN body. The former economics professor at the UDSM
wanted it to be a showcase for urban upgrading in the country.

Many people have said they were not surprised by the appointment of the tough
talking lady professor to become a minister after completing her term at the UN
Habitat. She had successfully vied for the Muleba South parliamentary seat in
the last election and her admirers believed her political star had just started
rising.

Analysts believe she is one of the most appropriate candidates for the Human
Settlements docket, or even one of the most promising the new ministers in
President Kikwete's Wednesday cabinet.

Her popularity stems from her wide-ranging experience and exposure on matters
pertaining to urbanisation while serving at the UN. She is seen as a suitable
person to address the growing urban crisis in Tanzania.

"This is a good choice. She will use her vast experience at the UN Habitat and
what she has done globally to upgrade our cities", said Prof. Humphrey Moshi of
the University of Dar es Salaam.

Prof. Moshi worked with the new minister at the 'Hill', where she once edited a
famous book titled "The Crisis of Social Services" in 1980s. He said the
country's urban sector needs somebody of her stature to solve a myriad of
growing challenges.

"What she had done globally is worth rewarding. She has been exposed to a lot of
urban crises. We should support her to enable her improve our towns and cities",
he pointed out.

A Dar es Salaam resident, Henry Muhanika said the award-winning professor landed
on the human settlements docket not only because of her exposure to management
of cities in general but because of her performance at UN Habitat.

"Prof Tibaijuka has a lot of experience in this area. But her appointment may
have much to do with what she delivered at UN Habitat.

She is on record of even initiating some slum upgrading projects in the
country," he said.

But even when serving at one of the senior posts in the UN hierarchy, the new
minister looked more of an activist rather than a bureaucrat operating from the
high-rise posh offices with all trappings of power.

During several international meetings organised by her organisation, she would
personally organise 'field visits' to Kibera and other slums in the Kenyan
capital to show delegates from various countries the incriminating evidence of
urban poverty.

Her close association with urban dwellers was not confined to Kibera. She was
also a familiar face in the crowded cities of Asia and Latin America, and
wherever the urban issues were at stake.

In all regional and international meetings she ceased the opportunity to
highlight with details the plight of people living in the poor informal
settlements globally, though in recent years she had directed her urban concern
more to the African continent.

Many people in Tanzania would now be eager to see if the down-to-earth professor
would replicate what she achieved in Kenya and elsewhere in the world in
addressing the problems of rapid urbanisation in Tanzania, like the
proliferation of unplanned settlements.

Although Tanzania does not have slums in the true sense of the word (akin to
Kibera or favelas in Brazil), there is a consensus that if the issue is not
addressed quickly, the country will soon find itself in the throes of rapid and
unsustainable cities with their attendant chaos.

Many people are eager to know how Prof. Tibaijuka will perceive the challenge in
Tanzania, and the policies and tactics she would prefer to employ to stem the
crisis, considering that urban crisis also covers issues like the debilitating
poverty, hunger and diseases.

People aware of her methods say she is against demolition of unplanned
settlements, and would rather prefer to see them being upgraded, as is the case
with the Hananasif project.

Unlike some scholars, Prof. Tibaijuka believes that urbanization is inevitable
not only in Tanzania and Africa but globally and that it is no longer valid to
assign the problem only to rural-urban influx.

She maintains that like elsewhere in the world, Tanzanian towns and cities would
continue to attract people from the countryside and other countries because of
rising demand for employment, business and better living conditions as well as
regional integration.

"Cities are the hubs of wealth creation and consumption. They are centres of
knowledge and civilisation. They are places where investments are rewarding
compared to the rural areas or peripherals", she says.

Prof. Tibaijuka believes no matter what governments do to discourage people from
settling in towns, the rural-urban influx would continue unabated, unless the
forces that drive people to urban areas are effectively addressed.

According to UN-Habitat, more towns and cities are becoming, or are already
overcrowded, and the world is increasingly having more urban dwellers than
people living in the countryside.

It is estimated that in the next 30 years, people living in the cities around
the world will largely outnumber those living in the rural areas. The global
urban population is currently estimated at one billion.

Available statistics indicate that 17 per cent of the African population is
already urbanised. The continent's urban population is set to double as would be
the case with the rest of the world in the next few years.

The deteriorating conditions in the slums are, of course, very unfortunate.
Slums are not only notorious for filth, overcrowding, poor shelter and health
hazards but also prone to crime, pollution, debilitating poverty and even
political unrest.

But what can countries do to stop having slums similar to Kibera or the numerous
informal settlements in Tanzania's urban centres where two thirds of built up
areas are not surveyed?

Prof Tibaijuka has continuously maintained that the final solution lies in the
political will. Governments across the world, including Tanzania, should put in
place policies for sustainable cities, instead of treating urbanisation as a
curse.

Urbanisation or even the much scorned rural-urban influx, she adds, should not
be seen as a bad or temporary phenomenon, but as part of the development process
and whose challenges must be addressed appropriately.

"The problem is not funds but the political will to assist millions of the poor
without shelter. Despite the availability of finance and capacity to improve a
lot for slum dwellers in many parts of Africa, apparently nobody was taking
care", she was once quoted saying.

She will assume duty at the Ardhi House fully aware that over 30 per cent of the
country's 40 million population are urban dwellers and that the number keeps on
rising.

The challenges facing urban planners are many and varied. Management of big
cities such as Dar es Salaam, a tiny area with a concentration of five million
people, would certainly need a different approach compared to the vast Simanjiro
District, for example or regional towns.

The problem of double allocation of plots in towns, cities and prime surveyed
areas will certainly deny her sleep for some time to come. But that is no
justification to lose hope.

Prof. Tibaijuka is also an expert at initiating housing finance schemes as she
did while at the UN Habitat. That is an areas where the disadvantaged groups can
pin their hopes in addressing the urban crisis and transforming their
livelihoods.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              632 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Idaho Business Review (Boise, ID)

                             June 28, 2011 Tuesday

Poultry regulation moves to Idaho Ag Dept. as industry positions for growth

BYLINE: Brad Carlson

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 392  words


The Idaho State Department of Agriculture is taking comments on a draft rule
that would change the way large poultry operations are regulated.

Meetings are slated at 1 p.m. July 13 and 1 p.m. Aug. 1 at department
headquarters on Old Penitentiary Road in Boise.

The April 6 state law, the Poultry Environmental Act, authorizes the department
to register and oversee poultry operations. It mandates practices such as using
waste management plans and taking soil samples. It also imposes a program fee.

The law requires permits and inspections for midsized and large poultry
operations, both with thousands of birds. The proposed rule establishes maximum
sizes by bird type and sets requirements for wastewater handling, storage and
discharge, and other activities.

The law and rule move poultry oversight from the Idaho Department of
Environmental Quality to the Idaho State Department of Agriculture, said John
Bilderback, Idaho State Department of Agriculture section manager for dairy and
concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO) programs.  The move is logical
because ISDA has a large staff of field inspectors, and already inspects dairies
and feedlots, he said.

Idaho has a few large poultry producers, but California poultry producers have
expressed interest in moving east because of increasingly strict animal welfare
regulations in that state. The number of applications for large poultry
operations is increasing, said the Idaho Conservation League, which did not take
a position on the bill.

"The state must act to put protections in place before the industry threatens
clean water and the quality of life in rural communities," the group said on its
website.

"If there is an influx of poultry operations, this potentially could be a big
industry for Idaho," Bilderback said.

The Idaho State Department of Agriculture also seeks input on new county CAFO
definitions under House Bill 150, passed this year. A meeting is set at 9 a.m.
July 13 at department headquarters.

The CAFO law allows counties to establish parameters for concentrated animal
feeding operations and have state agriculture staff assess the sites, Bilderback
said. Previously, the Idaho State Department of Agriculture set the minimum
animal headcount that established an enterprise as a CAFO, he said. The law
allows counties to collect fees to cover site analysis.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Regulatory

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              633 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           October 29, 2016 Saturday

Caribbean poultry sector looks for import restrictions to defend industry

BYLINE: Ivan Cairo, Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1083 words


Oct. 29--GEORGE TOWN, Cayman Islands -- While poultry farms are making serious
efforts, including financial investments, to make the region self-sufficient,
several issues such as illegal imports from Brazil and cheap 'dump chicken' from
the US are harming the industry, local entrepreneurs say.

According to Trevin Nairne, export manager with Jamaica Broilers, throughout the
Caribbean B-grade chicken is being imported from the US "that clearly is being
dumped". Meanwhile, Brazilian, Mexican and Chilean chicken is also entering the
regional market.

Nairne wondered how it is possible that a large facility such as Jamaica
Broilers, which produces high quality products, exists in the region and yet
inferior quality chicken is allowed to enter the regional market.

During several events at the Caribbean Week of Agriculture 2016 in the Cayman
Islands, representatives of international and regional institutions,
policymakers and farmers lamented the fact that unhealthy foods especially are
entering the Caribbean in staggering amounts.

Desmond Ali, executive director of the Caribbean Poultry Association (CPA), said
that for some time the organization has raised its concerns regarding the influx
of chicken from outside the region.

He stressed that "a lot of poultry is coming illegally into the region from
places as Brazil, which are not approved exporters into the region". There are
also concerns about "dark meat such as leg quarters, backs and necks that is
coming from the US".

According to Ali, the US currently has around one billion pounds of dark meat in
frozen stock, which had to be sold somewhere since countries as Russia and China
dropped the amount of dark meat that they used to import from the US. Russia
used to buy one million pounds a year but that has dropped to 300,000 pounds.

"So the US has to send this dark meat somewhere and we in the Caribbean are one
of the markets that they are coveting," Ali said.

He warned that the region should be "extremely careful and cautious about
defending our industry". With sales reaching US$650 million a year, employing
about 135,000 people and a production of 286,000 metric tonnes of meat, the
poultry industry is the largest agri-business in the Caribbean, "larger than
most agri-businesses put together".

"We are a big industry in terms of our socio-economic impact and we need to
defend that industry," the CPA official said.

In a bid to prevent illegal and sub-standard cheap products from interfering and
disrupting the regional market, a Caribbean poultry meat standard was developed
and subsequently approved by the Caribbean Regional Organization for Standards
and Quality. The CARICOM Council on Trade and Economic Development (COTED)
approved these standards in December 2012.

These standards should now be implemented throughout the region, said Ali. Two
important components of these standards are that: any meat that has been frozen
cannot be thawed and sold as chilled meat, nor can it be thawed and refrozen.

"Secondly we are saying that any meat that is more than 180 days old cannot be
sold for human consumption," Ali noted.

The CPA is seeing poultry meat from outside the region "that's two and three and
four years old", which is posing serious health risks for consumers. The CPA
chief further said that the organization is also looking into phytosanitary
measures to block unwanted products from entering the region.

Speaking to journalists, Caribbean sub-regional director of the Food and
Agriculture Organisation (FAO), Lystra Fletcher-Paul, noted that countries in
the region should seriously consider measures to prevent the importation of
certain unhealthy foods once they are in a position to produce healthier
substitutes.

She said that while the food import bill of CARICOM nations reached almost US$5
billion annually, at the same time the peoples in these countries are eating
themselves to death with the extra-regional food. Hypertension, heart disease
and diabetes are the deadliest health issues in the Caribbean, she said.

The FAO representative stressed that, when the region can produce and transport
high quality food that can substitute for imported products, restriction
mechanisms should be put in place to keep certain foods out.

According to Fletcher-Paul, within the rules of the World Trade Organization
(WTO) there is room for countries to ban certain foods. Government entities such
as the ministries of agriculture and foreign affairs should have closer
cooperation, which would enable the countries to take advantage of the WTO
rules.

According to Nairne, there need to be some kind of guideline or re-evaluation of
what currently exists to determine what kind of food, including poultry, is
suitable to enter the Caribbean market. The region, he added, could be saving
money or spend the money within the region to raise poultry "here to help us
grow".

The manager stressed that, if the regional farmers increase production, the
price of chicken would certainly drop.

"As you know, with increasing scale, the unit prices will drop, which clearly
means that the more we produce the more affordable the chicken will be," he
said.

Three years ago, Jamaica Broilers was operating only in Jamaica, now it is in
six countries selling "hormone-free" products. Nairne noted that, while poultry
farms in the region are under strict veterinary monitoring and regulation about
what is being exported, such is not the case regarding chicken that is brought
to the Caribbean.

Although farmers don't have a direct influence on discussions in COTED, the
manager hoped that the "government officials would speak on our behalves" at the
CARICOM table.

He argued that some tax mechanism should be put in place to protect regional
producers from the influx of cheaper "heavily subsided" products from outside
the Caribbean.

Jamaica Broilers, which produces 'The Best Dressed Chicken' brand, is currently
producing 800 to 900 tonnes of chicken weekly, which according to the manager
could be easily increased to 2-3,000 since the production facilities are
underutilized.

Nairne said that his company offers numerous jobs to people from all over the
Caribbean, including Guyana, Haiti, Trinidad and Tobago and the Cayman Islands.
He lamented that the money that is being spend on imported chicken doesn't flow
back to region.

___ (c)2016 the Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) Visit the
Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) at www.caribbeannewsnow.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20161029-1CN-Caribbean-poultry-sector-looks-for-import-restrictions-to-defend-in
dustry-1029-20161029

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CN


        Copyright 2016 Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands


                              634 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                              May 16, 2016 Monday
                                 METRO EDITION

'Promise Zone' is showing promise

BYLINE: ERIN GOLDEN; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 902 words



HIGHLIGHT: Federal designation lands $3.8M in aid for North Side in Mpls.; more
expected.


A special federal designation meant to revitalize north Minneapolis is beginning
to earn some extra help, but city and community leaders say it's too early to
measure any significant progress.

Last April, Minneapolis became one of 13 communities with a "Promise Zone" - a
high-poverty area given priority status for federal grants, volunteers and other
help from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The communities
selected by the White House for the designation maintain the status for 10 years
as they work on goals ranging from higher graduation and employment rates to
safer streets and lower crime rates.

A year later, Minneapolis has landed two grants, totaling about $3.8 million,
that officials attribute to the Promise Zone. The city has added an employee to
manage the effort and a HUD liaison is spending a few days a week at City Hall.
Soon, 10 AmeriCorps VISTA volunteers will begin working out of north Minneapolis
to help coordinate efforts between the city and the long list of government and
nonprofit groups that have pledged to help with the Promise Zone.

Michelle Horovitz, executive director of Appetite for Change, said leaders of
North Side community groups are in "a wait-and-see mode" as they consider
whether the Promise Zone will provide any lasting solutions. Her group is one
that has already won funding; it will share in a $374,402 grant from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture meant to bring more fresh and healthy food options to
the area.

"It seems like it has the potential to be different, if enough projects are
getting preferential treatment from the feds at all levels," she said. "Not just
social programs, but economic development and workforce development and other
for-profit projects - that could provide an influx of capital investment that
the community really needs."

Attracting investment

The food-project grant will be used to help restart a group called Northside
Fresh, which has gone dormant after losing its funding. Horovitz said the
coalition links up the work of multiple organizations. One example: Northpoint
Health and Wellness Center will be able to provide "prescriptions" for free
fresh produce that can be redeemed at the West Broadway Farmers Market.

The second Promise Zone-related grant, about $3.4 million for lead hazard
reduction efforts, came from HUD.

Julianne Leerssen, the city's manager of equity and inclusion and the top city
official working on the Promise Zone, said the city didn't have time to apply
for many other grants right away. She said she began work in September, late in
the annual federal grant-making process. Since then, she's submitted eight grant
applications connected to the Promise Zone, all of which are pending.

Elsewhere around the country, the three cities that first received Promise Zone
designations, in 2014, have reported considerable early success. Fifteen months
into Los Angeles' Promise Zone designation, officials said the city had received
$38 million in federal funding, while San Antonio brought in $10 million.
Philadelphia's zone attracted $30 million in federal, state and private funds.

While the Promise Zone designation helps secure federal money, officials in
other cities said it can also attract private investment.

San Antonio says more than $84 million in public and private investments have
poured into its Promise Zone. The city also touts the opening of 21 new
businesses in its Promise Zone since receiving the designation.

In Philadelphia, Promise Zone Director Owen Franklin said investments there now
total more than $37 million, with the largest grants for health and education
efforts.

He said the lack of direct funding that comes with the Promise Zone designation
is both an asset and a challenge. It provides help to people who are already
working in the area, but it can make the program difficult to explain.

"There's no sticker that's handed to you that says, 'This service brought to you
by the Promise Zone,' " he said. "It's understandable that sometimes residents
wonder about the benefits."

Signs of change

Leerssen said she believes the Promise Zone effort is different from others that
have been tried before on the North Side because it tackles multiple issues at
the same time.

In the future, she said, signs that the Promise Zone is making a difference
could include safer streets, more students graduating, more people finding jobs
and stable housing, and a broader range of businesses locating in north
Minneapolis.

"We'll have something other than fast food and nail shops on West Broadway," she
said, adding that there are some other businesses in the area, but it needs more
to accomplish a diverse mix.

Since the Promise Zone designation, the North Side has been home to weeks of
protests following the police shooting of Jamar Clark. In recent weeks, its
neighborhoods have seen a spike in gun violence that police attribute to an
ongoing gang feud.

Council Member Blong Yang, who represents one of two North Side council wards,
said he hasn't heard much about the Promise Zone in recent months but is
optimistic that it will begin to yield benefits for the city and help tackle
persistent issues like crime.

Leerssen said the city is seeing signs of hope - and indications that the
Promise Zone is starting to make a difference.

"Too often, we try to save the world and don't look at the steps that are
happening to get there," she said.

Erin Golden · 612-673-4790

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2016 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              635 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                             October 2, 2006 Monday

Chinese peasants cash in on "Golden Week" tourism

LENGTH: 576 words


Text of report in English by official Chinese news agency Xinhua (New China News
Agency)

Nanjing, 2 October: Seven years after the Chinese government started to promote
tourism and consumption with the introduction of "golden week" holidays, peasant
farmers have begun to benefit.

More and more city people are taking advantage of the week-long holidays around
Chinese Lunar New Year, Labour Day on 1 May and China's National Day on 1
October to head out to the countryside to enjoy fresh air and organic food.

For peasant farmers equipped to offer hospitality, the influx of tourists means
huge profits.

"I started to host tourists in 2004. Last year, I made 20,000 yuan (2,500 US
dollars) in net profits," said Zhou Fachun, a peasant farmer in Zhoujia'ao
Village, 8 km from the city centre of Nanjing, in east China's Jiangsu Province.

"It feels wonderful to be running a business from home," he said.

Sixteen out of the 78 families in Zhou's small village take in tourists during
the holiday periods. The three most successful family businesses are making
200,000 to 300,000 yuan (25,000 to 37,500 US dollars) a year.

"Chinese people started celebrating 'golden week' holidays in 1999 and more than
100 million holiday train trips are made each year," said Prof Zhou Yingheng,
president of Nanjing Agricultural University's School of Business
Administration.

For years, only city dwellers enjoyed the holidays. The 900 million peasants who
make up the vast majority of the Chinese population were left out, he said.

The huge gap between Chinese cities and the countryside means that peasant
farmers are at least 15 years behind their city peers in terms of consumption.
Even in the richer eastern provinces, the gap is around 10 years, according to
Zhou's research.

But the booming countryside tours have helped narrow the gap, according to a
local tourism official in the suburbs of Nanjing.

"The influx of tourists to the countryside has not just helped peasant farmers
increase income, but also increased the added value of local agricultural
production," said Xie Wencai, an official in suburban Yuhua District.

The State Tourism Administration says Chinese tourists are making at least 300
million trips to the countryside each year, generating more than 40bn yuan (5bn
US dollars) of tourism income.

In the meantime, some better-off farmers have joined their city peers in
sightseeing or shopping tours during "golden week" holidays.

"I'm busy most of the year, but I manage to travel with my family almost every
year," said Chen Xiangzhan, a farmer-turned-businessman from Yongjia County in
Wenzhou, a booming manufacturing centre in rich Zhejiang Province.

For the National Day holiday, Chen and his family went to Ningxia Hui Autonomous
Region, a Muslim community in the northwest that is far less developed than his
hometown.

But even in remote Ningxia, a sightseeing tour to Beijing or even Hong Kong is
no longer "pie in the sky" for every farmer.

"We've sent nearly 1,000 peasant farmers on package tours outside Ningxia. Many
of them travelled to Beijing and some to Hong Kong and Macao," said Zhang
Yonghua, vice managing director of Ningxia Overseas Tourism Co.

Chinese farmers made 640 million sightseeing tours in 2004, the most recent
period for which State Tourism Administration data is available.

That year, farmers' tourism spending totalled 135bn yuan (about 17bn US
dollars), it said.

Source: Xinhua news agency, Beijing, in English 0721 gmt 2 Oct 06

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2006 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              636 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            August 4, 2011 Thursday

Putin tells the Caucasus to stop fighting and start serving

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 441 words


Working in service industries is not an affront to personal pride, Prime
Minister Vladimir Putin insisted as he spoke to youngsters in the North
Caucasus.

At a local equivalent of the  Seliger youth forum  the premier put the case for
developing tourism in the region  rather than developing agriculture or
industry, as Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov had proposed a day before.

But he faced questions from one of the guests at Mashukskaya, who suggested that
serving tourists might not suit the Caucasian mentality.

Pride and hospitality

Putin was quizzed about how locals would adapt to an influx of visitors
persuaded to ditch the beaches of Antalya for the mountains of Southern Russia,
Moskovsky Komsomolets reported.

'We have not abandoned our Caucasian hospitality, but in the mountains we are
proud people - we prefer to fight rather than be servants,' said one of the
delegates at Putin's talk. 'Maybe it would be better to develop agriculture.'

Putin responded by urging a look at the bigger picture: 'The mountain people are
proud, but they are not created only to fight.

'When people understand that it affects their welfare, they quickly change their
mentality.

'It's wrong to speak about being a servant to tourists. This is a very important
economic sector in many countries ... it is not servitude, but a prestigious
job.'

Education in turmoil

Putin also assessed the rate of spending in the region, conscious of growing
concerns about the costs of redeveloping the North Caucasus via federal
subsidies.

While a proposed  4 trillion ruble ($144 billion) windfall  awaits, Putin
admitted that not all of the money previous invested had been well spent.

In particular he highlighted the unfettered growth of higher education,
complaining that an explosion in graduates had devalued the entire university
sector, Moskovskiye Novosti reported.

'In the past we trained about 34,000 people - now it's more than 170,000!' Putin
complained. 'There are 70-odd branches of universities, and that's a profanity.

'As a result, degrees from the North Caucasus are worthless. But this is not the
fault of the region. The blame lies with federal regulators.'

Funding cuts

Meanwhile in Kislovodsk it was becoming clear that the Finance Ministry was
unwilling to write that 4-trillion check for the Ministry of Regional
Development.

A meeting to discuss investment into the North Caucasus Federal District saw
Deputy Finance Minister Tatyana Nesterenko restate her opposition to the plan.

'We do not agree on such a big amount,' she said. 'Everything will be within
budget. We cannot even seriously consider such suggestions.'

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2011 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              637 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday

Study: Immigrants raise wages for some native-born Californians

BYLINE: Jessie Mangaliman, Mercury News

LENGTH: 642 words


The influx of immigrants to California raised the wages of some native-born
workers in the state, contrary to common public perception and previous studies
on the subject, according to a report released this afternoon from the Public
Policy Institute of California.

In the report based on analysis of wage and employment data, economist Giovanni
Peri finds that some better-educated workers, those with a least a high school
diploma, saw wage increases ranging from 3 percent to 7 percent between 1990 and
2004.

Rather than compete with native workers, immigrants ``complement'' certain work
sectors, agriculture and construction for example, by helping native workers who
have the language and local networking skills to ascend to better-paying
supervisory and managerial jobs. The influx of cheap labor, the report said,
allows companies in some labor markets to expand jobs in management and
training.

``There are some types of tasks and jobs, that as immigrants come in, they
preferentially take because they're good at those,'' Peri said, ``and that frees
up native workers for the better-paying jobs.''

The real losers among low-skilled workers in California, the report said, are
other immigrants who compete for the same jobs and experienced significant wage
declines. Foreign-born workers suffered an average range of wage decline from 13
percent to 20 percent during the same period.

The report, authored by Peri, associate professor of economics at the University
of California-Davis, is the first to look in detail at the impact of immigrants
on employment and wages of native Californians but it's not likely to settle the
contentious national debate among economists and policy makers about the complex
subject.

There are some who believe that immigrants take away jobs from native workers
and depress wages, while many studies have concluded that in the long term, the
negative impact on wages of a small sector of low-skilled workers who are high
school drop outs is small to negligible.

In the PPIC study, Peri refutes a commonly held assumption that the growth of
the immigrant labor force displaces native workers. Since 1960, the number of
California's foreign-born workers has grown steadily. In 1960, less than one in
10 of all state workers was foreign born. In 2004, the latest data analyzed by
Peri, a full one-third of all of California's work-force is foreign-born.

``It's like a man bites dog story, isn't it?'' said Roy Beck, executive director
of NumbersUSA Educational and Research Foundation in Arlington, Va. The group
conducts research on immigrant labor force, and supports strict limits to legal
immigration.

``It paints a rosy picture,'' a doubtful Beck said. ``It seems surprising.''

Gordon Hanson, director of the Center on Pacific Economies at the University of
San Diego, who has conducted studies on immigration and the U.S. labor force,
said he disagrees with Peri's findings that ``immigrants are just hurting
themselves.''

Hanson cites a 2003 study by Harvard University economist George Borjas that
said low-skilled native workers have been hurt by immigration.

Outside of California, in regions with growing immigrant populations,
researchers have documented the negative impact of the influx of immigrants on
the native labor force, said Steven Camarota, director of research for the
Center for Immigration Studies in Washington, D.C., a national that advocates
for limits to legal immigration.

Hans Johnson, a demographer with PPIC, said he's not surprised by reaction to
Peri's findings because it challenges a common belief that immigrants displace
native workers and lower their wages.

``A lot of people won't believe it,'' Johnson said. ``When we think about this
in terms of U.S. immigration, it should change the nature of the debate.''

Contact Jessie Mangaliman at jmangaliman@mercurynews.com or (408) 920-5794.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              638 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                This Day (Lagos)

                               December 15, 2015

Substandard Goods - SON to Introduce Reference Code for Products in 2016

BYLINE: Crusoe Osagie

LENGTH: 1040 words


The Standards Organisation of Nigeria (SON) has announced that it has taken
additional measures to combat the influx of fake and substandard goods[#x200e]
into the country by introducing a reference code on products in 2016.

The Director General, SON, Dr. Joseph Odumodu, explained that going forward next
year, every SONCAP certificate issued on products must have reference code to
ease traceability of substandard products in the country. Odumodu stated this
during a review meeting for 2015 with International Accredited Firms (IAFs).

In his words, [#x200e]"Going forward, we are introducing additional measures to
improve the effectiveness of the SONCAP and some of those measures will be
increasing our market surveillance activities and within the first half of next
year, to be precise by June, every product we find in the market place without a
code, we will interrogate more painstakingly and by September, we will not allow
any imported products without the code into the country."

"What that means is that by September, any product we find within the market in
Nigeria will be removed and destroyed. I have stated severally that the Nigerian
economy deserves a lot more in terms of local manufacturing capacity and the
only way we can achieve that is to ensure that Nigerian made products do not
compete with products that are of questionable background and integrity," he
said.

According to him, in the last four years, SON has entered into agreement[#x200e]
with the Chinese government, which he said never happened in order to deliberate
on how best to combat the influx of substandard goods into the country. [#x200e]
"There is a renewed commitment from the Chinese government but we need to see
this in action. Even without that agreement, the initiative we have put in place
in SON would actually help us to clean up the markets. The major provision of
what we put in place is the ability to repatriate products and get your FOB
value, and the Chinese must ensure that we get certified products in Nigeria.
The challenge we have is that our own people go over there to ask for something
that looks like the real products. If people cannot go to the United Kingdom or
the United States of America to get what looks like the original, why should
they get them in China," he added.

The SON boss added that the agency is also focusing on product liability, saying
that anybody who sells a substandard product would be held accountable till the
agency traces the original manufacturer of the substandard product. [#x200e] "If
I walk into a shop to get a product and it is substandard, it is the person who
sold that product that has the liability [#x200e]and until we are able to trace
the product to the original owner, the seller of that products will be in our
custody. What we are also saying is that we are putting some responsibility on
the retailers and wholesalers. We have told them to ask for documentation before
buying a product because they need to protect themselves," he said.[#x200e]

He said: "Our system going forward [#x200e]must be evidence-driven. If you sell
a product to someone and it does not work, you will pay. People should demand
their rights. If you buy a product and it does not work, you must return the
product and get your full value and if you do not get it, you have a right to
respond to.[#x200e] If you have a product in the market, it must be registered
to enable us capture it into our database so that when the product fail to
conform to standards, we will know where to trace it to."

He said Nigeria [#x200e]has a new government that is focused on promoting
agriculture [#x200e]and manufacturing to create employment for Nigerians,
pointing out that once the agency's initiatives gets into action, the level of
substandard products will be reduced to less than 15 per cent.

"We want you to join us as we journey to a safer and a more productive Nigeria.
There are lots of expectations from this new government in Nigeria and the
indications are already there because the relationship between Nigeria and China
is getting closer and I know that closeness will l[#x200e]ead to a lot more
commitment on both sides," he said.

Also speaking at the event, a representative of one of the IAFs, China
Certification and Inspection Company Limited (CCIC), Mr. Zhao Long, who stated
the Chinese government is 100 per cent commitment to the SONCAP project.

He said CCIC as a government corporation, has moved a further step with China
customs in trying to stop influx of substandard goods into Nigeria by ensuring
that every that every goods leaving China must have SONCAP certification.

"CCIC is 100 per cent committed to help stop the influx of substandard goods
into Nigeria.[#x200e] The Chinese and Nigerian government have a cordial and
traditional relationship. Our government has a strong support to this project
and instructed us to provide solace to play an important role in this project.
We have put together lot of resources in this project. So we will provide a
continuous support to this project," he said.[#x200e] [#x200e] Another
representative of the IAFs, Intertek International Limited, Mr. Victor Faleye,
said[#x200e] Intertek is proud to have pioneered this programme on behalf of
SON. saying that it is practically impossible for SON to be everywhere around
the globe especially the Asian market that has been a source of concern in terms
of importation of substandard products.

"We act as a representation to SON to ensure that the NIS mark for quality
specification for products coming in are met before they are shipped. We have
done this diligently in the last 10 years. I want to advocate for attitudinal
change [#x200e]of Nigerians. If a department of government is working very hard
to ensure that what we consume and the goods we buy with our hard earned
currency is of the highest quality, it is regrettable that Nigerians are
frustrating the agency's effort by engaging in such illicit trade[#x200e]," he
said.

"These goods, when they are destroyed does not only mean a loss to the importers
but also to the economy at large. We are aware of the scarcity of foreign
exchange in the country. We expect Nigeria to use the available resources to
bring in materials that will be of benefit to the country so that the little
that we earn do not get destroyed again as a result of substandard issues.," he
added.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              639 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Kashmir Images (India)

                             April 7, 2015 Tuesday

Tarigami concerned over crop damages due to incessant rains

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE: Jammu


Jammu, April 7 -- Expressing serious concern over the situation created by the
incessant rains in Kashmir, CPI (M) senior leader and MLA Kulgam Mohammad Yousuf
Tarigami has sought immediate intervention of the Chief Minister in distressing
condition of farmers who have suffered extensive damages to their crop.

In a statement issued here, Tarigami has said that farmers have suffered immense
damages to their mustard, wheat and other crops and the government must depute
teams to assess these losses immediately. "Losses suffered by farmers and
orchardists should be assessed and accordingly the compensation must be
disbursed to the affected farmers without any delay," Tarigami demanded.

The CPI (M) leader said that agriculture and horticulture sectors have suffered
a huge setback because of devastating deluge in September last year and the
farmers are not in a position to repay their loans raised against their farming
land and orchards. "Now the incessant rains have started adding to the damages
caused to their crop and other agriculture and horticulture produce."

Referring to the shortage and black marketing Horticulture spray oil,
pesticides, fungicides and fertilizers, Tarigami said the scarcity of
fertilizers and pesticides have been creating immense difficulties to farmers
and orchardists in the state especially in Kashmir valley.

The CPI (M) leader also sought Government intervention in checking the influx of
spurious pesticides and fungicides into the Valley. Since the fruit season 2015
is approaching and the fresh crop is expected in May followed by apple in June,
Tarigami said adequate supplies of spray oil, pesticides and fungicides
essentially required as per schedule prescribed by SKAUST-K and Horticulture
department must be made available in the market in order to save orchards from
deterioration.

He said it is imperative to provide support to the farming community by
exploring all possible marketing channels to make agriculture production
remunerative which would improve living conditions of farmers. Tarigami stressed
on the government to ensure that farmers are provided quality agriculture inputs
like improved seeds and standard fertilizers to give boost to agriculture
production.

Concerned over the recent fatal landslides in different parts of state, Tarigami
demanded that the affected families should be compensated and ex-gratia be
provided to those families whose kith and kin got killed.

He urged upon the government to take removal of encroachment from rivers, flood
spill channels as a top priority. "The government must come up up with a
concrete plan to remove all kinds of encroachments especially from rivers and
flood spill channels in order to protect the people from future catastrophic
situations," he added.

The CPI (M) leader also sought KCC loan waiver for the people of the state who
have suffered immensely due to September deluge and are not in a condition to
repay the amounts taken on loan. Tarigami also demanded six months extension in
free ration delivery to the people who are yet to come to terms after being hit
by the recent floods in Kashmir.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Kashmir Images. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 Kashmir Images
                              All Rights Reserved


                              640 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 9, 1988

Sudanese refugees facing starvation : '80 per cent of population' have fled war
in south

BYLINE: By TOM PORTEOUS

LENGTH: 587 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


A human catastrophe is unfolding in Sudan, as thousands of starving people
continue to flee from the war-torn south into the north in search of food and
security.

In recent weeks, several trains have arrived in Khartoum loaded with cargoes of
emaciated men, women, and children.


Passengers, many without food, ride 300 to a carriage (including those on the
roof) to reach friends and relatives in the capital. Others have made it only as
far as South Kordofan, just across the border from the Bahr Al-Bazal region in
the south, where the Ethiopian-backed rebel Sudan Peoples Liberation Army is
locked in a guerrilla war with government troops.

The hostilities have disrupted supply routes and agriculture, and are said to
have depopulated vast areas of the south.

The exodus of southern Sudanese into the north has coincided with a massive
influx of southern Sudanese into Ethiopia in recent weeks, and thousands of
other southerners have taken refuge in the government-held towns of the south.

Sudanese authorities say that 80 per cent of the population of south Sudan has
now been uprooted by war and famine.

Relief workers in Ethiopia and Sudan say the condition of many of these
fugitives is critical. A survey carried out last week by the relief agency,
Action International Contre La Faim, showed that among some of the new arrivals
in Kordofan more than 80 per cent of the younger children are suffering from
severe malnutrition.

Southerners, mostly from the Dinka tribes, have been pouring into Kordofan at a
rate of more than 200 a day.

It is feared that, unless humanitarian organisations undertake a major
assistance programme to help these people, many may die of starvation.

The influx of southerners to the north has put a severe strain on local
populations in the north, and has given rise to fears of serious political and
economic ramifications.

The Sudanese Prime Minister, Mr Saadiq al-Mahdi, said at the weekend that he was
astonished at the poor response of the international community to repeated
appeals for help by his Government.

In an interview, he condemned the SPLA for its 'totally unjustified refusal to
come to the negotiating table, as proposed by the Khartoum Government.'

The SPLA, which says it is fighting for an end to Arab and Muslim dominance of
Sudan, has refused to make piece with Khartoum unless the Sudanese Government
removes Islamic law from the statute book and sets out a secular constitution.

Mr Al-Mahti underlined that his Government was formulating a legal system under
which Islamic law would be applied only to Muslim Sudanese. He said official
policy in Sudan was to pursue a peaceful settlement of the conflict, and he
warned that the SPLA's militant position would result in the 'depopulation and
extermination of the population in the south, not maybe by physical force, but
by use of the food weapon.'

The Prime Minister accused the Western press of portraying the civil conflict in
Sudan in terms of religious persecution by the Muslim majority of the largely
non-Muslim south.

But this view, he said, was contradicted by the fact that hundreds of thousands
of southerners had taken refuge in the north, and had been by and large well
received by northern Sudanese.

However, some southern politicians have expressed anxiety that the displacement
of southerners to the predominantly Arab north will submerge the African
identity of these displaced people, and thus reinforce the Arab dominance.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1988 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                              641 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Business Mirror (Philippines)

                              July 19, 2015 Sunday

PHL eyes shipments of processed food to wealthy Efta countries

BYLINE: Mary Grace Padin

LENGTH: 281  words


The Philippines is targeting to export processed food products to countries
belonging to the European Free Trade Association (Efta), an official of the
Department of Agriculture said.

Agriculture Undersecretary Segfredo R. Serrano told reporters in an interview
that Manila is keen on asking Efta countries to open up their markets for
processed food and fishery products during negotiations for a free-trade
agreement (FTA).

Because Efta countries are far, we are more interested in exporting processed
food and fish products, Serrano said in the vernacular.

He noted that member-countries of Efta-Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Switzerland-are fishing countries and could also ship out fish products to the
Philippines.

The Philippines and Efta countries have started negotiations for an FTA in March
this year. Serrano said negotiations will again be held in September and
November. The Philippine government is targeting to conclude negotiations before
the end of President Aquino's term.

A trade official said earlier that the Efta bloc has floated the possibility of
giving duty-free access of all goods coming from the Philippines-a sign that
there is no fear from the side of the European on the possible influx of locally
made goods.

Bilateral trade between the Philippines and Efta countries is currently at a
dismal level. Data from the Department of Trade and Industry showed that from
2011 to 2013, Philippine imports have been growing at an annual average rate of
3.76 percent.

Data from the Tariff Commission showed that integrated circuits, fresh or
chilled fillets of fish and artificial teeth are among the top imports of
Liechtenstein and Switzerland from the Philippines.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 Business Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                              642 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             April 13, 2007 Friday
                                  City Edition

State agencies help ready towns for Panhandle plant ;
Smithfield beef processing facility promises 3,000 jobs

BYLINE: Ja'Rena Lunsford, Business Writer

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 475 words


State agencies and officials are putting their support behind a proposed
650,000-square-foot beef processing plant that is expected to bring nearly 3,000
jobs to Texas County.

Smithfield Beef Group Inc. and ContiGroup Cos. Inc. announced last fall it would
build the plant in the Oklahoma Panhandle. The plant will bring an influx of
residents - residents who will drive on roads, go to school and need housing.

To prepare the communities of Hooker and Tyrone for the population boom, state
agencies are providing assistance to the towns so they will be ready for the
2008 opening of the plant.

"The communities have asked for our help," Commerce Department spokeswoman
Leslie Blair said. "These smaller communities don't have the resources that some
of the larger communities have, so we are happy to help them."

Blair said the Commerce Department is helping the communities identify funds
that can be used to develop and improve infrastructure. That includes new
housing, road improvements and ensuring schools are adequately prepared for an
increase in population.

Also, the state's Agriculture Department has met with officials from both the
Hooker and Tyrone school districts to help facilitate an agreement for tax
revenues.

"With the addition of a facility as large as Smithfield, that's going to
generate a lot of tax revenues for the schools," said Jack Carson, spokesman for
the Agriculture Department.

Carson said the  meeting was to make sure the school systems would benefit
equally from the plant's presence. The new tax revenue will be beneficial to
both school systems, especially Tyrone, which nearly had to shut its doors,
Carson said.

The Agriculture Department also is helping the communities locate grants to help
pay for infrastructure improvements.

"All of the state agencies have partnered very well on this project and we
anticipate this will continue," Carson said. "It's taken a great deal of
cooperation."

The Oklahoma Employment Securities Commission will help Smithfield create a
recruitment plan, said Richard McPherson, director of work force services.

Although the state agencies are behind the project, some Panhandle residents,
like John A. Hairford, are not ready to support it. "I strongly feel this is not
right for us," Hairford said.

Hairford, who has lived in Hooker since 1958, said instead of applying for
grants to pay for infrastructure, the state should require Smithfield to pay for
the improvements.

"Taxpayers should not be burdened with that," Hairford said. "Smithfield will
make millions of dollars, but instead of Smithfield paying for infrastructure,
Oklahoma taxpayers are the ones that have to pay for it."

Blair said though the plant, which is expected to begin construction this
spring, has some opposition, the Commerce Department will continue to do what it
can to prepare the communities.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: (map of Hooker)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2007 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              643 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Messenger

                              June 22, 2014 Sunday

Suicide bombers influx in Sindh under guise of Wazirstan operation

SECTION: Vol. VI No. 172

LENGTH: 247  words


Sindh National Party has expressed grave concern on influx of Taliban terrorists
and suicide bombers under guise of Military operation in Wazirtan and they can
destroy already shabby peace in such a situation Sindhi nation and nationalist
forces shall have no option but to unite. This was stated by Ashraf Noonari
central organizer of SNP while presiding meeting of central organizing committee
of party at national house Qasimabad.

He said on one hand Sindh was bearing the atrocities of center and on the other
suffering under burden of 10 million illegal immigrants who were now  being
supplemented by new arrivals of terrorists running from operation in Wazirstan.

Noonari dissolved all district bodies of party including those of Sindhi Nari
Tehrik for purpose of reorganization. Dr, Uzma Jokhyo, Dr. Nasim Akhtar and
Saima Daheri have been made members of organizing body for SNT.

The meeting condoled death of 60 devotees of Qalander during 3 day annual Urs
due to inefficiency of Auqaf department and condemned mayhem at Lahore at hands
of Punjab police.

Noonari said Punjab was in control of 3 other provinces and was looting their
resources as booty. Dacca debacle was result of atrocities of Punjab and now
deprivation of Balochistan can repeat incident of Bengal.

He said 80% livelihood of Sindh was on agriculture but by blocking water Punjab
wants to create drought like situation in Sindh. He said it seems as if Nawaz
Sharif was considering him as prime minister of Punjab.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2014 The Messenger
                              All Rights Reserved


                              644 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Messenger

                              June 22, 2014 Sunday

Suicide bombers influx in Sindh under guise of Wazirstan operation

SECTION: Vol. VI No. 171

LENGTH: 247  words


Sindh National Party has expressed grave concern on influx of Taliban terrorists
and suicide bombers under guise of Military operation in Wazirtan and they can
destroy already shabby peace in such a situation Sindhi nation and nationalist
forces shall have no option but to unite. This was stated by Ashraf Noonari
central organizer of SNP while presiding meeting of central organizing committee
of party at national house Qasimabad.

He said on one hand Sindh was bearing the atrocities of center and on the other
suffering under burden of 10 million illegal immigrants who were now  being
supplemented by new arrivals of terrorists running from operation in Wazirstan.

Noonari dissolved all district bodies of party including those of Sindhi Nari
Tehrik for purpose of reorganization. Dr, Uzma Jokhyo, Dr. Nasim Akhtar and
Saima Daheri have been made members of organizing body for SNT.

The meeting condoled death of 60 devotees of Qalander during 3 day annual Urs
due to inefficiency of Auqaf department and condemned mayhem at Lahore at hands
of Punjab police.

Noonari said Punjab was in control of 3 other provinces and was looting their
resources as booty. Dacca debacle was result of atrocities of Punjab and now
deprivation of Balochistan can repeat incident of Bengal.

He said 80% livelihood of Sindh was on agriculture but by blocking water Punjab
wants to create drought like situation in Sindh. He said it seems as if Nawaz
Sharif was considering him as prime minister of Punjab.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2014 The Messenger
                              All Rights Reserved


                              645 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Messenger

                              June 22, 2014 Sunday

Suicide bombers influx in Sindh under guise of Wazirstan operation

SECTION: Vol. VI No. 172

LENGTH: 247  words


Sindh National Party has expressed grave concern on influx of Taliban terrorists
and suicide bombers under guise of Military operation in Wazirtan and they can
destroy already shabby peace in such a situation Sindhi nation and nationalist
forces shall have no option but to unite. This was stated by Ashraf Noonari
central organizer of SNP while presiding meeting of central organizing committee
of party at national house Qasimabad.

He said on one hand Sindh was bearing the atrocities of center and on the other
suffering under burden of 10 million illegal immigrants who were now  being
supplemented by new arrivals of terrorists running from operation in Wazirstan.

Noonari dissolved all district bodies of party including those of Sindhi Nari
Tehrik for purpose of reorganization. Dr, Uzma Jokhyo, Dr. Nasim Akhtar and
Saima Daheri have been made members of organizing body for SNT.

The meeting condoled death of 60 devotees of Qalander during 3 day annual Urs
due to inefficiency of Auqaf department and condemned mayhem at Lahore at hands
of Punjab police.

Noonari said Punjab was in control of 3 other provinces and was looting their
resources as booty. Dacca debacle was result of atrocities of Punjab and now
deprivation of Balochistan can repeat incident of Bengal.

He said 80% livelihood of Sindh was on agriculture but by blocking water Punjab
wants to create drought like situation in Sindh. He said it seems as if Nawaz
Sharif was considering him as prime minister of Punjab.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2014 The Messenger
                              All Rights Reserved


                              646 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 17, 1985 Friday

Exports, capital influx brighten growth prospects

BYLINE: CECIL FOSTER; GAM

LENGTH: 1032 words


By  CECIL FOSTER
 For well into the next decade, Ontario should be the place to grow in
 Canada, according to private and government economic forecasters.

A vibrant manufacturing sector, quicker adaptation of new technology,
 an influx of non-residential capital, growing exports to the United States
 and moderate consumer spending should help the province to outperform the
 national economy, forecasters said.

As long as the U.S. economy remains strong and keeps demanding the
 province's manufactured goods, Ontario can expect to achieve new levels of
 economic activity. The United States is Ontario's largest export market,
 taking 80 per cent of its sales last year, and the province is attracting
 a higher share of U.S. investments than other parts of the country.

With the proposed replacement of the Foreign Investment Review Agency
 by the milder Investment Canada, Ontario should continue to get more of
 the expected increase in foreign money flowing into the country,
 especially for the vital manufacturing sector.
    "In terms of investment spending, Ontario has been doing better than
 the rest of Canada," said Patricia Mohr, senior economist with the Bank of
 Nova Scotia. "We expect this to continue."
    And because Ontario is the main manufacturing centre in Canada, and its
 products still are competitive in the international export market, the
 province will continue to lead Canada's economic recovery.
    "The centre of activity has now switched out of the West to Ontario,"
 said Jim Webber, an economist with the Toronto-Dominion Bank. The strength
 of Ontario's economy is its diversity, with a healthy mix of resources,
 agriculture, manufacturing and services, he said.

Reza Ghaeli, regional economist for the Royal Bank of Canada, agreed
 that Ontario will be the base for Canada's short-term economic prosperity.
 "It is important to keep Ontario strong. If the Ontario economy doesn't
 perform well, the Canadian economy will not do well."
    Total economic activity in Ontario should increase by 3.1 per cent this
 year and another 3.6 per cent in 1986, compared with an impressive 6.2 per
 cent increase in 1984 and 4.3 per cent a year earlier.

The removal of quotas on Japanese cars in the United States, and
 possibly in Canada, could reduce the demand for Ontario-made automobiles.
 Noises from the U.S. Congress for protectionist measures to halt the
 runaway U.S. trade deficit could lead to a decline in Ontario exports.

In addition, Ontario is a net importer of technology. "With the
 emergence of highly competitive Third World countries in the resource
 sectors, the high-tech field is becoming more and more important to the
 industrialized countries," Chase Econometrics Canada of Toronto said in a
 recent report.
    "Since Ontario is the industrial heartland of Canada, this trend to
 high-tech industries is especially important to the province," it said.

But with President Ronald Reagan, an avowed free trader, in the White
 House, and Ontario auto makers having had about four years of protection
 from the Japanese through the quotas, these concerns are not too
 worrisome.

Mr. Webber is more concerned that Ontario might not be as productive,
 hence competitive, in the world market because the ratio of wages to
 production is not declining fast enough to keep pace with some developing
 countries.

The only valid reason for the quotas is the weak yen, which gives
 Japanese auto makers a cost advantage, Mr. Webber said. When the yen
 appreciates against North American currencies, the Canadian quotas should
 also be lifted.

On balance, the forecasters anticipate continued growth for the
 province.
    "We expect Ontario to outperform the national economy in terms of most
 economic measures, including output, employment, disposable income, retail
 sales, housing starts and non-residential investment," the Royal Bank said
 in a recent report.

Ontario gross provincial product, the measure of goods and services
 produced, should grow by 3.6 per cent annually until 1988 and by 3.4 per
 cent until 1993. This compares with annual increases of 3.3 per cent for
 the national economy until 1993.

The Conference Board of Canada is predicting the provincial rate of
 unemployment will remain virtually unchanged this year from the 1984
 figure of 9.1 per cent and will fall only marginally to 8.5 per cent in
 1986. But the Royal Bank is expecting an acceleration in the decline to
 5.7 per cent in 1993. Then, the Royal Bank said, the national unemployment
 rate will be 7.2 per cent.

A decrease in the number of new entrants into the work force should
 help reduce the jobless rate. As the population ages, there will be less
 demand for the creation of new jobs.

In 1984, employment in Ontario grew by 3.6 per cent, faster than any
 other province except Nova Scotia.

This growth is heavily dependent on the manufacturing sector,
 particularly in the auto industry. In 1984 this sector recorded the
 largest gains, with transportation equipment increasing by 18.2 per cent,
 non-electrical machinery 23.4 per cent and primary metals 16.1 per cent.
 Over-all manufacturing was up 29.1 per cent.

The auto industry is expected to grow at a slower rate of 2.5 per cent
 in 1985 and 3.6 per cent next year because of lower demand in the United
 States and competition from foreign makers.

Personal disposable income should rise by 6.7 per cent in 1985,
 compared with an unexpected 8.1 per cent last year, but still above the
 national level of 6 per cent. The increase should be 6.2 per cent next
 year because of attempts by the federal and provincial governments to
 control their deficits. Wages and salaries should grow less quickly in the
 next two years.

This should cause a moderation in consumer spending so that retail
 sales will increase 6.9 per cent this year and 5.4 per cent in 1986,
 compared with 9.3 per cent in 1984.

Following a 12.3 per cent drop in 1984, Ontario's housing starts are
 expected to grow by 4.9 per cent to 50,000 units this year, and next year
 by another 58,500 units for a 16 per cent increase.

The Bank of Nova Scotia expects forest products and mining to continue
 growing in volume, even if prices remain low, and for the recovery in
 business spending that began last year to gain momentum.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1985 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              647 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Herald (Harare)

                                 June 04, 2015

Join Hands to Manage GMOs - Biotech Experts

BYLINE: Sifelani Tsiko

LENGTH: 1665 words


Experts say one of the reasons for slow adoption of biotechnology is lack of
functional regulatory systems, including inability to perform timely
decision-making.

African countries must strengthen the links between national biosafety
regulatory authorities to enhance the continent's capacity to manage and handle
potential risks associated with genetically modified organisms (GMO) products,
biotechnology experts say.

The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) senior biotechnology
policy advisor, Dr Getachew Belay, told delegates at a two-day regional
biosafety training workshop in Harare recently that strengthening linkages would
help African countries manage biotechnology products given that the countries
share borders across which goods and services move.

"Biosafety issues are regional in nature and environmental impacts don't respect
borders," he said.

"Food safety issues are similar across borders with common consumption patterns
and we need regional mechanisms for sharing regional expertise and
infrastructure."

He said enhanced information sharing and co-ordination on trans-boundary
movement of GMOs would help to develop a fully-fledged continental biosafety
system.

COMESA, through its Regional Biotechnology and Biosafety Programme, supported
the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA) to organise the workshop.

Partners who supported Zimbabwe to host the regional training workshop include
the African Biosafety Network of Expertise (ABNE), Southern African Network for
Biosciences (SANBio), the Department of Science and Technology, Biosafety South
Africa, Public Understanding of Biotechnology (PUB) and Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF).

Dr Belay said most African countries did not have adequate financial resources
to develop national biosafety regulatory systems.

He said sharing expertise was critical in building the capacity of most
countries in African to manage and handle the potential risks associated with
GMOs.

Higher and Tertiary Education, Science and Technology Development Deputy
Minister Dr Godfrey Gandawa added his voice to the need for African countries to
strengthen links.

"Due to the porous nature of Sadc borders, there is need for a harmonised
regional policy to address a number of issues related to the dynamism of
scientific and technological innovations," he said.

"This training will go a long way in disseminating knowledge on biotechnology
and biosafety through the Sadc region in order to ensure sustainability of
regional trade. We expect that the deliberations from the workshop will also
support both policy and decision makers in Sadc."

Biosafety refers to the protection of human and animal health and the
environment from the possible effects of biotechnology products.

Biosafety regulators say a stronger and functional biosafety system is critical
for the exploitation of the potential benefits of biotechnology and ensuring
safe use of genetically modified crops in Africa.

"The need to build national and regional systems for risk assessment and
strengthening biosafety frameworks is one of the priorities emerging from the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)," Dr Gandawa said. "We need to learn
from each other and share good practices."

Africa's science and agriculture ministers have endorsed the use of
biotechnology as a tool to fight hunger and food insecurity on the continent.

NBA chief executive Dr Jonathan Mufandaedza said the workshop, which has brought
together leading biosafety regulators, scientists, academics, Government
officials, and representatives from various partners, sought to promote the
development of biosafety systems at regional and continental level.

He said the regional training workshop aimed to facilitate inter-country
collaboration, resource sharing, experience-sharing and other collective efforts
such as reducing policy and regulatory hurdles.

In addition, Dr Mufandaedza said, the workshop aimed to assist member states in
meeting global, regional and national obligations, including having adequate
regulatory preparedness to enable decision making and to deal with other
biosafety challenges that may arise with the implementation of biotechnology.

"Zimbabwe stands ready to learn from experience of regional partners. With
regional trade growing within the SADC and Comesa region, the NBA feels that it
would be beneficial to share biosafety experiences and offer training for the
countries," he said.

"It is generally considered that the most productive approach will be in the
form of a workshop where experts interact with participants and share
experiences on challenges and best practices of biosafety."

Most countries in Africa still lack the capacity for GMO sampling and detection,
something which is considered critical for the effective regulation of GM
products.

Biotechnology experts also say most African countries still do not have the
technical capacity to be able to meet technical requirements deriving from
international obligations.

They say there is need to support and strengthen GMO detection laboratories to
curb the influx of undesirable GMO products and enhance the capacity of the
continent to verify the GM content of food imports and exports.

Prof Diran Makinde, director of the Nepad African Biosafety Network of Expertise
(ABNE), said the absence of functional, efficient and technically competent
regulatory systems is a major constraint in Africa.

"There is no coherent position among government agencies or within key
government," he said.

"We need political will to embrace the technology. We need workable biosafety
laws and regulations that provide an enabling environment for appropriate
regulatory decision-making."

In the Sadc region, only South Africa has commercialised the production of GMO
crops, yet there is a growing influx of GMO products in the region from South
Africa and industrialised nations such as the United States, Canada, Brazil and
other Western countries that often donate food aid to drought-prone parts of the
region.

Given this scenario, biosafety experts say it is necessary that issues
pertaining to GMO monitoring and traceability issues, GMO inspection and
control, and the amelioration of emergency measures against accidental release
are included in biosafety training programmes in the Africa.

Prof Makinde said biosafety systems need to help prevent, manage, minimise or
eliminate hazards to human and animal health and to protect the environment from
biological agents and organisms used in research and trade.

Biosafety regulators in Africa, he said, need to have a good understanding of
what the risks are that could be derived from GMOs but without hindering their
adoption unnecessarily.

"Governments may decide on basis of precaution not to permit a particular GMO to
be imported across its borders . . . even if there is insufficient evidence
about the GMO's potential adverse effects," said Prof Makinde.

"We need to answer the question whether risk is manageable and mitigable.
Inefficient and unresponsive regulation stifles access to technology and
innovation.

"When the regulatory system is cumbersome, farmers may be tempted to adopt the
technology illegally."

A total of 76 participants drawn from Burkina Faso, Malawi, Swaziland, South
Africa and Zimbabwe attended the workshop.

Training covered biosafety processes, public engagement on biosafety and sharing
experiences on regional regulatory and legislative systems.

Public Understanding of Biotechnology (SA) programme co-ordinator Dr Manjusha
Sunil said there is need for African countries to promote a clear understanding
of the potential of biotechnology and to ensure broad public awareness, dialogue
and debate on its current and potential future applications.

"When facts and evidence are available to people, they are empowered to
participate effectively in the policy-making process and make informed choices,"
she said.

"The free flow of scientific information is impeded by political forces, or by
pseudo-scientists/anti-science activists, blocking media access, and keeping the
public in the dark."

Debate on GMOs in Africa, she said, was influenced by perceptions and not based
on sound knowledge of risks and benefits.

"Emotive factors generally influence the debate and little consideration is
given to the science," Dr Sunil said.

"A science-based approach for communicating effectively should improve trust and
build public confidence."

She said lack of competence, delayed response, arrogance and being defensive
erodes public trust and scientists need to improve communication skills to
enhance trust.

In Africa, only three countries - South Africa, Burkina Faso and Egypt - have
commercialised genetically modified (GM) crops, while 19 countries have
established biosafety regulatory systems, four countries are developing
regulatory systems, 21 countries are a work in progress, and 10 have no National
Biosafety Frameworks (NBFs).

Experts say one of the reasons for slow adoption of biotechnology is lack of
functional regulatory systems, including inability to perform timely
decision-making.

Other factors, they say, include the absence of national legislation,
regulations, risk assessment policies or procedures and inadequate capacity for
implementing functional regulatory systems.

According to the latest International Service for the Acquisition of
Agri-biotech Applications (ISAAA) figures, 77 percent of the world's GM crops
are grown in three countries - 40 percent in the USA, 23 percent in Brazil and
14 percent in Argentina - with plantings in Europe and Africa still at low
levels.

Mr Samuel Timpo of the ABNE said African countries need to fight "technophobia"
and strive to place a system that has adequate legal authority, clear safety
standards and decision making procedures and that operates in a cost and time
efficient manner.

With this, he said, it should be possible for Africa to promote the adoption of
biotechnology products using biosafety standards developed on the continent.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              648 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                     Agweek

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            January 16, 2012 Monday

Will oil patch lead to weed patch

BYLINE: Mikkel Pates, Agweek Magazine

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1278 words


Jan. 16--VALLEY CITY, N.D. -- The oil boom in western North Dakota is being
watched for yet another negative impact for farmers and ranchers -- weeds.

Jim McAllister, Barnes County, N.D., weed control officer at Valley City, says
the dramatic influx of equipment and road construction in the western part of
the state is a concern for all weed control professionals in the state.
McAllister says the issue was a topic of discussion in the hallways at the North
Dakota Department of Agriculture Weed Forum on Jan. 10 and the North Dakota Weed
Control Association convention Jan. 11 to 12, all in Mandan, N.D. More than 100
professionals attended from throughout the state.

"It's a big concern," McAllister says. "Anytime you get equipment coming in from
outside the state, it seems like it never is as clean as you'd like to see it.
Laws require the equipment to be cleaned, but, as with custom combining
equipment coming into the state, it's not perfect."

Derrill Fick has been weed control officer in Ward County, N.D., and the city of
Minot, for the past 14 years. He is a former president of the association, and
is the chairman of the education committee.

"It's concerning us terribly, I guess, because of the quickness with which
everybody is able to move into properties and build township roads into main
roads," Fick says.

The process involves a parade of road graders, bulldozers, gravel trucks and
support trucks for hauling the water, crude and oil.

"With increased traffic, there are more weeds," he says. "There is gravel coming
out of uncertified pits, or hauled from different states -- scoria, different
gravels -- being hauled, uninspected."

One telltale sign of the problem is when weed populations are exploding along
certain roads where oil activity goes, but then stop beyond the oil sites.
Primary species concerns include leafy spurge, Canada thistle and absinth
wormwood, Fick says. There is concern about black henbane, coming out of the
South and Southwest states. "Some spotted knapweed is showing up. It's a variety
of things here," Fick says.

State agencies can help

The association's education committee works with weed boards to improve
connections with the Public Service Commission, which regulates wind and coal,
and the Industrial Commission's Oil and Gas Division, although usually the weed
boards can handle it on their own. Fick says he thinks local weed officials only
went to the state agencies, three or four times in the past year. Oil companies
usually try to cooperate, he thinks.

"For the most part, when they are approached by the weed board, they respond
fairly quickly. Either they do the controls themselves, or they hire a
contractor, or even the weed board," he says.

He says it isn't always clear whether they realize the cost of leaving the weeds
unchecked. "They're in the business of punching a hole in the ground," he says.

In the past, weed control officers have had more of a handle on noxious weed
movement in their counties. "Usually you can keep track of farmer hauling, but
now you have thousands of (oil) sites popping up overnight. You can't keep track
of it."

Some of the areas of greatest concern in North Dakota are in Mountrail County
near Stanley; in Dunn County south of Lake Sakakawea and in the Killdeer area;
and farther west at Watford City near McKenzie County, and in Williams County
near Williston.

There is no hard data on how much oil rig-related weed influx has already
occurred.

Weed control officers can sometimes get an inkling by comparing observations
with their 20 to 30 years of spraying activity records. Recent records include
Global Positioning System tracking.

"Now, all of a sudden, we're having to go on that same road and finding more
weeds showing up, and the only difference is the movement of trucks and oil
activities, and derricks, and the gravel being hauled," he says.

Hot hallway topic

The issue has been discussed within county weed boards and within the
association, Fick says.

Sanitation of incoming trucks is a problem. Weed seeds stick to mud and gravel
on the undercarriage of trucks. The majority of the problem comes from
uncertified gravel pits. In most counties, when a new gravel pit is opened to be
used, it must be inspected by a weed control officer in that county, and even
monitored for noxious weeds for a period before hauling can begin. If noxious
weeds are present, there may be restrictions on moving it until overburden is
removed, or until the weeds are effectively sprayed.

Weed boards get money through dedicated funds from county operations budgets.
Depending on property valuations, weed boards can tax a half-mill to 5 mills or
more. In addition, the North Dakota Department of Agriculture allows individual
county weed boards to access at least $4,000 per county per biennium for
spraying operations. If the county levies at least 3 mills they can access other
funds. Most counties levy that much.

In a related issue, weed control programs have a difficult time competing with
$20 to $30 an hour wages in the oilfields.

Fick says a site where four or five problem weeds are visible today might cost
$20 to $30 to control, but -- left unchecked -- might cost $1,000 or more to
control, two or three years from now.

Spotted knapweed

McAllister says spotted knapweed, a weed that has infested millions of acres in
Montana, is gaining a bigger foothold in this area. Spotted knapweed is a
short-lived biennial, meaning it comes from a seed. "It isn't a perennial, but
once it reaches a certain population it'll kill out everything else, McAllister
says. "Everybody in North Dakota realizes what a problem leafy spurge has been.
Well, spotted knapweed, if it is uncontrolled, will actually choke out leafy
spurge."

Some areas in northern Barnes County have gotten spotted knapweed, and officials
think it came in with grass seed. "We'd recommend nobody really buying seed out
of Montana unless they can assure you that it doesn't have any noxious weeds in
it, and it's pretty hard for them to do that." Fick says spotted knapweed is a
problem in all western states.

"We had a place in the northern part of the county on the Griggs County, N.D.,
line, that we've seen move 300 to 400 yards west where we've never seen it
before. We've also discovered some that had moved off a gravel pit that they've
agreed not to move any more of that (gravel) material. It looks like we had a
plant that started on the river -- not very many -- but it's a big concern
because water can move the seed along in a short amount of time."

That will mean lots more scouting in the northern part of the county and south
of Valley City, N.D., and along the river.

Fick says it was a challenging year for weed control in general, with wet
conditions delaying control until late June, and ongoing flooding that made
access to roads difficult.

McAllister says Barnes County was able to control "pretty much what we've done
in the past," because of the extended fall conditions.

"This year, probably because of the wet weather, we had a bigger problem than
normal with Canada thistle," he says. Road ditches, where they do most of their
control, had way more of the weeds than usual. "We thought we had it under
control a couple years ago and with the wet weather," it came back, he says.

On the positive side, the extended good fall spraying conditions were an
excellent time to control perennial weeds. Fall is when the plants translocate
nutrients into the roots to store for the winter. "It's also more apt to take
the chemical in," McAllister says.

___ (c)2012 Agweek Magazine (Grand Forks, N.D.) Visit Agweek Magazine (Grand
Forks, N.D.) at www.agweek.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120116-AW-Will-oil-patch-lead-to-weed-patch-0116-20120116

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AW


                             Copyright 2012 Agweek


                              649 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                  Western Mail

                             May 21, 2002, Tuesday

HINT OF HELP FOR NEW ENTRANTS;
 YFC TOUR: ASSEMBLY MINISTER NOTES DILEMMA FACING FUTURE FARMERS

BYLINE: Ceri Jones

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 561 words


DESPITE the huge problems faced by farmers, hundreds of young people still want
to pursue a career in the industry, Carwyn Jones has been told.

The Welsh Minister for Rural Affairs put on his walking boots last Friday as he
took part in a Wales YFC tour of three farms near Haverfordwest, to see for
himself how farmers in their 20s are coping with the day-to-day running of their
farms.

He also took time off his tour to answer questions from young people at
Haverfordwest Showground.

The message repeated by young farmers was that prioritisation was the key to
ensure a constant influx of new farmers were able to venture into the industry
with confidence.

"Young business people starting out are given many opportunities to benefit from
a number of financial schemes designed to give them a boost on the business
ladder," said Wales YFC's rural affairs committee chairman, Will Prichard.

"However, young people wishing to take on board a farming business are often not
included in these schemes, with the overall result that many young people switch
off' to the idea almost instinctively.

"What we need is to completely re-design the process by which support for new
entrants is given. By working with the minister and the Assembly we can make
real progress in this vital step for the future of agriculture."

He said Wales YFC had a wellestablished link with the minister and the movement
planned on liaising closely with the Assembly on all issues affecting young
people in agriculture and rural areas.

"Today we have seen members from all over Wales turn up to see the minister -
this in itself is a clear display of how important the issue of young people in
agriculture is. We must ensure that these young people - the future of the
industry - get the best possible chance to achieve their goals."

Delme Harries, chairman of Wales YFC, said that although the average age of
farmers in Wales was said to be 59, they were keen to draw attention to the fact
that farming was not exclusively for the more mature.

"The three farms we have seen today are prime examples of young enterprise and
initiative forging the way ahead," he said. "With youth comes new ideas and
concepts and we firmly believe that with the co-operation of the ministers and
of the Assembly, we can build a positive outlook for the future of the industry
here."

Mr Jones told the young farmers at Haverfordwest that he was always impressed by
the views of young farmers.

"Things are difficult and the fact that the you are still farming is a tribute
to your resilience," he said.

He said the Assembly was working on a number of schemes to help them and other
youngsters in rural areas.

Among them was a new scheme whereby the capital invested in a farm could be
released to give retiring farmers a pension and a young person an entrance into
farming at the same time.

"There are still legal obstacles and financial obstacles to overcome but if we
can do it that's the sort of scheme to set up. It won't happen before next
year," he said.

In answer to a number of concerns about what could be done to keep people in the
countryside given high house prices in areas such as Pembrokeshire, he said the
multi-body Rural Partnership, set up by the Assembly, would be publishing a
report in the autumn with a number of recommendations.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ALL EARS: Rural Affairs Minister Carwyn Jones talking with young
farmers from Pembrokeshire during the forum at Haverfordwest

                    Copyright 2002 Western Mail and Echo Ltd


                              650 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                                October 28, 1999

Row over Brown's lack of contact with French

SECTION: Sport, Pg.22

LENGTH: 426 words


Agriculture Minister Nick Brown moved to appease angry farmers with the
publication of new food labelling guidelines to ensure that shoppers can tell if
products they are buying are really British.

But the Minister found himself under fire later after he admitted that he had
not spoken directly to his French counterpart, Jean Glavany, in more than a week
despite the deepening "beef war" crisis.

In a further sign of the deteriorating situation, Mr Glavany last night
announced that he was cancelling a weekend visit to Britain to see Mr Brown so
that he could join French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin on an official trip to
the West Indies.

But Mr Brown dismissed a suggestion that he should telephone Mr Glavany directly
to prevent the situation spiralling out of control.

"I just think that is nonsensical," he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme,
adding that the two governments were in close contact at official level.

However, the Tories said it was an "extraordinary admission" that there had been
no direct contact with Mr Glavany.

"At a time like this is absolutely essential that Nick Brown should be in daily
contact with his opposite number in France," said shadow Agriculture Minister
Tim Yeo.

"His failure to do so is just one more item in a catalogue of incompetence,
mismanagement and inaction."

With no sign of a let-up in the unofficial "beef war" with France, Mr Brown had
earlier announced a "British Food Kitemark" which he said should prevent food
products made with foreign ingredients being passed off as British.

Mr Brown made his announcement at a one-day conference in London on a platform
alongside National Farmers' Union president Ben Gill, who warned that the influx
of cheap foreign imports masquerading as British was creating a financial crisis
in UK agriculture.

Mr Brown said Britain had two options on labelling - either accept that food
produced within Europe was generic or allow consumers to know exactly where
their food came from.

It was plainly wrong that in the worst cases of misleading labelling, consumers
had to remove wrapping to find out exactly where the food had originated.

As he left the conference, the Minister said he stood by his personal
self-imposed boycott on French products, but denied that he was anti-French.

He said: "I like France and I like the French people. But I am entitled to spend
my own money on what I want.

"A lot of people in this country agree with me that the French are wrong.
Individual citizens are saying how upset they are with the French action."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1999

LANGUAGE: English

                      Copyright 1999 Western Morning News


                              651 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                          China Daily European Edition

                            June 19, 2013 Wednesday

GM influx a dilemma for consumers, farmers

SECTION: SOCIETY

LENGTH: 589 words


HARBIN, - Liu You, a farmer in Keshan County of northeast China's Heilongjiang
province, stopped planting soybeans last year, due to the crop's low yield and
economic return.

He grows corn instead, which yields much more than soybean and brings more
income. "The price of soybeans has kept almost unchanged while the prices of
corn and rice have been rising in recent years," says Liu.

In Keshan County, the plantation area of soybeans nearly halved from 2007 to
2012, showing farmers have less interest in planting the crop, a trend that is
playing out in many other rural areas.

The root for the decisions taken by Liu and his peers can be found in China's
rising imports of genetically modified (GM) soybeans. By virtue of the
modifications, GM soybeans are more economical to produce than their
conventionally-farmed equivalents. With large-scale production of GM crops not
yet approved in China, domestic farmers of soybean are being priced out of the
market as the country proves happy to look to imports for this most
quintessential of Chinese foodstuffs.

However, this is far from the only troubling aspect of imported GM food. GM
remains controversial over doubts as to its safety. As it flows into China, the
country is having to face up to such questions.

Last week, China's Ministry of Agriculture announced the approval of three
varieties of GM soybeans to be imported as processing materials.

The news triggered fresh domestic concerns about safety, although there has been
large-scale commercial plantation of GM crops for years in the United States and
many other countries.

China began to import GM soybeans in 1997 to meet surging domestic demand,
according to Peng Yufa, a senior member of the country's GM crop bio-safety
committee and a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences.

Last year, China imported 58.38 million tonnes of soybeans while the country's
own soybean production was about 13 million tonnes, official statistics showed.

For Chinese farmers, the plantation of corn per mu, a Chinese measurement which
equals about 667 square meters, can earn them about 300 to 400 yuan (about $48
to $65) more in revenue than that of soybeans on average.

This has prompted more farmers to stop planting soybeans. In Heilongjiang, a
major soybean producer in China, the area used for plantations of this legume
reduced to about 40 million mu last year from about 70 million mu in 2009.

Although edible soybean oil made from GM produce is common in Chinese
supermarkets, most citizens worry about its safety despite relatively lower
prices than equivalents such as peanut oil.

"When I buy edible oil, I will make sure whether they have GM marks. After all,
there is no final conclusion as to the safety of GM products," says a lady
surnamed Zheng in Guangzhou, capital of south China's Guangdong Province.

Results of an online survey conducted by Chinese news portal Sina.com showed on
Wednesday that about 85 percent of the 30,000 voting netizens said they would
not buy GM products and 78 percent believed GM is harmful to people's health.

To woo consumers, some companies in Heilongjiang have tried to highlight their
non-GM soybeans. For example, the Heilongjiang Jiusan Non-GM Soybean Trade
Center was set up last September.

"The key is to allow and encourage Chinese scientists to catch up with others
and come up with quality products, including safe GM products. Only in this way
can we change the status quo of China's soybean products," says Rao Yi, dean of
the School of Life Sciences at Peking University.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 China Daily Information Co
                              All Rights Reserved


                              652 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Odessa American (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 20, 2012 Thursday

Food bank urges community to fight hunger past holidays

BYLINE: Lyxan Toledanes, Odessa American, Texas

SECTION: LIFESTYLE

LENGTH: 733 words


Dec. 20--Less than a week leading up to Christmas, and the West Texas Food Bank
warehouse is filled with crates, boxes and barrels full of donated food.

Though it's a welcome change from the clear floors the staff sees during the
summer, it's still not enough to continue helping the Permian Basin's hungriest
residents.

Once the holidays are over, the massive piles of food will dwindle down, WTFB
Deputy Director Libby Campbell said. Campbell said the amount of food currently
in stock could be stretched until May 2013.

"We're already starting to go down (on donated stock)," Campbell said. "Food
drives and donations taper off in January and February but our need is still
going to be there."

Though the food bank has experienced much community support this holiday season,
those in need still outpace the influx of donations.

"We've seen a higher need in our community," Campbell said. "It has to do with
housing -- rent increases and property taxes have gone up."

Campbell said the food insecure often have to make a decision between paying
their bills, medical expenses and food.

"The rate of poverty hasn't gone down," Campbell said, citing statistics from
the United States Department of Agriculture.

At the Ector County Senior Centers, Executive Director Donna Greaves sees first
hand how the community's donations affect those in need.

"It's a great asset for the seniors that we're able to contact," Greaves said.
"We have some seniors that literally live on $300 to $500 a month. They have to
pay for prescriptions, utilities, rent and food. What do they pick?"

"A lot of times they do without food or they cut their prescriptions in half and
that is not good for them," Greaves added.

By providing food to the seniors from the West Texas Food Bank, Greaves said the
Senior Centers are able to reach those who wouldn't typically ask for the help
they need.

"They're very prideful and, in fact, some of them won't take anything at all.
You have to tell them this is a contribution. We're trying to help you," Greaves
said. "We're able to make a difference."

And the food bank's impact is seen on a wider scale across the Permian Basin,
said James Moore, board member of the Wayne and Jo Ann Moore Charitable
Foundation in Midland.

The WTFB currently serves 22 counties in West Texas. In 2012, more than 3
million meals were served, according to the food bank.

"They do such a vital job for West Texas," Moore said. "They do this over
thousands of square miles. You can't watch the news and read the paper without
seeing someone who's benefitted from the West Texas Food Bank."

Moore said Moore Foundation donated $50,000 to help the food bank during the
holiday season. Earlier in the year, the foundation donated $15,000. For every
$1 donated, the food bank can provide four meals.

The Moore Foundation was one of several organizations and individuals in the
community to give to the food bank during the holiday season.

According to the WTFB, 49,260 pounds of food have been donated by the community
from Oct. 1 to Wednesday.

"We're fortunate that we live in a fairly well-to-do area in the United States,
but that doesn't mean there are still not those that go hungry and have special
needs," Moore said.

Campbell said that after Jan. 1, donations will be even more instrumental to the
food bank as El Paso and three other counties separate to form the El Pasoans
Fighting Hunger food bank.

Without a major city like El Paso, Campbell said the already reduced assistance
from the USDA will be further split between El Paso and the West Texas Food
Bank.

But with 19 counties still left to cover after January, Campbell said the need
is still great.

"We still cover the largest amount of land in Texas, and we have rural areas
that have less resources, which makes it a challenge," Campbell said adding that
splitting from El Paso does mean more donations stay local.

Moore said as the holiday season ends, it's important to keep donating to the
food bank during off seasons.

"It's not as though people are only hungry during the holiday season," Moore
said. "People are hungry year round. If we're able to help someone else
throughout the year, then we do so."

Contact Lyxan Toledanes on twitter @OAcitylife, on Facebook at OA Lyxan
Toledanes, or call 432-333-7786.

___ (c)2012 the Odessa American (Odessa, Texas) Visit the Odessa American
(Odessa, Texas) at www.oaoa.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20121220-OD-Food-bank-urges-community-to-fight-hunger-past-holidays-1220-2012122
0

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: OD


                         Copyright 2012 Odessa American


                              653 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Times of India (Electronic Edition)

                          September 22, 2016 Thursday
                               Ahmedabad Edition

State slips to fourth rank in fruit production

BYLINE: Himanshu Kaushik

SECTION: TIMES CITY

LENGTH: 344 words


Gujarat has slipped to the fourth position in fruit production among Indian
states. Uttar Pradesh, which previously ranked fourth, is now the top
fruit-producing state in the country.

Gujarat, which mainly produces banana, guava, mango and papaya, had held the
third rank in 2014-15 among fruit-producing states.

Gujarat, however, conti

nues to be the top spice-producing state in India. The state's production of
cumin seed was the highest in the country. Officials said that of 48.55 lakh
metric tonnes

of cumin produced nationally, the state contributed 36.45 lakh metric
tonnes.Gujarat provides 75% of the country's yield in cumin.

The state currently ranks fifth in terms of vegetable production. According to
data released by the Union agriculture department, the cultivation of fruits in
2015-16 was higher than that in 2014-15, but per hectare productivity had
registered a decline.

State agriculture mini

ster, Chimanbhai Dharamshibhai Shapariya, said that he has studied the report,
but cannot comment as to why the fruit production decreased in the state.

Officials in the agriculture department said that Uttar Pradesh, which was
ranked fourth in 2014-15, expanded the area under fruit cultivation by nearly
90,000 hectares, and so their total production increased by

nearly 25 lakh metric tonnes.

V P Chovatia, director of research, Junagadh Agriculture University, said,
\x93The state has suffered a major setback in mango production. Unseasonal rains
or fluctuation in temperature is affecting the production of mango. Secondly,
rainfall for the last two years has been below normal, which is also affecting
per hectare yield of fruit crops in orchards.\x93

Chovatia said increasing salinity in coastal areas was also affecting the
production of coconuts.Lack of rains and lower influx of freshwater has led to
the increase of salinity, he said. Past two years' weather was also not
conducive for fruit crops said Chovatia.

R L Sayani, agriculture economist, agreed. \x93The climate last year was not
conducive for fruit crops and led to lower yield.,\x93 he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              654 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Business Mirror (Philippines)

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday

Food makers push for more investments in agriculture

LENGTH: 355  words


Local food manufacturers are pushing for more investments to boost the
agriculture sector to enable it to achieve a 10-percent export growth in 2014
and meet rising local demand.

Philippine Food Processors and Exporters Organization Inc. (Philfoodex)
President Roberto Amores said the country has value-added goods, like mango
products and fresh bananas, that are sought after abroad.

"China [for one] has a program to buy $150 billion worth of food in the next
five years. That will impact on demand in the Philippines," Amores said in a
statement issued by the Philippine Exporters Confederation Inc. (Philexport).

Amores said the local requirements for agricultural products are also growing,
driven by the influx of tourists.

"The consumption patterns of food services and hotels, and the changing habits
of the domestic consumers have expanded the demand of agricultural products. So
we need to continue producing raw materials in order to address this demand," he
said.

As the Philippines also braces for Asean integration come 2015, Amores said the
government and the private sector need to ramp up investments in agriculture to
improve productivity and help drive growth in the sector.

"Among these are investments in storage, equipment and increased awareness in
global agriculture practice," he said.

Amores, also the food trustee of Philexport, said the adoption of sustainable
agriculture methods can enhance the sector's competitiveness and productivity.

He said it is "imperative" for the government to fast-track the establishment of
common service facilities nationwide. These include mobile repacking and
agriculture laboratory facilities.

"This is because the global requirements on food safety are becoming very rigid.
So the testing and the capability of the sectors to produce raw materials should
be fast. The turn-around cycle needs to be fast-tracked," Amores added.

He also recommended the establishment of agriculture productive cluster zones
where raw materials can be produced.

"[With this], we can generate better yields with the same input; this could
automatically lower the cost of production," Amores said.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 Business Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                              655 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                           October 19, 2006 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITION

Commissioner of agriculture;
We recommend Charles H. Bronson

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 317 words


Charles H. Bronson has grown in office, as a commissioner of agriculture should.

He's a better candidate than he was four years ago, when he ran for election as
the incumbent commissioner, and in 2001, when Gov. Jeb Bush appointed him to
temporarily fill the post.

Bronson showed a firm grasp of the issues and challenges facing Florida
agriculture when he was elected in 2002. Four years later, he still talks easily
about farm policies and practices, but he has also become conversant in the
vernacular of alternative energy sources, such as biofuels, port security,
food-chain safety and land-management strategies.

If Bronson is re-elected, we hope he will use his office to build a broad
coalition to improve security at Florida's deep-water ports. Whereas most (but
not enough) of the attention paid to port security focuses on the terrorist
threat, Bronson correctly points to the damage -- to agriculture and the natural
environment -- caused by the influx, through ports, of exotic species of plants
and animals. If farmers and environmentalists joined anti-terrorism experts in a
coalition, port security might be improved to the level it should be.

We also hope that, if he is re-elected, Bronson will continue to campaign for
the allocation of more public funds to manage the state's portfolio of public
lands.

His experience in agriculture (as a rancher and as a student) and politics (as a
Republican member of the Florida Senate) have helped Bronson in his work as
commissioner. His opponent in the general election, Democrat Eric Copeland,
lacks experience in those critical areas.

Copeland, a lawyer, points to problems with the state's citrus canker program
and the general need for official advocacy on behalf of consumers.

Good points, but not enough to warrant replacing a knowledgeable agriculture
commissioner with a novice.

We recommend Charles H. Bronson for commissioner of agriculture.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: EDITORIAL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              656 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         The Straits Times (Singapore)

                            October 13, 2014 Monday

Growing number of Asians migrating to NZ;
Influx at all-time high with 103,900 in the year to August - a third Asians

BYLINE: Jonathan Pearlman For The Straits Times In Wellington

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 883 words


BEHIND the counter of his newly fitted printing shop in the New Zealand city of
Wellington, Mr Eddie Saw gives a cheeky smile as he attempts to explain the
reason for emigrating last year from Malaysia.

Moving to his desktop computer, he points to a website which shows that
Wellington was recently rated the 13th most romantic city in the world.

"Not bad," he says. "That was a good reason to move here. There weren't any
Asian cities on the list (of 25)."

Mr Saw, 48, admits that romance was not the primary motivation for moving from
George Town in Penang in January 2013 with his wife Karen Tan, 44, who works in
a Chinese restaurant, and two sons, aged 10 and 14.

The main reason, he says, was that he and his wife were seeking a less frenetic
pace of life.

"I like it here - it's a good lifestyle," he told The Straits Times.

"I think maybe Malaysia is good for a holiday or for retirement. It is cheap
there, but it is hectic and can be a rat race."

Mr Saw, who migrated on a business visa and opened a downtown printing and
courier shop a year ago, is one of a rapidly growing number of Asians who have
chosen to call New Zealand home.

The nation of 4.5 million people has experienced an Asian boom, with the
country's growing economy and strong job market leading to a mass influx in
recent years.

The NZ$40 billion (S$39.8 billion) rebuilding of the city of Christchurch,
heavily damaged by a 2011 earthquake,  has added to the demand for skilled
workers, particularly in construction and engineering. Other in-demand areas
include the health, tourism, agriculture  and oil & gas sectors.

Since 2001, Asian-born citizens have leapt from 7 per cent of the population to
12 per cent, or about half a million people.

Within the decade, Asians are expected to overtake the 600,000-strong Maoris as
the nation's main ethnic minority.

The Asian influx has led to occasional racial tensions and calls for immigration
curbs, but for the most part there has been acceptance of the country's changing
face over the past decade.

But a survey released in March by the Asia New Zealand Foundation found there
was growing resentment among Maoris. While 27 per cent of New Zealanders
believed attitudes towards Asians had cooled in the past year, 44 per cent of
Maoris did so.

An expert on race relations, Professor Paul Spoonley from Massey University,
said the Maoris are worried about losing jobs and the threat to their status in
New Zealand society. In the past 40 years, the government has moved towards a
"bicultural" society that promotes Maori language, heritage and culture.

"By 2000, the country had an extensive (albeit incomplete) bicultural policy
framework," he wrote in The Conversation website earlier this year.

In the lead-up to the general election last month, the opposition parties
largely backed curbs on immigration.

But the plans were slammed by Prime Minister John Key, whose National party
easily won a third term.

"We don't put up the fear factor you see from other political parties about the
multicultural society that is emerging in New Zealand," he said in a speech in
May.

"We welcome tourists (and) people who are going to come and study at our schools
and universities; we welcome people who want to invest (and) we welcome people
who want to make their home in New Zealand."

According to the nation's 2013 census, Chinese, Indians, Filipinos and Koreans
have been the largest Asian migrant groups. The largest city, Auckland, with
almost 1.4 million people, has the biggest proportion of Asian residents, with
more than 23 per cent of the city's total; Wellington is second, with 11 per
cent.

While the volume of the influx is new, New Zealand has long had a sizeable
Chinese population, with the first migrants arriving in the 1860s to work in the
goldmines.

A  former president of the New Zealand Chinese Association, Mr Harvey Wu, 70,
whose father migrated from China in the 1920s, said the new generation of
immigrants from China were far more savvy, better educated and wealthier than
earlier waves.

"The early migrants came here to make a better living - the original idea was to
make their fortune and go back to China," Mr Wu told The Straits Times. "After
the (second) Sino-Japanese war (of 1937-45), a lot of them decided it was not
such a good idea to go back."

Mr Wu, a former accountant, said the more recent migrants "wanted to get out of
China for good"  and arrived with "a much better perspective".

"They are much more involved in politics and more vocal about their needs - the
earlier generations were much more heads down," he said.

The immigration intake is at an all-time high, with government figures last
month showing 103,900 arrivals - including students - in the year to August. A
third of the arrivals were from Asia.

But, as Mr Saw has been learning in his printing business, the transition is not
always carefree. His business has progressed slower than he expected and has
involved the sort of hours and stress he had hoped to leave behind.

"I didn't move to make lots of money but for an easier life than in Asia, which
is work, work, work," he said.

"In reality, it takes a while before a business kicks off. I have actually been
very stressed even though the lifestyle here is much more relaxed."

jonathanmpearlman@gmail.com

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2014 Singapore Press Holdings Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              657 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          December 14, 2011 Wednesday

Meeting to wrap up plans for Ellerbe sewer line

BYLINE: Dawn Kurry, Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 407 words


Dec. 14--A meeting of the various funding agencies and partners involved in the
Ellerbe-Rockingham-Richmond County Wastewater Regionalization Project will bring
the project to the next step, said Ellerbe Mayor Olivia Webb.

This meeting will take place at the Ellerbe Town Hall at 1:30 p.m. today.

The regional wastewater project is an endeavor to retire Ellerbe's outdated
lagoon treatment system and expand a sewer line from Ellerbe to Rockingham along
Highway 220. Rockingham is prepared to take on the extra influx of sewage, and
the sewer line expansion will allow Highway 220 to receive more development.

Ellerbe officials say they look forward to meeting with Richmond County
government officials, members of the Golden LEAF Foundation, the U.S. Department
of Agriculture and the North Carolina Rural Center to discuss final steps in the
planning phase of the project.

"It's all the funders getting together to discuss master financial agreements,"
said Webb. "We're going to work out the fine details of the financing. It's the
ultimate technical meeting before beginning the project. We're solidifying the
final steps in the process."

The regional wastewater project will cost approximately $6 million. The Town of
Ellerbe "will be able to shut down its antiquated lagoon treatment system ...
and will be able to outsource sewer service to the City of Rockingham," said
Webb.

According to Webb, the Town of Ellerbe contributed $500,000 to the project,
Richmond County contributed $500,000, the Golden LEAF Foundation contributed $1
million, the North Carolina Rural Center contributed $847,600, and the USDA
grants totalled $3,150,000.

"I'm looking forward to meeting new folks and getting to say thank you," said
Webb. "This is the first time we'll have all gotten together. We're one step
closer and we're ironing out the details."

The Town of Ellerbe will release a proposal for construction bids in January,
and the Ellerbe Town Council will review those bids and accept one for the
construction contract in February.

Construction of the new sewer line between Ellerbe and Rockingham is projected
to be completed by December 2010.

-- Staff Writer Dawn M. Kurry can be reached at 910-997-3111, ext. 15, or by
email at dkurry@heartlandpublications.com

___ (c)2011 the Richmond County Daily Journal (Rockingham, N.C.) Visit the
Richmond County Daily Journal (Rockingham, N.C.) at www.yourdailyjournal.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20111214-RU-Meeting-to-wrap-up-plans-for-Ellerbe-sewer-line-1214-20111214

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RU


                                 Copyright 2011


                              658 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                   Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 23, 2010 Monday

Contractors to begin bidding on Freeland sewer treatment project

BYLINE: Amanda Christman, Standard-Speaker, Hazleton, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 441 words


Aug. 23--The contract for Freeland's sewer treatment plant expansion project is
ready for contractors to bid on.

The estimated $13 million project, undertaken by the Freeland Municipal Sewer
and Water Authority, will be advertised online using the PennBid Program.
Engineer Chris McCue of Borton Lawson said the bidding process will be closed to
contractors Sept. 22.

Under the project, the treatment plant, which is currently able to treat 750,000
gallons of sewage per day, will be able to treat 1.2 million gallons per day.
Upgrades will also be made to the combined sewer overflow structure -- an
emergency provision that handles large influxes of storm water during severe
storms, McCue said.

A component of the expansion project began in the spring, when the authority
awarded a contract for its sewer collection system upgrade to Franzosa
Construction, Hazleton. Franzosa is working on that project now.

A U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development loan is financing both parts
of the project.

Wyoming Street

McCue said he and the authority are working on negotiations with Foster Township
to pay for the Wyoming Street pumping station, which was installed this summer.

Under an intermunicipal agreement, both Freeland and Foster agreed to pay half
of the $220,000 project; however, McCue said the project cost went over that
figure due to regulatory requirements. McCue wouldn't say by how much the work
exceeded the estimate, but the authority board approved paying $120,000 toward
the cost at its Wednesday night meeting.

The authority also plans to find out from where an accumulation of grease at the
pumping station came.

Authority Member Bill Kuklis said the grease was found during routine cleaning
and had to be taken out of the pumping station so the sewer infrastructure
wouldn't get clogged. He said the grease could be from anywhere in Freeland or
Foster Township, because the machinery pumps sewage for both places.

Grease can not only clog sewer lines, but also household plumbing, Kuklis said.
He said the product should not be dumped down drains or in toilets, and should
be disposed of by putting it in a container and then into the trash.

achristman@standardspeaker.com

To see more of the Standard-Speaker or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.standardspeaker.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Standard-Speaker, Hazleton,
Pa. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20100823-ZX-Contractors-to-begin-bidding-on-Freeland-sewer-treatment-project-201
00823

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZX


                        Copyright 2010 Standard-Speaker


                              659 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          Business Day (South Africa)

                           September 28, 2012 Friday
                                Surveys Edition

Urban agriculture punted as solution

BYLINE: Neels Blom

SECTION: PRINT:PAGE

LENGTH: 308  words


Urban agriculture punted as solution

HOUSEHOLD food insecurity is usually associated with rural poverty and not with
urban areas, partly owing to the perception that people living in cities have
greater access to food. But this assumption skews the true picture, the Africa
Institute of SA says in a 2011 policy brief.

Migration to urban areas is a global trend and SA, too, is experiencing large
numbers of people migrating to the cities. In SA, it is especially inner city
districts that have seen an unprecedented influx of people seeking better
employment and education opportunities. It is now estimated that about

62% of South Africans live in urban areas.

The picture is further skewed by the fact that many rural migrants do not live
in the country's cities, but live in sprawling informal settlements in
peri-urban areas near cities and on the periphery of smaller rural towns. These
areas may be strictly classified as rural, but for the purposes of food
security, the inhabitants of informal settlements should also be regarded as
urbanised.

The main reason is that where rural people, such as those living in SA's former
homeland areas, are, theoretically at least, in the position to undertake some
degree of subsistence agriculture production, this is not the case for urban
dwellers, which means they are in most instances dependent on an income to
achieve household food security.

The institute recommends the development of urban agriculture, though it says it
is unlikely to be of much greater value than poverty alleviation. It also notes
some difficulties in its implementation, such as the absence of policy, access
to land with secure tenure, urban zoning and sufficient water. Adjustment to
policy and intergovernmental co-operation can solve these problems, it says.

SELF HELP: People in informal settlements could grow their own food.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2012 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              660 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                   New Orleans CityBusiness (New Orleans, LA)

                            January 20, 2003 Monday

Federal payroll plan to bring jobs to National Finance Center

BYLINE: Mary Webb

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 718 words


Next year, the New Orleans Business and Industrial District will be home to
thousands of technology jobs after the Department of Agriculture's National
Finance Center was tapped to be one of four federal payroll centers.

The U.S. Office of Personnel Management made the announcement Wednesday, a day
before NOBID's Property & Investment Banking Committee made decisions on several
plans regarding NOBID tenants, including a lawsuit to recoup more than $4
million from a former tenant.

"This is another example that NOBID is a decent place to do business. I can bet
you that if the government was not completely sold on that location, then that
selection would not have been made," says NOBID President Eugene Green.

The National Finance Center, which runs payroll systems for the U.S. Department
of Agriculture, employs more than 1,600 people at its offices in NOBID.

The center along with three other agencies, will replace 22 current providers of
payroll and related services for the federal government's 1.8 million employees.
The e-Payroll initiative is part of President Bush's Management Agenda, which is
designed to save taxpayer dollars by streamlining government operations.

The four providers, which also include the Department of Defense's Defense
Finance and Accounting Service in Arlington, Va.; the Department of the
Interior's National Business Center in Washington, D.C.; and the General
Services Administration, also in the nation's capital, were selected from among
eight agencies that submitted proposals.

Wednesday's announcement achieves one of four goals outlined by TechVision 2020,
a volunteer-based task force appointed by former Mayor Marc Morial to write an
economic development plan for the city to grow information technology jobs
during the next 20 years.

Mark Lewis, president of the Louisiana Technology Council, praised the
selection.

"This says that the city has what it takes to bring technology jobs to New
Orleans, and that it's a good place to do business," Lewis says.

New Orleans will not start seeing the influx of jobs until next year when the
centers begin to be phased out, according to Lewis. Presently, there is no exact
figure on how many jobs the payroll initiative will mean, but it is expected to
range from the hundreds to thousands, he says.

Meanwhile, another Morial initiative involving NOBID will likely result in a
lawsuit. The entire board will decide Wednesday whether to employ the law firm
of Mendy & McElroy to collect $4.4 million from Royce Instrument Corp., a
water-instrument manufacturer, which broke its lease last year.

Morial worked to secure a $250,000 federal grant for Royce to upgrade its
manufacturing facilities. In 2001, NOBID offered to relocate all of its tenants
to make room for Royce, which signed a $422,000 annual lease agreement. The
company moved in last June, but stopped paying rent after only one month when
its experienced financial problems related to its merger with California-based
InterGlobal Waste Water Management.

If the board agrees to hire Mendy & McElroy, the firm would keep a third of the
money it collects. If the firm fails to collect any money, NOBID would not be
responsible for paying anything.

Meanwhile, Green says NOBID will pay the law firm of Adams & Reese approximately
$13,000 for legal fees it racked up in the Royce matter. Late last year, the law
firm presented NOBID with a $21,000 bill, which Green disputed because NOBID
never entered a contract with the firm. The firm contends Green gave them verbal
permission to proceed.

"The issue is disputable, but the board recognizes that certain services were
performed," Green says.

In other news, the committee gave Green approval to employ Billes- Manning and
Hewitt-Washington architectural firms to serve as NOBID's consultant on it
multi-stadium project.

Finally, the committee approved a recommendation by Green to allow Meyers
Distributing to increase its rental space from 50,000 square feet to 90,000
square feet, though they will pay 75 cents less per square foot. Green says he
is willing to accept the $2.10 per square foot rate in the "interest of
preserving long-term stability of an established firm."

The entire board will make a final decision on the matter this week.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Government activity

                      Copyright 2003 Dolan Media Newswires
                                All Rights Reserved


                              661 of 997 DOCUMENTS


             Journal Record Legislative Report (Oklahoma City, OK)

                           September 5, 2006 Tuesday

OK state officials raise questions about reassignment of master conservationist

BYLINE: Brian Brus

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 538  words


The executive director of the Oklahoma Conservation Commission and other state
officials are seeking the reversal of a U.S. Department of Agriculture decision
to move the federal department's state representative from his position.

Commission director Mike Thralls said at a recent federal agency cooperative
listening session in Enid that an "injustice" was committed with the
reassignment of master conservationist Darrel Dominick to Fort Worth, Texas.

Nearly two years ago, officials noted that technical assistance funds for the
implementation of conservation programs were being reduced even though it
appeared that congressional appropriations were on the rise. Backed by U.S. Rep.
Frank Lucas, R-Okla., the commission and the Association of Conservation
Districts demanded answers and correction.

Lucas later authored an amendment to the 2007 USDA appropriations bill to
eliminate funding for the office of the Undersecretary for Natural Resources and
Environment, Mark Rey.

"The reward for Oklahoma's efforts has been a large influx of funding here at
the end of the fiscal year, yet it was also accompanied with the forced removal
of this master conservationist, Darrel Dominick," Thralls said.

Dan Lowrance, president of the state Association of Conservation Districts, was
more direct: "We find it to be more than a coincidence that Mr. Rey chose to
reassign Mr. Dominick to a position outside of Oklahoma," he said recently,
calling the reassignment "a political act of retribution. "

Thralls and others have asked U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Mike Johanns to
personally reconsider Dominick's demotion. Terry Peach, Oklahoma's agriculture
secretary, wrote a letter to Johanns.

"I asked that he review the procedure and that Darrel be reinstated and treated
fairly and equitably," Peach said. "I've worked with Darrel for three and a half
years. ... He's a person with extreme integrity and honest, and he's built a
great base of teamwork with all the conservation and agriculture industry within
the state. It has been indeed an honor for me to work with Darrel to move the
state of Oklahoma forward. "

Leadership at the Oklahoma Farm Bureau, the Oklahoma Association of Conservation
Districts and the National Grazinglands Coalition also have publicly supported
Dominick's reinstatement.

Conservation Commission spokesman Mark Harrison said that Johanns has agreed to
review the situation. Dominick could not be reached for comment. Sources
confirmed that because of family ties in Oklahoma, he has chosen to leave the
department rather than move to the Fort Worth office.

USDA Deputy Undersecretary for Natural Resources and the Environment David Tenny
told officials at the Enid meeting that he could not comment directly about
personnel issues.

Thralls told federal officials in Enid, "You tear it down and are guilty of
preaching ... when actions such as this are allowed to stand. If you wish to
encourage cooperative conservation, federal agencies must act with integrity.
And when injustices such as this one are made known, I would ask that you have
the courage to correct the wrong. Because in so doing, damaged relationships can
be restored and we can move on to the important conservation task that is before
us. "

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Government activity

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              662 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday

Pakistan: PIJBF identifies priority sectors

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: LAHORE


LAHORE, July 3 -- The Pakistan-India Joint Business Forum (PIJBF) has
established specific taskforces for ten sectors and decided on a 60 days'
timeframe for recommendations on addressing the problems being faced by
businesses in bilateral trade.

The sectors identified by the PIJBF, in the first meeting held on Saturday in
Islamabad, are agriculture, agricultural products, automobiles, engineering,
textiles, and made-ups, pharmaceuticals, chemical education and vocational
training, banking infrastructure, information technology and telecommunication

The PIJBF has mutually agreed to seek further softening of the visa regime and
provide visas to the agriculture chambers of the two sides.The Forum, which has
15 prominent businessmen from each country, has been tasked with identifying the
problems faced in cross-border trade and to come up with recommendations.

The next meeting of the PIJBF will be held in September in New Delhi.An Indian
delegation led by Sunil Kant Munjal, chairman of Hero Corporate Services, met a
Pakistani team in Islamabad over the weekend.

Bashir Ali Mohammad, the vice chairman from the Pakistani side, cautioned about
high expectations from the Forum. He stated that there were apprehensions in
some sectors of the economy in Pakistan that trade normalisation would lead to
an influx of cheap and subsidised Indian products which would negatively impact
the local industry and agriculture. Responding to Bashir Ali Mohammad's opening
remarks, Sunil Kant Munjal the co-chair of the Forum, agreed that trade
normalisation should be a win-win situation for all and that it was the task of
the Forum to create conditions for that. He said he hoped that the Forum would
come up to the expectations of the stakeholders on both sides of the border.

The Pakistani side besides Bashir Ali Mohammad, included, Abdul Razak Dawood,
Sikander Mustafa Khan, Nauman Dar, Shabbir Diwan, Dr Tariq Bucha, Iftikhar A.
Malik, Dar, S M Muneer, Syed Nadeem Qamar and Noor Muhammad Kasuri.

Senior members of the Ministry of Commerce, led by Commerce Secretary Munir
Qureshi, also participated in the meeting, together with senior representation
the Board of Investment of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Indian Deputy High
Commissioner Gopal Baglay and Jayant Khobragade, counsellor at the Indian High
Commission in Islamabad assisted the Indian side.

The members of the PIJBF also called on Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif, who
assured the Forum of the government of Pakistan's commitment to the early
normalisation of trade between the two countries. He requested the members of
the Forum to identify areas in which progress could be made in the immediate
future so as to build trust and support for normalisation of trade

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              663 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

PIJBF identifies priority sectors

LENGTH: 452 words

DATELINE: LAHORE


The Pakistan-India Joint Business Forum (PIJBF) has established specific
taskforces for ten sectors and decided on a 60 days' timeframe for
recommendations on addressing the problems being faced by businesses in
bilateral trade.



The sectors identified by the PIJBF, in the first meeting held on Saturday in
Islamabad, are agriculture, agricultural products, automobiles, engineering,
textiles, and made-ups, pharmaceuticals, chemical education and vocational
training, banking infrastructure, information technology and telecommunication

The PIJBF has mutually agreed to seek further softening of the visa regime and
provide visas to the agriculture chambers of the two sides.The Forum, which has
15 prominent businessmen from each country, has been tasked with identifying the
problems faced in cross-border trade and to come up with recommendations.

The next meeting of the PIJBF will be held in September in New Delhi.An Indian
delegation led by Sunil Kant Munjal, chairman of Hero Corporate Services, met a
Pakistani team in Islamabad over the weekend.

Bashir Ali Mohammad, the vice chairman from the Pakistani side, cautioned about
high expectations from the Forum. He stated that there were apprehensions in
some sectors of the economy in Pakistan that trade normalisation would lead to
an influx of cheap and subsidised Indian products which would negatively impact
the local industry and agriculture. Responding to Bashir Ali Mohammad's opening
remarks, Sunil Kant Munjal the co-chair of the Forum, agreed that trade
normalisation should be a win-win situation for all and that it was the task of
the Forum to create conditions for that. He said he hoped that the Forum would
come up to the expectations of the stakeholders on both sides of the border.

The Pakistani side besides Bashir Ali Mohammad, included, Abdul Razak Dawood,
Sikander Mustafa Khan, Nauman Dar, Shabbir Diwan, Dr Tariq Bucha, Iftikhar A.
Malik, Dar, S M Muneer, Syed Nadeem Qamar and Noor Muhammad Kasuri.

Senior members of the Ministry of Commerce, led by Commerce Secretary Munir
Qureshi, also participated in the meeting, together with senior representation
the Board of Investment of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Indian Deputy High
Commissioner Gopal Baglay and Jayant Khobragade, counsellor at the Indian High
Commission in Islamabad assisted the Indian side.

The members of the PIJBF also called on Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif, who
assured the Forum of the government of Pakistan's commitment to the early
normalisation of trade between the two countries. He requested the members of
the Forum to identify areas in which progress could be made in the immediate
future so as to build trust and support for normalisation of trade.


LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              664 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                             July 31, 2000, Monday

BA 'snub' hits pet passports scheme

BYLINE: Valerie Elliott Consumer Editor

SECTION: Home news

LENGTH: 462 words


British Airways is jeopardising plans to extend the pet passport scheme this
week to rabies-free nations such as Australia, New Zealand and Japan.

Baroness Hayman, junior Agriculture Minister, will announce an extension of the
scheme, currently restricted to EU countries. The change will allow cats and
dogs that have been rabies-vaccinated and blood-tested to enter the UK with a
passport instead of enduring quarantine.

Ministers are keen for other islands, including Cyprus, Malta, Bermuda and
Hawaii, to be brought into the system by the end of the year. However, pet
owners are sceptical that they will ever be able to fly into Heathrow with their
animals and are disappointed by the lack of services offered by BA.

The failure of the UK's largest airline to participate in the scheme has
particularly irritated the Corporation of London, which recently expanded its
animal reception centre at Heathrow to cope with an influx of pets on passports.

Dr Peter Hardwick, chairman of the Port and City of London health and social
services committee, which oversees the centre, said last night that he was "very
disappointed" with BA.

He said that the Corporation had worked closely with the Minister of Agriculture
and had agreed to offer extra facilities at its reception area for pets. "But
really, this is all very slow. If British Airways, our largest airline, is not
prepared to provide facilities, I really don't think this scheme is going to be
viable and it will just fall by the wayside."

He added: "I really think BA, and many more airlines, must use it."

The Ministry of Agriculture launched a pilot pet passport scheme in February
this year for all EU countries, and made a special provision for guide and
hearing dogs to travel in from Australia and New Zealand. Since then, hundreds
of dogs and cats have travelled via the French ports or through the Channel
Tunnel. But so far, only about 120 pets have flown into Heathrow.

Only three air companies have so far been licensed to take part in the European
scheme - British Midland from Amsterdam and Palma, Lufthansa from Frankfurt and
Finn Air from Helsinki. British Airways was initially interested but has now
decided it is "too complicated to administer". British Midland is keen to extend
its service but it will not be able to bring in pets from long-haul
destinations, as the company operates only within Europe.

A BA spokesman said last night: "We don't rule it out for ever, but it is not
viable at present. At a time when we have had a difficult financial year, the
company has decided to concentrate on the core business."

Lady Fretwell, founder of Passport for Pets, said: " There really need to be
more airlines on board, they owe it to their clients."


LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2000 Times Newspapers Limited


                              665 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  China Daily

                           September 3, 2015 Thursday

Events boost trade, communications and culture

BYLINE: Fu Chao

LENGTH: 951  words


The 10th China-Northeast Asia Expo began on Tuesday and will run through Sunday
in Changchun, the capital of Jilin province.

Featuring six countries from Northeast Asia, the expo is a significant event to
promote cooperation in trade and culture, as well as conversations between
economies.

Jilin province is located at the geographical center of Northeast Asia. In 2005,
with approval from the State Council, the province hosted the first Northeast
Asia Expo, as part of efforts to revitalize the heavy industrial base in China's
northeast.

Influx of trade

The most substantial impact the expo brings to Jilin is an influx of trade and
investment opportunities. According to organizers, 520,000 professional business
visitors have attended the event in the past decade, sealing deals of more than
$6.9 billion. Included in that number is an average of 10,000 overseas business
visitors each year. In its first nine years, the expo has attracted a total of
806 Fortune 500 companies.

Each September for the past 10 years, buyers and business groups from around the
world have gathered in Changchun. Since 2013, the expo has introduced a new
"product", the International Business Fair, that is an upgrade of the expo's
regular trade fair. According to organizers, the fair has offered a platform for
more than 4,000 business visitors to hold exclusive and in-person negotiations
on about 8,000 products.

Last year, the expo launched its first Global Trade in Services Conference,
which was a highlight of the event. Some 240 politicians, experts and
entrepreneurs from 13 countries and regions took part in the conference to
discuss such subjects as strategies for China's trade in services in a new era,
and the future of IT outsourcing.

In addition to the major events, the expo also features purchasing summits for
minority groups and small enterprises in China. These summits, covering specific
fields such as energy and medicine, attracted multinational corporations and
business groups from around the world.

Industrial experts said that the trade events presented at the expo are of great
significance to local businesses in Jilin, by helping businesses promote the
advantages of their products, expand their market share in the global landscape
and boost business owners' confidence to tap into more overseas markets.

The expo also promoted a range of major projects that the province is seeking
investment for to fuel its economy and improve infrastructure.

Automobiles, petrochemicals, agriculture and medicine have historically been the
backbone industries in Jilin for attracting investment. In recent years, the
province's emerging industries including new materials and clean energy, which
were showcased and well received at past expos, have become the new engines of
the province's investment growth.

Official data show that from the fourth to ninth expos, 1,581 projects were
sealed worth more than 1 trillion yuan ($156.7 billion). By the end of 2014,
about 89 percent of those projects were in progress or completed.

The expos brought Jilin province not only tangible progress such as deals and
projects, but also new and liberating ideas for doing business and running a
city. By exchanging ideas with their counterparts from around the world, local
entrepreneurs learn innovative and effective business ideas. The province also
started to pay more attention to management efficiency and "soft environment"
development in addition to its business environment.

Dialogue initiator

An event mainly acting as a business opportunity provider, the China-Northeast
Asia Expo also serves as a bridge to connect countries and regions in Northeast
Asia by initiating dialogues between authorities.

The expo's most important and influential program, the High-Level Forum on
Northeast Asia Economic and Trade Cooperation, which started in 2007, is a
roundtable for political leaders to discuss key issues in the region. The forum
was renamed the High-Level Forum on Northeast Asia Cooperation in 2013,
indicating a wider coverage.

Northeast Asia lacks a mature and comprehensive cooperation mechanism such as
the European Union or the North American Free Trade Agreement and the area's
regional cooperation is still at an early stage. Set against this backdrop, the
expo aims to trigger political progress by fueling economic development.

The Northeast Asia Think Tank Forum at last year's expo made its key subjects
the development of China and Japan and South Korea Free Trade Zone.

The expo is also a global forum where great minds from different fields around
the world share ideas.

Cultural exchanges

For Jilin province, and other regions and countries in Northeast Asia, the most
subtle but lasting impact of the expo is cultural, as participants learn more
about other cultures.

Each expo showcases cultural activities from the most iconic and also the
usually ignored cultures of Northeast Asia countries and regions.

These activities are not only spectacular performances for the expo audience and
journalists from around the world, but are also "soft power" presentations and
exchange opportunities for authorities.

The expo also promotes tourism. With the influence of the expo, new tourism
products in Northeast Asia region have developed and more cooperation projects
have begun.

According to official data, Jilin province welcomed about 69 million tourists in
the first half of 2015, an increase of 16 percent from a year earlier.

As the host of the expo for 10 years, Jilin is internationalizing its
infrastructure, service industry and the mindset of residents.

fuchao@chinadaily.com.cn

Delegates from across Northeast Asia attend the expo. Photos by Ding Luyang /
for China Daily

(China Daily 09/03/2015 page10)

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1493


                    Copyright 2015 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              666 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  China Daily

                           September 3, 2015 Thursday

Events boost trade, communications and culture

BYLINE: Fu Chao

LENGTH: 951  words


The 10th China-Northeast Asia Expo began on Tuesday and will run through Sunday
in Changchun, the capital of Jilin province.

Featuring six countries from Northeast Asia, the expo is a significant event to
promote cooperation in trade and culture, as well as conversations between
economies.

Jilin province is located at the geographical center of Northeast Asia. In 2005,
with approval from the State Council, the province hosted the first Northeast
Asia Expo, as part of efforts to revitalize the heavy industrial base in China's
northeast.

Influx of trade

The most substantial impact the expo brings to Jilin is an influx of trade and
investment opportunities. According to organizers, 520,000 professional business
visitors have attended the event in the past decade, sealing deals of more than
$6.9 billion. Included in that number is an average of 10,000 overseas business
visitors each year. In its first nine years, the expo has attracted a total of
806 Fortune 500 companies.

Each September for the past 10 years, buyers and business groups from around the
world have gathered in Changchun. Since 2013, the expo has introduced a new
"product", the International Business Fair, that is an upgrade of the expo's
regular trade fair. According to organizers, the fair has offered a platform for
more than 4,000 business visitors to hold exclusive and in-person negotiations
on about 8,000 products.

Last year, the expo launched its first Global Trade in Services Conference,
which was a highlight of the event. Some 240 politicians, experts and
entrepreneurs from 13 countries and regions took part in the conference to
discuss such subjects as strategies for China's trade in services in a new era,
and the future of IT outsourcing.

In addition to the major events, the expo also features purchasing summits for
minority groups and small enterprises in China. These summits, covering specific
fields such as energy and medicine, attracted multinational corporations and
business groups from around the world.

Industrial experts said that the trade events presented at the expo are of great
significance to local businesses in Jilin, by helping businesses promote the
advantages of their products, expand their market share in the global landscape
and boost business owners' confidence to tap into more overseas markets.

The expo also promoted a range of major projects that the province is seeking
investment for to fuel its economy and improve infrastructure.

Automobiles, petrochemicals, agriculture and medicine have historically been the
backbone industries in Jilin for attracting investment. In recent years, the
province's emerging industries including new materials and clean energy, which
were showcased and well received at past expos, have become the new engines of
the province's investment growth.

Official data show that from the fourth to ninth expos, 1,581 projects were
sealed worth more than 1 trillion yuan ($156.7 billion). By the end of 2014,
about 89 percent of those projects were in progress or completed.

The expos brought Jilin province not only tangible progress such as deals and
projects, but also new and liberating ideas for doing business and running a
city. By exchanging ideas with their counterparts from around the world, local
entrepreneurs learn innovative and effective business ideas. The province also
started to pay more attention to management efficiency and "soft environment"
development in addition to its business environment.

Dialogue initiator

An event mainly acting as a business opportunity provider, the China-Northeast
Asia Expo also serves as a bridge to connect countries and regions in Northeast
Asia by initiating dialogues between authorities.

The expo's most important and influential program, the High-Level Forum on
Northeast Asia Economic and Trade Cooperation, which started in 2007, is a
roundtable for political leaders to discuss key issues in the region. The forum
was renamed the High-Level Forum on Northeast Asia Cooperation in 2013,
indicating a wider coverage.

Northeast Asia lacks a mature and comprehensive cooperation mechanism such as
the European Union or the North American Free Trade Agreement and the area's
regional cooperation is still at an early stage. Set against this backdrop, the
expo aims to trigger political progress by fueling economic development.

The Northeast Asia Think Tank Forum at last year's expo made its key subjects
the development of China and Japan and South Korea Free Trade Zone.

The expo is also a global forum where great minds from different fields around
the world share ideas.

Cultural exchanges

For Jilin province, and other regions and countries in Northeast Asia, the most
subtle but lasting impact of the expo is cultural, as participants learn more
about other cultures.

Each expo showcases cultural activities from the most iconic and also the
usually ignored cultures of Northeast Asia countries and regions.

These activities are not only spectacular performances for the expo audience and
journalists from around the world, but are also "soft power" presentations and
exchange opportunities for authorities.

The expo also promotes tourism. With the influence of the expo, new tourism
products in Northeast Asia region have developed and more cooperation projects
have begun.

According to official data, Jilin province welcomed about 69 million tourists in
the first half of 2015, an increase of 16 percent from a year earlier.

As the host of the expo for 10 years, Jilin is internationalizing its
infrastructure, service industry and the mindset of residents.

fuchao@chinadaily.com.cn

Delegates from across Northeast Asia attend the expo. Photos by Ding Luyang /
for China Daily

(China Daily 09/03/2015 page10)

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1493


                    Copyright 2015 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              667 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  China Daily

                           September 3, 2015 Thursday

Events boost trade, communications and culture

BYLINE: Fu Chao

LENGTH: 951  words


The 10th China-Northeast Asia Expo began on Tuesday and will run through Sunday
in Changchun, the capital of Jilin province.

Featuring six countries from Northeast Asia, the expo is a significant event to
promote cooperation in trade and culture, as well as conversations between
economies.

Jilin province is located at the geographical center of Northeast Asia. In 2005,
with approval from the State Council, the province hosted the first Northeast
Asia Expo, as part of efforts to revitalize the heavy industrial base in China's
northeast.

Influx of trade

The most substantial impact the expo brings to Jilin is an influx of trade and
investment opportunities. According to organizers, 520,000 professional business
visitors have attended the event in the past decade, sealing deals of more than
$6.9 billion. Included in that number is an average of 10,000 overseas business
visitors each year. In its first nine years, the expo has attracted a total of
806 Fortune 500 companies.

Each September for the past 10 years, buyers and business groups from around the
world have gathered in Changchun. Since 2013, the expo has introduced a new
"product", the International Business Fair, that is an upgrade of the expo's
regular trade fair. According to organizers, the fair has offered a platform for
more than 4,000 business visitors to hold exclusive and in-person negotiations
on about 8,000 products.

Last year, the expo launched its first Global Trade in Services Conference,
which was a highlight of the event. Some 240 politicians, experts and
entrepreneurs from 13 countries and regions took part in the conference to
discuss such subjects as strategies for China's trade in services in a new era,
and the future of IT outsourcing.

In addition to the major events, the expo also features purchasing summits for
minority groups and small enterprises in China. These summits, covering specific
fields such as energy and medicine, attracted multinational corporations and
business groups from around the world.

Industrial experts said that the trade events presented at the expo are of great
significance to local businesses in Jilin, by helping businesses promote the
advantages of their products, expand their market share in the global landscape
and boost business owners' confidence to tap into more overseas markets.

The expo also promoted a range of major projects that the province is seeking
investment for to fuel its economy and improve infrastructure.

Automobiles, petrochemicals, agriculture and medicine have historically been the
backbone industries in Jilin for attracting investment. In recent years, the
province's emerging industries including new materials and clean energy, which
were showcased and well received at past expos, have become the new engines of
the province's investment growth.

Official data show that from the fourth to ninth expos, 1,581 projects were
sealed worth more than 1 trillion yuan ($156.7 billion). By the end of 2014,
about 89 percent of those projects were in progress or completed.

The expos brought Jilin province not only tangible progress such as deals and
projects, but also new and liberating ideas for doing business and running a
city. By exchanging ideas with their counterparts from around the world, local
entrepreneurs learn innovative and effective business ideas. The province also
started to pay more attention to management efficiency and "soft environment"
development in addition to its business environment.

Dialogue initiator

An event mainly acting as a business opportunity provider, the China-Northeast
Asia Expo also serves as a bridge to connect countries and regions in Northeast
Asia by initiating dialogues between authorities.

The expo's most important and influential program, the High-Level Forum on
Northeast Asia Economic and Trade Cooperation, which started in 2007, is a
roundtable for political leaders to discuss key issues in the region. The forum
was renamed the High-Level Forum on Northeast Asia Cooperation in 2013,
indicating a wider coverage.

Northeast Asia lacks a mature and comprehensive cooperation mechanism such as
the European Union or the North American Free Trade Agreement and the area's
regional cooperation is still at an early stage. Set against this backdrop, the
expo aims to trigger political progress by fueling economic development.

The Northeast Asia Think Tank Forum at last year's expo made its key subjects
the development of China and Japan and South Korea Free Trade Zone.

The expo is also a global forum where great minds from different fields around
the world share ideas.

Cultural exchanges

For Jilin province, and other regions and countries in Northeast Asia, the most
subtle but lasting impact of the expo is cultural, as participants learn more
about other cultures.

Each expo showcases cultural activities from the most iconic and also the
usually ignored cultures of Northeast Asia countries and regions.

These activities are not only spectacular performances for the expo audience and
journalists from around the world, but are also "soft power" presentations and
exchange opportunities for authorities.

The expo also promotes tourism. With the influence of the expo, new tourism
products in Northeast Asia region have developed and more cooperation projects
have begun.

According to official data, Jilin province welcomed about 69 million tourists in
the first half of 2015, an increase of 16 percent from a year earlier.

As the host of the expo for 10 years, Jilin is internationalizing its
infrastructure, service industry and the mindset of residents.

fuchao@chinadaily.com.cn

Delegates from across Northeast Asia attend the expo. Photos by Ding Luyang /
for China Daily

(China Daily 09/03/2015 page10)

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1493


                    Copyright 2015 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              668 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily the Pak Banker

                           September 26, 2011 Monday

Pawar predicts excess onion influx in the winter

LENGTH: 111 words

DATELINE: Satara


Satara, Sept. 26 -- India's Union Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar today said
there could be an excess onion harvest in the country post-October, which will
bring the prices down. Speaking at a press conference here, Pawar said whether
the export of the onion is allowed or banned, the government has to face
criticism either way.

He said that the recent agitation by the onion farmers in Maharashtra against
ban on exports was unnecessary, as the ban was temporary Published by HT
Syndication with permission from Daily Pak Banker. For any query with respect to
this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              669 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                           January 11, 2014 Saturday

Pakistan: Sindh govt plans to make Karachi a global city

LENGTH: 891  words

DATELINE: KARACHI


KARACHI, Jan. 11 -- Chief Minister Sindh Syed Qaim Ali Shah has said that
Karachi bears immense significance for Sindh and Pakistan and his government has
planned to mobilise its resources to implement mega development projects so as
to convert it into a global and most favourable city of the world.

"Better provision of clean drinking water, efficient sewerage & sanitation and
mass transit system are the main areas for investment to change the face of the
city."

He said this while talking to Rachid Benmessoud, Country Director of the World
Bank, who called on him at the CM House here on Thursday.

Qaim Shah said that the Sindh government was trying its best and investing huge
amount for the development of Karachi but since the population of Karachi has
crossed 20 million mark due to influx from all over the country and abroad,
foreign investment was required to achieve the goals.

The chief minister appreciated the contribution and financial assistance being
provided by the World Bank for bringing improvement in education, agriculture
and water sectors. He said that by the World Bank's financial assistance of up
to 400 million dollars in education sector, $450million in agriculture and water
sectors, considerable improvement in the social development of the province
would be achieved. He also appreciated the $66 million grant of the World Bank
for the management sector of Education Department under the global partnership
for education programme, which would probably be implemented in June this year.

Inviting the attention of the World Bank towards the development projects of
Karachi, Qaim Shah said that the Sindh government was spending huge amount to
maintain law and order in Karachi and trying its best to overcome this issue
within shortest possible time.

He said that the federal and the provincial governments were on the same page as
far as the development of any sector was concerned, adding, "Karachi has good
potential for investment which could be availed by the foreign investors to whom
the Sindh government would provide all facilities. Taking keen interest in the
development of Karachi, Country Director World Bank Rachid Benmessaoud said:
"Urbanisation is a long term and most difficult subject and it needs leadership
and coordination among all stake holders to make it success". He, however,
expressed his confidence in the leadership of the chief minister Sindh to change
the face of Karachi and convert it in to a modern, most favourable and
commercially viable city of the world.

WB team meets KMC chief

A World Bank (WB) delegation comprising of six members called on Karachi
Metropolitan Corporation (KMC) Administrator Rauf Akhtar Farooqui in his office
and discussed the ongoing dialogue on transformation of Karachi. The area of the
proposed discussion was related to non-lending technical assistance.

The WB team consisted of Peter Ellis, Ming Zhang, Fatima Shah, Shahnaz Arshad,
Moazzam Ahmed and Khalid Siddiqui. The KMC administrator was assisted by the KMC
Commissioner Samiuddin Siddiqui and senior directors of relevant departments of
the KMC.

Briefing the delegation, Faroouqi reiterated the eminent position of Karachi in
context of the economic and social development of Pakistan. He described that
the metropolis as a fast growing metropolis with a rural-urban migration ratio
of 3.5 percent per annum and emphasised that the city resources were being
depleted fast in meeting the demands of its populace.

He also pointed out that the cardinal issue facing the city managers and
planners is the multiplicity of agencies controlling 70 percent of its vast
resources leaving its premier civic body, the KMC, with as little as 30 percent
of its resources that in turn are expected to provide civic amenities to the
city.

"Owing to these constraints the city planners devised 'Karachi Strategic
Development Plan' with the prime aim to fill the void in these resources and
expenditure. The KMC requires far large resources to provide civic services to
the citizens of the metropolitan".

The leader of the WB delegation briefed the KMC administrator about the ensuing
discussions about this matter and said that the WB has had exhaustive debate
about these urban transformation issues.

The current visit of his team was to explore the possibility of non-lending
technical assistance with a view to provide technical expertise once indigenous
agencies are prepared to launch a civic project on their own, he said.

The WB was looking into areas of development from three angles; planning,
investment and financing investment. He, however, mentioned that necessary
funding could well be arranged by the WB for more specified areas through
pre-feasibility reports. The WB emphatically encourages the financiers to come
forward for helping the development, he added.

Farooqui emphasised the need to bring in projects with shorter gestation periods
so that their efficacy was soon apparent instead of long duration schemes.

The installation of storm water drainage system in the city was amongst his top
priorities followed by urban road transport facility and solid waste management
and other sectors, he claimed

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              670 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                The Jordan Times

                           November 26, 2013 Tuesday

Jordan, Romania discuss better economic ties

LENGTH: 356  words


AMMAN -- Prime Minister Abdullah Ensour on Tuesday discussed with a Romanian
delegation ways to develop economic ties between the two countries.

At a meeting with a Romanian delegation, chaired by Romania's Prince Radu and
Prince Nikola, discussions focused on mechanisms to develop bilateral economic
and commercial cooperation.

At the meeting, attended by Romania's Ambassador to Jordan Bogdan Filip, Prince
Radu said governments of the two countries should encourage their private
sectors to increase joint cooperation to explore investment opportunities
available in both Jordan and Romania.

The two countries should also boost commercial exchange volumes, he said,
pointing out that there are various opportunities available to expand commercial
cooperation.

Ensour highlighted the Kingdom's drive towards reform, led by His Majesty King
Abdullah as well as the economic challenges Jordan is facing due to the large
influx of Syrian refugees over the past three years.

Also on Tuesday, Minister of Agriculture Akef Zu'bi met with the visiting
delegation and discussed ways to enforce agricultural agreements signed between
the two countries.

Zu'bi urged Romania to facilitate the entry of Jordanian goods into the Romanian
market.

The visiting delegation expressed Romania's interest in importing phosphate and
vegetables and its interest in the Kingdom's tenders to purchase wheat and other
cereals at a meeting with Ministry of Industry, Trade and Supply Secretary
General Maha Ali.

The visiting delegation also met with Isa Murad, Jordan European Business
Association president, who highlighted that the Jordanian private sector is keen
to strengthen its economic, investment and commercial cooperation with Romania.

Trade balance between Jordan and Romania is in favour of the southeastern
European country as the Kingdom exports some kinds of vegetables and fruits to
Romania whereas it imports live sheep, lamb and other cattle to Jordan, besides
wheat and corn.

Jordan's exports to Romania totalled $13.1 million in 2012 while its imports
from Romania stood at $167 million.

<p class='syndigate_disclaimer'>© Copyright The Jordan Times.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 62


                        Copyright 2013 The Jordan Times.
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              671 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                             Sowetan (South Africa)

                             July 6, 2011 Wednesday

MEC's bid to boost land allotment

BYLINE: Mogomotsi Selebi

SECTION: ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

LENGTH: 319 words


AGRICULTURE and rural development MEC Nandi Khoza has advocated for a
partnership between emerging and established farmers to ensure the success of
the land redistribution initiatives.

 Delivering her R490million budget in the Gauteng legislature, Khoza said such a
partnership would ensure the creation of sustainable jobs.


 "This is in no way creating a culture of dependency but it would be beneficial
for them to learn from the more established farmers," Khoza said.
 She warned that land received through redistribution should be utilised
optimally.
 "It is important that the issue of redistribution of wealth be looked at. But
what is equally important is what do we do with the land once we have it. It
would not make much sense for people to have land and not utilise it," she said.


 Khoza said other provinces had to be made "attractive" to residents to
alleviate the high influx of job seekers into Gauteng.

 "Gauteng faces the challenge of migration of people from the rural areas to the
inner-city. This makes it difficult for the province to provide services.
 "In order to reduce immigration without restricting people's movements, we have
to ensure that there is progress in improving rural services to support," she
said.
 Khoza has allocated R123million to ensure equitable and sustainable rural
communities and food security.
 About R22,6million for protected and enhanced environmental assets and natural
resources.
 Some R101,8million for the running of the public service and R242,3million for
compensation of employees.
 Khoza also said she was concerned about the country's reduced food exports.
  "South Africa has in the past prided itself on being one of the few net food
exporters in the world," she said.
 "This has however changed during the past 10 years. We need to invest more in
agriculture, and agribusiness in particular, to ensure sustainable food
security."
 DETERMINED: MEC Nandi Khoza

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: Sowetan


                    Copyright 2011 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              672 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                        Armenpress News Agency (English)

                           September 30, 2016 Friday

Armenian Premier receives delegation of Crédit Agricole CJSC

LENGTH: 436  words


YEREVAN, SEPTEMBER 30, ARMENPRESS. Prime Minister of Armenia Karen Karapetyan
received today a delegation led by Crédit Agricole's International Retail and
Commercial Banking Director Marc Oppenheim.

As "Armenpress" was informed from the press service of the Government of
Armenia, praising Crédit Agricole's activities in Armenia's banking sector and
the presence of French management culture, the Prime Minister stressed the
importance increased influx of French capital and the need to push ahead with
the implementation of investment programs.

"We are set to improve the business environment, and to this end, we have
already changed the focus of the Ministry of Economy, with a primary objective
to support the business community and attract investment. Our team will always
be open: we will back you in addressing any eventual challenges,"Karen
Karapetyan said.

The Premier added that during a recent meeting with the representatives of the
banking sector he urged them to develop appropriate SME lending mechanisms using
the assets available with the banks in order to activate the economy.

Highlighting the Bank's involvement in the agricultural sector, the Prime
Minister stressed the importance of close cooperation between the French company
and the Ministry of Agriculture of Armenia, adding that the Ministry of
Agriculture in the near future will develop a package of investment programs.
Karen Karapetyan expressed confidence that Crédit Agricole will help bring in
French capital and emphasized the need for a turnaround in this matter.

Thankful for the reception, Marc Oppenheim noted that the 20th anniversary of
his bank's activity in Armenia was being marked today. According to him, this is
the evidence of close bilateral relations and their willingness to improve the
business environment and economic development in Armenia. Marc Oppenheim
expressed confidence that the shift in the focus of the Ministry of Economy will
contribute to the implementation of the government's objectives and investment
projects. He thanked the Prime Minister for his willingness to assist investors,
noting that it is very important for successful business activities.

"Good relations between the government and investors are the keys to success.
Any State, which is ready to assist the business community, will be able to
achieve development and ensure progress. We will back you on this way as we are
keen to become the ambassador of French capital in Armenia,"Marc Oppenheim
pointed out.

During the meeting, the parties discussed other issues of mutual interest.

http://imgs.syndigate.info/354/1176/23/147525925986.jpg



LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1176


                           Copyright 2016 Armenpress
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              673 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock and Land

                            November 11, 2016 Friday
                           Print & Internet Editions

More growers to store grain

BYLINE: Joely Mitchell

LENGTH: 686 words


WITH an influx of grain on its way, growers are investing in more on-farm
storage options than ever before.

Growers are choosing to store grain on property for a range of reasons, but
distributors of storage units say it's mainly because they're expected to exceed
their contracted tonnage, and because they wish to hold on to grain until prices
go back up.

Dean Heard, Heard's Hire Horsham, said he's seen almost a 100 per cent increase
in sales of grain storage units this year.

"There's definitely been a lot more interest in grain bags, particularly in
comparison to years gone by," Mr Heard said.

"In better years, there's always been interest, but this year there's just been
a lot."

He said growers seemed to be thinking about storage options a lot earlier than
normal this year.

"Everyone was in very early this year and by the end of September, everything
was done and dusted," he said.

Tim Gaffy, Gaffy's Hire, said he had also completely sold out of units by the
end of September.

"We've had a lot of interest this year, a lot more than what we've had in the
past," Mr Gaffy said.

"Growers will have good crops, so will be looking at ways to store it all until
prices go back up."

Recently wheat prices have dropped to 10-year lows on the back of over global
supply.

Mr Gaffy, who sells grain bags to growers in the Goulburn Valley, Gippsland,
Colac, Horsham and Mildura, said growers were aware that prices would go down,
so stocked up well in advance.

Tim Sait, Bunker Bags, has also been sold out since September, and said he's
been purchasing second-hand units from growers that don't need them anymore, to
distribute to growers in need.

"I've been visiting several growers and negotiating with them, and buying
second-hand units from some of them to supply to growers who are still in the
market for them," Mr Sait said.

Mr Sait sells four different sized storage bags, a 60m by 2.7m bag (holds 200
tonnes), a 75m by 2.7m bag (260 tonnes), a 60m by 3m bag (270 tonnes), and a 75m
by 3m bag (330 tonnes).

He said the most popular sized bags in Australia are the 2.7m diameter bags.

"For the 75m and 100m bags, you need a crane and cradle mechanism to get the
grain in," he said.

"The guys that don't have those have to get the smaller sized ones, it's
probably about 50/50."

He said a 75 metre bag would cost about $900.

"The cost of the bag doesn't go up much when you get a bigger size, but the
capacity is so much greater."

He said it was inevitable that units would be popular, given the significantly
low commodity prices.

"Because of the low prices, and growers breaking their contracted tonnage, the
units have been very popular," he said.

"Priority is to get grains harvested and safe, so you can market when you've got
a known quantity and quality."

He said given the unseasonably wet conditions, growers couldn't rely on the
harvesting season being dry.

"It's been wet all year, so chances are it wouldn't stop at harvesting time," he
said.

"It would only take one big rainfall, and we'd see millions of dollars wiped off
crops."

Mr Heard said accessibility to properties may also be a reason that growers
would have to store their own grain.

"There have already been a few issues with people being unable to get into
properties because of flooding, so in some cases, growers will have to store
their grain themselves," he said.

AGRIvision Consultants general manager Kent Wooding, who is based in Swan Hill,
said the wet conditions would amount to a lot of unexpected grain.

"The season started off ok, as in average to slightly below average rainfall,"
Mr Wooding said.

"Coming off the back of two poor years, everyone was quite conservative and
nervous about the season, and then we got into August and September, and it was
very wet, and now most crops in the region are looking as good as we've ever
seen."

He said growers would be strategic with what they did with their crops this
year.

"Growers have been looking into harvest strategies, and there will definitely be
a lot more on-farm storage being used," he said.

"I think growers are going to be very strategic with what they do with their
crops."&acirc;&euro;&lsaquo;

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              674 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock and Land

                           November 10, 2016 Thursday
                                 Print Edition

More growers to store grain

BYLINE: Joely Mitchell

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 686 words


WITH an influx of grain on its way, growers are investing in more on-farm
storage options than ever before.

Growers are choosing to store grain on property for a range of reasons, but
distributors of storage units say it's mainly because they're expected to exceed
their contracted tonnage, and because they wish to hold on to grain until prices
go back up.

Dean Heard, Heard's Hire Horsham, said he's seen almost a 100 per cent increase
in sales of grain storage units this year.

"There's definitely been a lot more interest in grain bags, particularly in
comparison to years gone by," Mr Heard said.

"In better years, there's always been interest, but this year there's just been
a lot."

He said growers seemed to be thinking about storage options a lot earlier than
normal this year.

"Everyone was in very early this year and by the end of September, everything
was done and dusted," he said.

Tim Gaffy, Gaffy's Hire, said he had also completely sold out of units by the
end of September.

"We've had a lot of interest this year, a lot more than what we've had in the
past," Mr Gaffy said.

"Growers will have good crops, so will be looking at ways to store it all until
prices go back up."

Recently wheat prices have dropped to 10-year lows on the back of over global
supply.

Mr Gaffy, who sells grain bags to growers in the Goulburn Valley, Gippsland,
Colac, Horsham and Mildura, said growers were aware that prices would go down,
so stocked up well in advance.

Tim Sait, Bunker Bags, has also been sold out since September, and said he's
been purchasing second-hand units from growers that don't need them anymore, to
distribute to growers in need.

"I've been visiting several growers and negotiating with them, and buying
second-hand units from some of them to supply to growers who are still in the
market for them," Mr Sait said.

Mr Sait sells four different sized storage bags, a 60m by 2.7m bag (holds 200
tonnes), a 75m by 2.7m bag (260 tonnes), a 60m by 3m bag (270 tonnes), and a 75m
by 3m bag (330 tonnes).

He said the most popular sized bags in Australia are the 2.7m diameter bags.

"For the 75m and 100m bags, you need a crane and cradle mechanism to get the
grain in," he said.

"The guys that don't have those have to get the smaller sized ones, it's
probably about 50/50."

He said a 75 metre bag would cost about $900.

"The cost of the bag doesn't go up much when you get a bigger size, but the
capacity is so much greater."

He said it was inevitable that units would be popular, given the significantly
low commodity prices.

"Because of the low prices, and growers breaking their contracted tonnage, the
units have been very popular," he said.

"Priority is to get grains harvested and safe, so you can market when you've got
a known quantity and quality."

He said given the unseasonably wet conditions, growers couldn't rely on the
harvesting season being dry.

"It's been wet all year, so chances are it wouldn't stop at harvesting time," he
said.

"It would only take one big rainfall, and we'd see millions of dollars wiped off
crops."

Mr Heard said accessibility to properties may also be a reason that growers
would have to store their own grain.

"There have already been a few issues with people being unable to get into
properties because of flooding, so in some cases, growers will have to store
their grain themselves," he said.

AGRIvision Consultants general manager Kent Wooding, who is based in Swan Hill,
said the wet conditions would amount to a lot of unexpected grain.

"The season started off ok, as in average to slightly below average rainfall,"
Mr Wooding said.

"Coming off the back of two poor years, everyone was quite conservative and
nervous about the season, and then we got into August and September, and it was
very wet, and now most crops in the region are looking as good as we've ever
seen."

He said growers would be strategic with what they did with their crops this
year.

"Growers have been looking into harvest strategies, and there will definitely be
a lot more on-farm storage being used," he said.

"I think growers are going to be very strategic with what they do with their
crops."&acirc;&euro;&lsaquo;

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              675 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                            April 19, 2014 Saturday
                               Australian Edition

Sell off the farm, says big business

BYLINE: ANNABEL HEPWORTH National business correspondent

SECTION: THENATION; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 444  words


BIG business is urging the government's taskforce on the future of Australian
agriculture to relax the investment thresholds for foreign purchases, in a
challenge to the Coalition's election promise of more scrutiny of foreign bids
for farmland and agri-businesses.

The Business Council of Australia has also told the taskforce developing a white
paper on the competitiveness of Australian agriculture that labour costs are
high compared with our inter-national rivals and younger workers need to be
enticed on to the land as the average farmer was aged 52.

In a new submission, the BCA says foreign investment would "assist greatly" in
delivering an -influx of finance and capital needed so the sector can innovate
and grow. "Australia should aim to become a world leader in attracting foreign
direct investment. One means of assisting this would be to extend the higher
investment screening threshold that applies to the US and New Zealand -
currently set at about $1.1 billion - to private sector investors from all other
countries," the submission says.

"Australia should also revisit and further clarify the foreign investment policy
for investment by sovereign wealth funds and state-owned enterprises." While the
free-trade pacts with South Korea and Japan apply the same deal for
"non--sensitive" sectors, they have a carve-out for agricultural purchases
requiring vetting by the Foreign Investment Review Board of agricultural land
purchases worth more than $15 million and $53m for agribusinesses.

These triggers were locked into the recent free trade agreement deals in line
with the -Coalition's election platform and are a core policy for the Nationals,
although Queensland Nationals MP Bruce Scott has said the thresholds should be
considered as part of the white paper.

Agriculture Minister Barnaby Joyce, who has called for submissions for the white
paper that is expected to shape government policy on the sector, has been an
outspoken critic of foreign investment proposals in the past, including the US
bid for GrainCorp.

According to Australian Bureau of Statistics data cited in the agricultural
competitiveness issues paper, about 1 per cent of -agribusinesses is wholly or
partly foreign-owned, as is about 11 per cent of farmland.

Foreign investment is more obvious in certain areas, with about half the milk
and 40 per cent of the red meat in Australia being processed by foreign-owned
firms in 2011.Preliminary findings for the white paper have raised concerns
about labour costs. The submission says while rising affluence in Asia will spur
demand for agricultural products, Australia faces stiff competition from other
international producers.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: The Australian


                   Copyright 2014 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              676 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                            February 22, 2015 Sunday

Aquaculture to get agriculture status in Andhra Pradesh

SECTION: HYDERABAD

LENGTH: 166 words


VIJAYAWADA: Chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Friday said the state
government will announce a new aquaculture policy in order to make Andhra
Pradesh the top exporter of marine products in the world.

He said the government is planning to grant agriculture status to aquaculture so
that there can be an influx of funds into the sector.

Addressing a meeting after inaugurating 'Aqua Aquaria', an aquaculture expo, in
the city, Chandrababu Naidu said he was unable to elaborate on the aqua policy
due to the MLC election code in Krishna district. He, however, promised to
extend support to fishermen and exporters. He said the government will make use
of 3,000 tmcft water which is going into the sea from the Godavari river to
promote the aqua sector in the state. He said the government has fixed a target
of exports worth Rs 30,000 crore per annum.

The government will also introduce new courses in aqua technology in
professional colleges to boost the industry.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              677 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Times of India (Electronic Edition)

                           February 21, 2015 Saturday
                               hyderabad Edition

Aquaculture to get agriculture status in AP

SECTION: TWO STATES

LENGTH: 158 words


Chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Friday said the state government will
announce a new aquaculture policy in order to make Andhra Pradesh the top
exporter of marine products in the world.

He said the government is planning to grant agriculture status to aquaculture so
that there can be an influx of funds into the sector.

Addressing a meeting after inaugurating `Aqua Aquaria', an aquaculture expo, in
the city, Chandrababu Naidu said he was unable to elaborate on the aqua policy
due to the MLC election code in Krishna district. He, however, promised to
extend support to fishermen and exporters.

He said the government will make use of 3,000 tmcft water which is going into
the sea from the Godavari river to promote the aqua sector in the state. He said
the government has fixed a target of exports worth Rs 30,000 crore per annum.

The government will also introduce new courses in aqua technology in
professional colleges to boost the industry.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              678 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 18, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; TODAY IN BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 822 words


MEDIA OWNERSHIP RULES  The head of the Federal Communications Commission has
circulated an ambitious plan to relax the decades-old media ownership rules,
including repealing a rule that forbids a company to own both a newspaper and a
television or radio station in the same city.

AN ETHANOL LIFE RAFT  Farmers who produce sugar cane,  fearing an influx of
sugar from Mexico,  are promoting a provision in the new farm bill that would
obligate the Agriculture Department to buy surplus sugar and sell it to ethanol
producers. The Bush administration, and ethanol makers, are fighting it.  [C1.]

INQUIRY ON COUNTRYWIDE CHIEF  The Securities and Exchange Commission has opened
an informal investigation into the stock sales of the chief executive of
Countrywide Financial, Angelo R. Mozilo, people briefed on the matter said.
[C1.]

SMALL COMPANIES, TOUGH RULES    The Food and Drug Administration has begun to
enforcing rules on small pharmaceutical companies that require their drugs to go
through the agency's stringent approval process. The companies are crying foul.
In the Hunt: Brent Bowers.  [C1.]

MORGAN STANLEY SELLS  STAKE  Morgan Stanley has sold its 7.2 percent stake in
The New York Times Company, people close to the matter said. It would be the end
of a bitter fight between one of the bank's asset managers and the company over
its dual-class share structure.  [C1.]

EBAY REPORTS HIGHER SALES EBay said it continued to grow quickly in the last
quarter. In its third-quarter earnings report,  eBay reported sales up 30
percent from last year and ahead of Wall Street's forecast of $1.83 billion. The
company reported a $936 million net loss because of a recent write-off stemming
from  Skype, the Internet calling service it acquired in 2005.   [C4.]

F.D.A. TO CONSIDER MORE TESTS  The Food and Drug Administration is likely to
study whether to require more extensive tests of critical heart-device
components before they are sold, as a result of Medtronic's recent problems with
such a product, an agency official said. [C10.]

ACCOUNTING BOARD'S NEW HEAD   The body that governs the International Accounting
Standards Board has found a new chairman: Gerrit Zalm, who was the Dutch finance
minister for more than 11 years. [C9.]

G.P.S. SYSTEM THAT TALKS BACK  A new navigation system for drivers not only
relies on data from the satellites of the Global Positioning System but it also
broadcasts information back to a network, feeding a database of highly detailed
and accurate traffic information. Basics.  [C7.]

A WORLD MUSEUM ONLINE The Library of Congress announced an ambitious plan to
digitize a collection of the world's rare cultural materials.  The library also
agreed with Unesco to move ahead with the World Digital Library project, which
will post online rare and fragile artwork, like the 1862 Japanese portrait of an
actor shown above. [C2.]

TAXES ARE UP WORLDWIDE  After dipping briefly in the first years of this decade,
taxes are growing again in nations around the world, the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development said. Taxes in 2005 equaled the previous
peak year of 2000, the group said, and when final figures are in for 2006 they
will most likely show a new peak. [C3.]

Local governments across the United States are feeling economic strain driven in
part by the real estate downturn, and many cities are raising fees and taxes to
make up for expected budget shortfalls. [A20.]

some tinkering allowed Apple is opening up the iPhone -- at least partly -- to
encourage independent developers to build programs for use on the iPhone. It is
not changing a policy that forbids users from using the iPhone with carriers
other than AT&T. [C2.]

A SYMBOL THAT CAN CHANGE   Sponsors of the  2012 Summer Olympics in London are
permitted to put their own brand symbols or colors into the official logo of the
2012 games. Advertising. [C11.]

VARIABLE WINDS ON WALL ST.  The markets ended a volatile session mixed.
Investors' concerns about sluggish housing and tight credit, along with rising
oil prices, pushed prices down. But upbeat earnings reports from Yahoo and Intel
encouraged buying in the technology sector. [C13.]

MILBERG WEISS'S GIFTS  The law firm of Milberg Weiss, a specialist in
shareholders' suits that was indicted on federal charges of fraud and bribery,
has continued a close relationship with Democratic politicians. Since the
indictment, 26 Democrats around the country, including four presidential
candidates, have accepted  contributions from people connected to the firm.
[A1.]

1,700 BONDS DOWNGRADED  Standard & Poor's downgraded more than 1,700 bonds that
were tied to mortgages that were issued this year. [C5.]

GLAXO VACCINE FOR MALARIA

The world's most promising malaria vaccine, developed by GlaxoSmithKline, has
been shown to work in infants less than a year old, the most vulnerable group,
according to a new study. [A14.]

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO GRAPH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              679 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                            April 23, 2008 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Farm-worker accommodation crunch looms; Greenhouse growers need homes for
migrant labourers

BYLINE: John Bermingham, The Province

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A25

LENGTH: 269  words

DATELINE: DELTA


DELTA - Greenhouse growers say they're running out of time to find housing for
migrant farm workers before the busy summer season.

"If you don't have labour, you can't harvest the crops," said Mary-Margaret
Gaye, who heads the B.C. Greenhouse Growers Association.

"They'll rot."

Gaye said thousands of seasonal workers are arriving in the Lower Mainland, but
farmers don't know where they're going to house them.

"It's actually going to be quite a job," she said. "It takes a certain amount of
lead-time to get housing built."

Last year, 2,600 seasonal farm workers came to B.C., from Mexico, Central
America, the Caribbean and the Philippines.

There are farm-housing bylaws in Chilliwack, Abbotsford, Pitt Meadows, Langley
and Richmond.

But in Delta, farmers are having to rent out apartment buildings for the
workers.

Some Delta residents are concerned about the effects of an influx of farm
workers.

A bylaw to allow farms to house up to 42 seasonal foreign workers is going to a
public hearing April 29.

"The other option is to leave those crops in the fields, and that is not an
option," said Delta Mayor Lois Jackson.

"We need somebody to go and help the farmers work, and get their crops in."

B.C. Agriculture Minister Pat Bell said he's working on a set of guidelines with
the agriculture industry.

"This is a relatively new challenge that we're facing," said Bell. "It's largely
as a result of full employment across the province."

Bell said the rules will soon be going out for public comment. The province will
probably be responsible for monitoring and inspecting housing conditions, he
said.

jbermingham@png.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Delta Mayor Lois Jackson ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


    Copyright 2008 The Vancouver Province, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                                Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              680 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 BusinessWorld

                            January 27, 2009 Tuesday

Gov't says no need to scrap corn tariff

BYLINE: Jessica Anne D. Hermosa

SECTION: Pg. S1/6

LENGTH: 449 words


THE GOVERNMENT remains opposed to hog and poultry growers' and feed millers'
plea to eliminate the tariff on imported corn, amid the prevailing shortage,
arguing that the move will hurt local farmers and that the current tightness in
corn supply should ease as new shipments arrive next month.

The petition will not be considered by the Committee on Tariff and Related
Matters (CTRM), Agriculture department Assistant Secretary Salvador S. Salacup
told reporters at the sidelines of the national price coordinating council
meeting yesterday.

Corn import tariff rate at minimum access volume (MAV) this year of 216,000 MT
stands at 35%. Imports beyond this MAV level are slapped the regular 50% rate.

"At 0% tariff, the landed cost [of imported corn] will be P9 [per kilo]," Mr.
Salacup said, noting that locally grown corn, meanwhile, sells for
P18/kg-P19/kg.

"That cannot be. Our farmers number P1 million. They will become pitiful," Mr.
Salacup said in Filipino.

Shipments of imported corn will be arriving to relieve the 300,000-ton gap in
the supply by February, Mr. Salacup added.

A 100,000-ton corn shipment imported by the private sector from Brazil will be
arriving today, Mr. Salacup said.

Trade Secretary Peter B. Favila echoed the Agriculture department's stand
against tariff cuts, saying: "[There is no need] based on what he [Mr. Salacup]
said."

The Trade and Agriculture departments are among the agencies that make up the
CTRM.

Asked to comment, Gregorio A. San Diego, Jr., president of the United Broiler
Raisers' Association said poultry farmers need to cut production costs and
become more competitive in preparation for the expected influx of imported
chicken from neighboring countries come 2010.

"We need the tariff cut because local corn is very expensive. This situation
cannot go on. We have a commitment in the ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian
Nations] to allow imported chicken to enter at lower tariffs," Mr. San Diego
said in Filipino in a telephone interview yesterday.

"I know it will be hard to get the government's approval, but if we get cheaper
imported corn, we can cut our production costs," Mr. San Diego said.

Officials from the Philippine Association of Feed Millers, Inc. and National
Federation of Hog Farmers, Inc. were not immediately available to comment.

Meanwhile, Mr. Salacup said that hog and poultry growers should not increase
prices as there is no reason to do so, especially with corn supply said to be
stabilizing by next month.

However, poultry prices may still increase as feed millers have committed to
keeping feed prices stable only up to the end of January, Mr. San Diego said.

Chicken farmgate price stands at P74/kg-76/kg, Mr. San Diego said.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2009 BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              681 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                      Business and Financial Times (Ghana)

                          February 24, 2016 Wednesday

Tema Port gets new 480-unit reefer terminal

LENGTH: 273  words


Source: Patrick Paintsil | thebftonline | Ghana

A new 480-unit reefer terminal to handle frozen cargo will be commissioned at
the Tema Port on Monday.

The commissioning of the facility will also mark the GPHA's takeover of delivery
for all reefer containers that arrive in the country.

This will help to check the issues of illegal importation and falsification of
documents in the port community, as Tema Port will be taking full delivery of
all reefer containers to ensure effective control.

Hitherto, three other terminals were made to take delivery of reefer containers
due to capacity challenges; which made it difficult for effective control of
illegal documentation in clearance.

Jacob Adorkor disclosed this when the Deputy Minister for Food and Agriculture,
Hannah Louisa Bissiw, paid a courtesy call to collaborate and fight the menace
of falsified signatures and documents at her ministry.

He assured that the new reefer terminal will ensure effective control over the
influx of unapproved containers in the country.

Deputy Minister for Food and Agriculture, Hannah Louisa Bissiw, after touring
the new reefer terminal said it will now be difficult for unauthorised goods to
enter the port.

"I came to the port based on government's intention to revive the poultry
industry and also stop the malpractices in terms of importing special poultry
products into the country.

"There is a lot of falsifying signatures, documents and permits at my ministry,
hence the need to collaborate with Customs and Tema Port to curb the menace,"
she indicated.

http://imgs.syndigate.info/630/1800/82/145683611015.jpg

Tema Port gets new 480-unit reefer terminal

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1800


                  Copyright 2016 Business and Financial Times.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              682 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                         Portland Press Herald (Maine)

                     November 9, 2003 Sunday, FINAL Edition

Results of rabies vaccine test due back next spring;
Researchers used edible vaccine packets in an experiment on controlling the
virus' spread in raccoons.

BYLINE: MEREDITH GOAD Staff Writer

SECTION: MAINE & NEW ENGLAND; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 798 words


Blood and tooth samples from more than 100 raccoons are being shipped off for
analysis to see if an experimental rabies vaccine program under way in three
Maine counties is actually working.

Researchers dropped more than 270,000 doses of raccoon rabies vaccine over
Penobscot, Aroostook and Washington counties in late August. The goal of the
project, part of a national effort to control rabies, is to stop the spread of
the virus into northern Maine and Canada.

The vaccine was dropped by plane and by hand over 1,680 square miles and more
than two dozen Maine towns. The drug was hidden in fishmeal-coated sachets that
look like packets of fast-food ketchup. When raccoons bite into the sachets,
they get a dose of the vaccine.

For the past six weeks, researchers have been live-trapping raccoons to get
blood and tooth samples that will show whether the animals took the bait and are
developing immunity to rabies.

The trapping ended last week, after capturing 107 raccoons and eight skunks,
because raccoons have become less active with the cold weather, said Libby
Roswick, a wildlife biologist with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's wildlife
services division in Augusta.

"We try to get a good sample size and a good number of animals from different
areas so we're able to determine the bait uptake and how well it worked in
different areas," she said.

The teeth are being sent to a laboratory in Montana where they will be used to
determine age and which animals were vaccinated, Roswick said. The bait
contained tetracycline, which acts as a biomarker that creates a fluorescent
stain on teeth. If the stain shows up on a tooth, that means that particular
animal consumed the bait.

The blood is being analyzed for antibodies to the raccoon rabies virus, an
indication they have developed immunity.

"We're expecting those results next spring, if we're lucky," Roswick said.
"There's a lot of states involved in this, and there's only a limited number of
laboratories that are set up on contract to read our samples. This time of year
they get a huge influx of samples, and they do what we can."

Dennis Slate, USDA's national rabies coordinator, said scientists on the
national rabies management team are searching for faster ways to get results.

"We would like to be able to capture an animal and have a quick diagnostic test
that would tell us that an animal has taken a bait," Slate said. "So we're
looking at other ways of doing that with biomarkers that might mark the hair
temporarily, or other ways that we could say by looking at the animal" that
they've been vaccinated.

Then statistical tests could be used to estimate how that translates into
immunity, he said.

Rabies is a disease of the central nervous system that is almost always fatal.
People who are exposed to the virus through contact with infected wildlife or
pets must undergo a series of shots that can cost $2,500 to $3,000.

So far this year, 72 animals in Maine have tested positive for rabies, but the
number of infected animals roaming the state is probably much larger. The
disease has spread rapidly since its re-introduction to the state in 1994.

Rabies is not yet a major problem in the three rural counties that make up the
study area, but the disease could easily go unnoticed there. So Roswick and her
colleagues are collecting roadkill - mostly raccoons, foxes and skunks - as well
as animals that are acting strangely, and sending them to the public health
laboratory in Augusta for testing.

The Maine project is being largely funded with $270,000 from the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency, which is concerned about the rabies virus crossing the border
into Canada. The USDA is contributing $50,000. Also involved are various state
agencies and scientists from Cornell University in New York.

Roswick said she's been pleasantly surprised by the local community response to
the rabies project.

"When we did the vaccine drop, we had so many volunteers we couldn't even get
them all up in the air," she said. "We had probably over 50 people interested in
helping us. I had people for weeks after bait drop calling us and asking if
there's anything else they can do. It was really great because we honestly
didn't know what to expect."

Researchers were concerned that other animals might gobble up some of the bait,
and had warned people to keep their pets inside or on a leash during the bait
drop. Eating too much of the bait could make them sick.

Roswick said there were no confirmed reports of problems - with pets, anyway.

"I heard rumors of people finding bear scat with one of the sachets in it," she
said. "Little berries, and then a little plastic sack."

Staff Writer Meredith Goad can be contacted at 791-6332 or at:

mgoad@pressherald.com

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                 Copyright 2003 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.


                              683 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Idaho Falls Post Register (Idaho)

                            March 19, 2011 Saturday
                                  Main Edition

Eastern Idaho's seasonal job market remains competitive

BYLINE: By Emma Breysse,

SECTION: THE WEST; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 449 words


Even with construction season approaching, there are no quick fixes for a
temporary job market that has seen a steady increase in people needing work.

Over the past year, temporary employment agencies have seen an increase in
employers seeking temporary help, but an even greater increase in people looking
to fill those jobs, according to their recruiters.

That mirrors trends reported earlier this month by the Idaho Department of
Labor, showing increased hiring making only marginal inroads in the state's
unemployment numbers.

""There are definitely more opportunities for temporary work than at this time
last year, but things are still pretty bad,"" said Rob Astle, the Idaho Falls
office recruiter for Intelligent Employment Solutions. ""Right now, we're
getting an influx of applicants anticipating construction work, but they're
still pretty much in a bind.""

His words were echoed by representatives from three other staffing agencies.

The most reliable source of temporary work during the spring typically is
agriculture, as local farmers seek help with planting. Cleaning and restoration
companies sometimes need extra hands with homes and businesses as the snow
melts. By contrast, construction work is more sporadic and doesn't really pick
up until the summer, Astle said.

Even when those jobs open up, he estimated he will be able to place only 40
percent to 80 percent of applicants.

Johnny Ruiz is among those hoping the change in seasons will mean a change in
his employment situation. Ruiz said he's a client of SOS Staffing in Idaho
Falls.

""I can do farm work and I can do construction work,"" he said. ""Winter isn't
much good for those, so I'm really hopeful.""

The competitive market for temporary work was no surprise to Ruiz. He's been in
the labor pool for almost three months.

""Yeah, there's a lot of people looking, no doubt about that,"" he said. ""But
if (manual labor) is what you know how to do, you just keep trying to find
something. Not much else to do.""

Between 33 percent and 41 percent of eastern Idaho's job openings are for
temporary or seasonal work, according to Department of Labor statistics.

Will Jensen, a regional economist for the department's Idaho Falls office,
confirmed that the number of job applicants was at least 20 percent higher than
the number of temporary jobs. He said an influx of applications is typical as
economic recessions come to a close.

""What you tend to see is people who had just given up hope of finding something
start looking again,"" he said. ""As permanent hiring gets going again, a trend
like this will even out.""

Emma Breysse can be reached at 542-6766. Comment on this story on Post Talk at
www.postregister.com/posttalk/.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Post Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              684 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           December 31, 2011 Saturday

Bill is degrading and disgusting

BYLINE: NIKKI McALPIN Grassy Butte TOM BRAY Bismarck

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 574 words


No water - no life. That's pretty elementary. In short order, both the oil
industry and our agriculture will be belly-up dead without water.

But Gov. Jack Dalrymple can't seem to grasp that, nor does he seem to care. If
we are going to benefit from this oil boom, we need new leadership.

For those of you who don't live in the oil area, you may hear about the dollar
bills coming into Bismarck. But what you aren't being told is the truth about
the chaos and destruction from oil drilling. Thousands of homeless people are
crammed into campers. Dalrymple declares thousands more are coming. Crime has
skyrocketed. Housing prices are outrageous. Highway deaths are soaring. An
entire town has gone dry. Our quiet, safe, agricultural lifestyle is being
annihilated.

Yet the incumbents are handing out drilling permits like candy in a parade and
just handed over another 50-square miles for more drilling. When we can't meet
the basic necessities of human existence and don't have the resources or
infrastructure to support the current demand of drilling, does it make any sense
for our government to issue even more permits?

At the rate the oil companies are using surface water, in a few short years
there will be no water for cattle, for people or for oil.

What will happen to our state if we continue in the direction Dalrymple is
taking us? Neither agriculture nor oil drilling will survive.

What would help is to stop giving drilling permits and stop the influx of more
people. Balance the oil drilling with the resources. But it seems Sen. John
Hoeven and Dalrymple are more concerned about pocketing dollar bills and
pleasing Washington than about protecting North Dakota.

Shouldn't we benefit from oil and not be destroyed by it? If Dalrymple remains
in office, North Dakota will crumble. No leadership, no concern, destruction,
high crime and immoral infestation, no water. Annihilation of our great state.
We need new leadership.

As a Christian, if I read this legislation correctly, our trusted and elected
officials, our mouthpieces in Washington D.C., voted "yes" to a bill that
condones sodomy and bestiality within the ranks of our beloved military.

This is what was repealed:

"Any person subject to this chapter who engages in unnatural carnal copulation
with another person of the same or opposite sex or with an animal is guilty of
sodomylete the offense ...

"Any person found guilty of sodomy shall be punished as a court-martial may
direct."

This bill also allows the unlawful arrest of civilians and indefinite detainment
of them without a cause or trial. My letter to both Sens. Kent Conrad and John
Hoeven states: "I am filled with disgust that you would sanction such a bill.
Wouldn't your parents, your wife, children, and our forefathers, who based their
beliefs in God foremost and solid upright principles be proud of you? What do
you gain by passing this bill?"

I believe with all my heart that the majority of North Dakotans would stand
against such a bill had they known the true contents and been aware of the
perversion and deceitful practices of "our" senators.

I cannot come close to expressing my disgust, disappointment and complete
repulsion for what Conrad and Hoeven have done to degrade not just the military,
North Dakotans and the United States of America, but themselves as trusted and
representatives of the people.

This abuse of power must stop and stop now.

It is still "we the people" whom politicians must answer to.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2011 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              685 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK)

                            February 15, 2010 Monday

Farm experts tipped for Tory success

BYLINE: Matt Chorley London Editor

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 337  words


Two men with Westcountry  farming experience  have been tipped for the top if
the Tories win the election.

Wilfred Emmanuel-Jones, the self-styled Black Farmer, and MEP Neil Parish are
among those named by a new report as having "the background and experience that
suggests they have the makings of ministers or future party leaders".

The report's authors, Insight PA, said the expenses scandal had led to a rush of
sitting MPs announcing they would not stand again, clearing the way for a major
influx of fresh talent to the Commons.

John Lehal, managing director, said: "Those who get to grips quickly with
Westminster life and impress their new leaders are promised the opportunity to
follow in the footsteps of the likes of Ed Miliband, Ed Balls, Michael Gove and
Grant Shapps - to make it to the junior ministerial or shadow ministerial ranks
soon after taking their seats."

Mr Parish has long been seen as a potential minister in a Conservative
Government. After farming in Somerset, he became an MEP in 1999. He has served
in Brussels for 11 years making a name for himself as a champion of agriculture.
He is  chairman of the agriculture and rural development committee.

Mr Parish was selected to fight the Tiverton and Honiton seat in 2007, after
Angela Browning announced she would stand down at the election. The seat has a
notional Tory majority of 9,000. "It is likely that the largely rural
constituency of Tiverton and Honiton will return a Conservative Member of
Parliament at the next election and Parish looks set to do well," the Insight
report said.

By comparison, Mr Emmanuel-Jones has a reputation for being a rebel in the Tory
party. Still farming in Devon, he will contest the new Chippenham seat.

He is best known for his Black Farmer range of gluten-free food. The
Jamaican-born former television producer says he is happy being known as a party
rebel: "Part of why I have become political is not to accept the rules, not to
accept what cards life may have dealt you, to challenge the perceived wisdom."

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 83


                 Copyright 2010 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              686 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                  Korea Times

                           November 26, 1999, Friday

Labelling of GM Corns, Beans Mandatory

LENGTH: 416 words


   The genetically modified farm products of beans, bean sprouts and corn will
be obligated to carry the GM'' label beginning in March 2001.

Violators will face penalities up to 10 million won. Those who falsely label the
farm products will face imprisonment up to three years or penalities up to 30
million won in accordance with the farm and fishery products quality control
law.

The Agriculture and Forestry Ministry announced yesterday that beginning in
March, 2001 it will adopt the mandatory labelling system for use on the three
above mentioned farm products when they are genetically modified.

Britain introduced mandatory labelling of GM products on Sept. 17 and Japan
announced it will adopt the compulsory labelling in April 2001, one month after
Korea.

According to the announcement, importers, retailers and wholesalers must label
the targeted products as GM beans or corns,'' bean sprout cultivated with GM
products" and this food contains corns or beans that have been genetically
manipulated." In consideration of the possible unitentional influx of GM corns
and beans with regard to cultivation and distribution, producers and
distributors are to voluntarily label that these corns (beans) are not
genetically manipulated'' if only 5 percent or less of the total is mixed with
GM products.

The GM labelling is based on the certification of products in the distribution
stages such as the purchase of seeds, production, storage and sales of the three
products handled by importers, retailers and wholesalers as there is currently
no international verification method.

The verification of bean sprouts are possible with the technology developed by
the Rural Development Administration and next year the RDA will be able to
verify whether it is the GM corns or not.

The ministry plans to collect opinions on the labelling of GM food from
government agencies, industries involved in the the GM farm products and
consumers and will post the notice on March 1. The notice will be put into
effect in March 2002.

A ministry official said, In tune with the introduction of GM labelling, our
ministry is considering the import of non-GM corns and beans. We are determined
to take joint action with the European Union and Japan in the upcoming
negotiations on multilateral negotations on free trade in introducing GM food
labelling as the right of the people of the food importing nations to choose
between GM and non-GM food.''

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                          Copyright 1999 Hankook Ilbo


                              687 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           November 13, 2007 Tuesday

A KILLER BEE'S BEST FRIEND

BYLINE: CRISTINA SILVA, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 469 words

DATELINE: GULFPORT



HIGHLIGHT: Contradicting the state, an exterminator says Africanized bees can be
of use to us.


A south Pinellas bug exterminator is on a one-man campaign to save the state's
wild bees.

Jeff McChesney of Bug Man Termite and Pest Control Services and Supplies in
Gulfport said the state is overreacting to a recent influx of Africanized bees,
so-called killer bees because of the horrific death they can cause.

So McChesney has set out to prove to others that the bees can be used to
pollinate crops and make honey. In recent weeks, he has flooded bee enthusiast
Web sites with offers to move the wild bees his customers find on their
properties.

"Africanized bees can be tended to successfully," McChesney said in a recent
interview. "They are a heartier bee. They are a better bee."

His stance directly opposes that of the state Department of Agriculture, which
has called for the extermination of all wild bees.

The Africanized breed was first reported in Tampa in 2005. State officials
estimate that the bees, which are known to invade European honeybee hives and
kill their queens, now make up more than 80 percent of all wild bees.

Jerry Hayes, chief apiarist for the Department of Agriculture, warned that
domesticating Africanized bees is not as easy as some might think.

All honeybees sting when their nest is threatened by invaders, but Africanized
bees defend their nests in greater numbers and for longer distances than the
European honeybees most common in the United States.

While other nations, including Brazil, have used the species to pollinate crops
for decades, the breed of Africanized bees in the United States is excessively
aggressive, Hayes said. Most recently, a Texas man was killed in September after
more than 1,000 bees stung him. No Africanized bee-related deaths have been
reported in Florida.

"It is a good thing to have bees, but we need to decide what kind of bees do we
want?" Hayes said. "How many fatalities do we want in Florida? That's basically
what it comes down to."

The debate over Africanized bees will be discussed at the Florida state
beekeepers association's annual convention in Winter Haven this weekend.

Already, some beekeepers have answered McChesney's call with open arms. Last
year, an unknown illness wiped out more than half of the nation's domesticated
beehives. Since then, beekeepers have spent thousands rebuilding their hives.

"People need those bees to have food in their stomach," McChesney said. "Our
African bees here can actually go and help people who have lost a half a million
dollars this year and do not know what to do next year. The bees that the state
wants to kill can help people."

Cristina Silva can be reached at (727) 893-8846 or csilva@sptimes.com

More on wild bees

For more information about Africanized bees, check out
www.doacs.state.fl.us/pi/plantinsp/apiary/africanbees.html

For more information about bee relocation, see www.bugman-stpete.com

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              688 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           November 1, 2007 Thursday

BEFRIENDING THE BEES

BYLINE: Cristina Silva, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: CLEARWATER TIMES; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 471 words

DATELINE: GULFPORT



HIGHLIGHT: Contradicting the state, an exterminatorsays Africanized bees can be
of use to us.


A south Pinellas bug exterminator is on a one-man campaign to save the state's
wild bees.

Jeff McChesney of Bug Man Termite and Pest Control Services and Supplies in
Gulfport said the state is overreacting to a recent influx of Africanized bees,
so-called killer bees because of the horrific death they can cause.

So McChesney has set out to prove to others that the bees can be used to
pollinate crops and make honey. In recent weeks, he has flooded bee enthusiast
Web sites with offers to move the wild bees his customers find on their
properties.

"Africanized bees can be tended to successfully," McChesney said in a recent
interview. "They are a heartier bee. They are a better bee."

His stance directly opposes that of the state Department of Agriculture, which
has called for the extermination of all wild bees.

The Africanized breed was first reported in Tampa in 2005. State officials
estimate that the bees, which are known to invade European honeybee hives and
kill their queens, now make up more than 80 percent of all wild bees.

Jerry Hayes, chief apiarist for the Department of Agriculture, warned that
domesticating Africanized bees is not as easy as some might think.

All honeybees sting when their nest is threatened by invaders, but Africanized
bees defend their nests in greater numbers and for longer distances than the
European honeybees most common in the United States.

While other nations, including Brazil, have used the species to pollinate crops
for decades, the breed of Africanized bees in the United States is excessively
aggressive, Hayes said. Most recently, a Texas man was killed in September after
more than 1,000 bees stung him. No Africanized bee-related deaths have been
reported in Florida.

"It is a good thing to have bees, but we need to decide what kind of bees do we
want?" Hayes said. "How many fatalities do we want in Florida? That's basically
what it comes down to."

The debate over Africanized bees will be discussed at the Florida state
beekeepers association's annual convention in Winter Haven this weekend.

Already, some beekeepers have answered McChesney's call with open arms. Last
year, an unknown illness wiped out more than half of the nation's domesticated
beehives. Since then, beekeepers have spent thousands rebuilding their hives.

"People need those bees to have food in their stomach," McChesney said. "Our
African bees here can actually go and help people who have lost a half a million
dollars this year and do not know what to do next year. The bees that the state
wants to kill can help people."

Cristina Silva can be reached at (727) 893-8846 or csilva@sptimes.com

FAST FACTS

More on wild bees

For more information about Africanized bees, check out
www.doacs.state.fl.us/pi/plantinsp/apiary/africanbees.html.

For more information about bee relocation, see www.bugman-stpete.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ATOYIA DEANS - Times: Jeff McChesney prepares to eliminate a
50,000-bee hive last month. It was too big to move. PHOTO, ATOYIA DEANS - Times:
Jeff McChesney says Africanized bees, "heartier" than European honeybees, can be
tended successfully. PHOTO, ATOYIA DEANS - Times: McChesney eliminated the big
hive at 2400 Fifth Ave S. In general, he favors relocation.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              689 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           October 31, 2007 Wednesday
                                  East Edition

BEFRIENDING THE BEES

BYLINE: Cristina Silva, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: NEIGHBORHOOD TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 471 words

DATELINE: GULFPORT



HIGHLIGHT: Contradicting the state, an exterminatorsays Africanized bees can be
of use to us.


A south Pinellas bug exterminator is on a one-man campaign to save the state's
wild bees.

Jeff McChesney of Bug Man Termite and Pest Control Services and Supplies in
Gulfport said the state is overreacting to a recent influx of Africanized bees,
so-called killer bees because of the horrific death they can cause.

So McChesney has set out to prove to others that the bees can be used to
pollinate crops and make honey. In recent weeks, he has flooded bee enthusiast
Web sites with offers to move the wild bees his customers find on their
properties.

"Africanized bees can be tended to successfully," McChesney said in a recent
interview. "They are a heartier bee. They are a better bee."

His stance directly opposes that of the state Department of Agriculture, which
has called for the extermination of all wild bees.

The Africanized breed was first reported in Tampa in 2005. State officials
estimate that the bees, which are known to invade European honeybee hives and
kill their queens, now make up more than 80 percent of all wild bees.

Jerry Hayes, chief apiarist for the Department of Agriculture, warned that
domesticating Africanized bees is not as easy as some might think.

All honeybees sting when their nest is threatened by invaders, but Africanized
bees defend their nests in greater numbers and for longer distances than the
European honeybees most common in the United States.

While other nations, including Brazil, have used the species to pollinate crops
for decades, the breed of Africanized bees in the United States is excessively
aggressive, Hayes said. Most recently, a Texas man was killed in September after
more than 1,000 bees stung him. No Africanized bee-related deaths have been
reported in Florida.

"It is a good thing to have bees, but we need to decide what kind of bees do we
want?" Hayes said. "How many fatalities do we want in Florida? That's basically
what it comes down to."

The debate over Africanized bees will be discussed at the Florida state
beekeepers association's annual convention in Winter Haven this weekend.

Already, some beekeepers have answered McChesney's call with open arms. Last
year, an unknown illness wiped out more than half of the nation's domesticated
beehives. Since then, beekeepers have spent thousands rebuilding their hives.

"People need those bees to have food in their stomach," McChesney said. "Our
African bees here can actually go and help people who have lost a half a million
dollars this year and do not know what to do next year. The bees that the state
wants to kill can help people."

Cristina Silva can be reached at (727) 893-8846 or csilva@sptimes.com

Fast facts

More on wild bees

For more information about Africanized bees, check out
www.doacs.state.fl.us/pi/plantinsp/apiary/africanbees.html.

For more information about bee relocation, see www.bugman-stpete.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ATOYIA DEANS - Times: Jeff McChesney prepares to eliminate a
50,000-bee hive last month. It was too big to move. PHOTO, ATOYIA DEANS - Times:
Jeff McChesney says Africanized bees, "heartier" than European honeybees, can be
tended successfully. PHOTO, ATOYIA DEANS - Times: McChesney eliminated the big
hive at 2400 Fifth Ave. S. In general, he favors relocation.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              690 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          PNG Post-Courier (Australia)

                            February 12, 2016 Friday
                                   1 Edition

Reduce tariff to save local livestock: Basil

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 289 words


THE Government should reduce tariff to save the local livestock industry, says
Pangu Party leader Sam Basil.

Mr Basil, the Deputy Opposition Leader, reiterated his call to address
bio-security threats and to support the agriculture commodity sector to reduce
poverty, improve nutrition, ensure food security, and increase employment and
income.

He said that the ban on uncooked poultry products based on bio-security threats
has been lifted and the good news is that more of the low-income earners can now
afford to buy chicken cutlets which sell from K6 to K8 than the locally-produced
poultry products.

During the ban the local producers have adjusted their production from increased
local out-growers schemes, increased workforce from the sheds to the factory
into the retail outlets to meet the demand.

Mr Basil said the sad news is that local poultry producers of Zenag Chicken,
Niugini Tablebirds will suffer from the sudden influx of cheaper imported
products, cutting back on sales output and profit margins which means job cuts
and loss of income.

The Agriculture and Livestock Department must strike a balance to ensure that
local producers can maintain their current production whilst being competitive
against cheaper imports," he said.

To maintain the poultry industry and the stakeholders that had benefited and
expended resources to tap into the market opportunities during the ban, the
Government cannot simply walk away and leave our farmers disillusioned.

"The Government should encourage agriculture and livestock sector, more
particularly poultry industry by making "zero import duty" on tariff on
veterinary supplies, farm implements such as water and feeding troughs, building
sheds, tractors and feedstocks," Mr Basil said.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PTC


                   Copyright 2016 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              691 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           The Nikkei Weekly (Japan)

                               February 28, 2000

Imports swamp Indonesian farmers
Government protection sought as floods, high cost ravage productivity

BYLINE: PRAGINANTO Special to The Nikkei Weekly

SECTION: Asia-Pacific; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1285 words


JAKARTA - A flood of imported rice has become a big issue in Indonesia, causing
mass bankruptcies in rural areas where most of Indonesia's 210 million citizens
live.

The Indonesian Farmers Association demanded last month that the government
impose quotas and increase the 30% tariff on imported rice. But the government
insists that the problem can be solved by boosting efficiency in rice
production.

Prices of imported rice have been hovering around 1,500 rupiah (30 cents) per
kilogram, while those of domestically grown rice are around 2,200 rupiah. It is
reported that rice traders are holding some 6 million metric tons of imported
rice, and it is unlikely that the flood of cheap imported rice will let up soon.

Meanwhile, the rainy season has also hit Indonesian farmers, causing floods and
raising the anxiety level among farmers throughout Indonesia. Thousands of
hectares of paddy fields in some rice-production centers have been destroyed by
floods caused by heavy rainfall since January. Reportedly some one-fourth of the
6,000 hectares (14,800 acres) of paddy fields in three rice-production centers
in Central Java Province - Jepara, Kudus, and Rembang - have been ravaged by
floods.

Weather forecasters say the rainy season will last until March or April and that
more paddy fields could be hit by floods. Flooding was more serious this year,
officials at the Agriculture Ministry said, because the economic crisis has
undermined the government's ability to repair damaged dams and irrigation
networks. Furthermore, they say, the government is unable to deal with rampant
illegal forest cutting.

Spreading pests

Another threat is coming from rats and insect pests that frequently hit paddy
fields during and after the rainy season. A few hundred hectares of paddy fields
have been hit by the fast-spreading pests. Many farmers on the island of Java,
where most Indonesian rice is produced, worry that rats will begin to spread in
the coming weeks.

"The government should take decisive measures or most farmers will fall into
unaffordable debt," said Didik J. Rachbini, economist at the Institute for
Development, Economics and Finances, a Jakarta based think tank.

Analysts have warned about serious social and political impacts because rice is
a staple food and there are some 110 million Indonesians in 22 million farm
families. Their warning referred to previous times of economic difficulty, when
many farmers flocked to cities to seek temporary jobs or to beg. But since most
cities have been suffering from soaring unemployment and poverty, analysts fear
that an influx of farmers could foment violence or increase crime.

"The plunge in local rice prices is mainly caused by the flood of illegal
imported rice into the market," said Siswono Yudohusodo, chairman of Indonesian
Farmers Association, or HKTI. "A number of customs officers are likely involved
in large-scale rice smuggling," he said.

Permana Agung, director general of customs at the Finance Ministry, has denied
the allegation, but he acknowledged that there were importers who manipulate
rice-import documents. "They imported more rice than was reported in the
document," he said.

Bungaran Saragih, professor of agriculture economics at Bogor Institute of
Agriculture, believes that rice smugglers are not new players. "They have been
in the rice business for a long time, and have maintained close relations with
Bulog (State Logistics Agency)," he said.

A number of senior government officials shared the same view as Siswono. They
believe that the government should not allow unlimited rice imports, which are
detrimental to farmers. They want the government to increase the import tariff
for rice and limit the number of rice importers in order to make control over
rice importation easier.

"The failure to combat illegal imported rice could risk the collapse of the
whole agricultural system," said Jafar Hafsah, secretary of the Agency of the
Mass Guidance Engineering Unit at the Agriculture Ministry.

Since January this year, the government has imposed a 30% tariff on imported
rice, ending the zero-percent tariff that had been in effect since 1998. "We
hope that the tariff would be able to significantly reduce the influx of
imported rice," said Agriculture Minister Prakosa. The latest government move
two weeks ago was to postpone an open bid to import rice from Australia, China,
the U.S., Vietnam and Thailand.

Rice traders in Jakarta say the import tariff does not affect rice imports
because import prices are still lower than those of domestic rice. But they do
not expect the government to impose any protectionist policy that could cause
rice prices to soar. "As has happened in the past, such policy would benefit
only well-connected businesspeople," said a rice wholesaler in Jakarta.

In a bid to help local farmers, the government has allocated some 2 trillion
rupiah to buy rice from the farmers so that they do not suffer any loss. "We can
still increase the fund to as high as 6 trillion rupiah if needed," said Yusuf
Kalla, minister of industry and trade.

In the past, Bulog was required to buy rice from farmers at prices set by the
government that are higher than production cost. When the rice prices were high,
Bulog imported rice to keep the prices low even though the government has
declared Indonesia self-sufficient in rice since the mid-1980s.

Many government officials doubt that the cash-strapped administration of
President Abdurrahman Wahid would be able to conduct such a policy. It is
because, unlike the former President Suharto, Wahid does not have the authority
to order Bank Indonesia, the central bank, to extend credit to Bulog. Under a
new law that took effect last year, the central bank has become an independent
body.

However, Kalla rejects the call for government intervention in the rice market.
"The best way to deal with the price problem is boosting efficiency of the
production system," he said.

The inefficiency in rice production is linked with Suharto's ambition to make
Indonesia genuinely self-sufficient in rice, said analysts. Suharto pushed rice
farmers to become lifetime rice farmers. As a result, too many farmers rely on
rice production for their livelihood and the use of massive inorganic
fertilizers has seriously damaged soil fertility. Consequently, production cost
has risen.

Critical condition

A survey by the Agriculture Ministry shows that some 2.5 million hectares, or
65%, of paddy fields on the island of Java are in critical condition because of
fast-declining organic content of the soil. The survey suggests that the
government take all necessary steps to prevent the paddy fields from turning
barren and causing the whole economy to suffer since most of Indonesia's rice is
produced in Java.

Under pressure from the International Monetary Fund, the government drastically
changed its rice policy in 1998 when it freed farmers to choose their crops and
revoked the monopoly of Bulog on rice distribution and importation. The IMF is
leading a 46 billion bailout package to help Indonesia out of its economic
crisis.

The policy caused rice imports to jump. "The amount of rice imports in 1998 was
fantastic. It reached 5.9 million tons, almost half the world's rice stock. It
looked unrealistic, but it was real," said Agriculture Minister Prakosa.
Indonesia's average annual rice production is around 32 million tons.

Rice imports dropped to 1.45 million tons in 1999. But traders said the supply
of imported rice has begun to increase in the market. Some traders believe that
the increasing supply was pushed by speculation that many paddy fields would be
hit by floods in the first quarter this year.

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.


                              692 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Grand Forks Herald (North Dakota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           August 27, 2014 Wednesday

Crookston sees influx of Brazilian students

BYLINE: Anna Burleson, Grand Forks Herald

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 540 words


Aug. 27--Thanks to a program developed by the Brazilian government to educate
more college students in science, technology engineering and math, the
University of Minnesota-Crookston is seeing a wave of international students,
more than half of whom are from Brazil.

Thirty-five Brazilians will join two existing Brazilian students in Crookston to
study animal science through the schools' pre-veterinarian program.

Kimberly Gillette, the school's director of international programs, said the
program has sent about 100,000 students overseas annually for the last three
years. Students have started coming to UMC in the last two years because of the
niche veterinarian program offered there.

Gillette said she consulted the two Brazilian students who enrolled last year
about ways the school could be more welcoming to Brazilians, but they didn't
have many suggestions.

"What I've noticed with these students is that they're so eager to participate
and be a part of things, so I don't think we'll have issues in getting them
involved in the community," he said.

The Brazilian government pays for the students' airfare, tuition, health
insurance and books, pays them an initial settling-in stipend of about $1,300
and provides a $300 monthly stipend. Students must return to Brazil to complete
and earn their degree.

Other news

--  Colin Combs, a professor in the Department of Basic Sciences at UND's School
of Medicine and Health Sciences has been awarded $88,200 from the Michael J. Fox
Foundation for Parkinson's Research. The Rapid Response Innovation grant is for
a project titled "Defining the Contribution of Neuroinflammation to Parkinson's
Disease in Humanized Immune System Mice."

--  UMC was named "a best in the Midwest" college for the eighth year in a row
by The Princeton Review, the university said.

--  The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recognized the North
Dakota Statewide Cancer Registry as a CDC National Program of Cancer Registries
Registry of Excellence, one of 15 in the nation to be so honored. The registry,
which serves as an early warning system for cancer trends, is operated by UND's
medical school and the state Health Department.

--  The Northwest Regional Sustainable Development Partnership in Crookston is
seeking ideas for seed funding in the areas of agriculture and food systems,
tourism and resilient communities, natural resources, and clean energy, UMC
said. The deadline is Sept. 26. More info: RSDP.umn.edu, kinge002@umn.edu, (218)
281-8697.

--  UMC and the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities has agreed to a "pathway to
nursing" program that make it easier for UMC grads to pursue a master of nursing
degree at the Twin Cities campus.

More info: Share higher education news at news@gfherald.com; include "Higher ed
notebook" in the subject heading. To see more regional higher education news,
visit the websites of UND, University of Minnesota-Crookston, Northland
Community and Technical College, Mayville State University and Lake Region State
College. Herald Staff Writer Averi Haugesag contributed to this column.

___ (c)2014 the Grand Forks Herald (Grand Forks, N.D.) Visit the Grand Forks
Herald (Grand Forks, N.D.) at www.grandforksherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140827-GF-Crookston-sees-influx-of-Brazilian-students-0827-20140827

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GF


                       Copyright 2014 Grand Forks Herald


                              693 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Waterloo Courier (Iowa)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             April 19, 2009 Sunday

EDITORIAL: Nothing to do in Cedar Valley? C'mon!

BYLINE: Waterloo-Cedar Falls Courier, Iowa

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 718 words


Apr. 19--We're not Las Vegas, Walt Disney World or even Adventureland. But
tourism is big business in the Cedar Valley, and it's on the rise.

"Within this fiscal year, our numbers have been up quite a bit," said Aaron
Buzza, executive director of the Waterloo Convention & Visitors Bureau.

"Our hotel-motel tax collections check in the quarter between October and
December was up 10 percent," said Kim Burger of the Cedar Falls Tourism and
Visitors Bureau.

That may be partly because the area has done a pretty good job of promoting some
of its finest products: tractors and wrestlers.

Agriculture-related events were among the draws over the past year, Buzza said,
mentioning the Two-Cylinder Expo at the National Cattle Congress grounds last
July and the International Harvester Collectors' annual National Winter
Convention in early March at the Five Sullivan Brothers Convention Center. Both
events drew thousands of visitors. John Deere's Waterloo operations also held
their 90th anniversary celebration at the end of September in and around the new
Riverloop Expo plaza in downtown Waterloo.

"Both drew big numbers from all over the country," he said.

Sporting activities also have played a role in the increase, including amateur
wrestling events coming to the home of local wrestling and coaching legend Dan
Gable.

"We just hosted a national wresting tournament at the (UNI-Dome), which brought
a lot of people in," Burger said, noting that the all-age amateur tournament was
the second large-scale wrestling event the Dome hosted in the last two months.

The Division I NWCA/Cliff Keen National Duals were held at the Dome in January.
Capitalizing on the influx of intercollegiate wrestlers, the Dan Gable
International Wrestling Institute and Museum in downtown Waterloo bounced back
from flood damage and reopened concurrent with the National Duals, which will
return to the Dome in 2010 and 2011.

In addition to University of Northern Iowa's recent football and men's
basketball success, the Dome also has hosted the Iowa state high school football
championships for more than 30 years.

The area is capitalizing on people wanting to get away but taking short trips in
light of the current economy.

The Isle Casino and Hotel, which opened two years ago, and adjacent attractions
have contributed to the influx of tourists in that regard, Buzza noted. "The
golf course (South Hills) is right there, and there's Lost Island (water park)
nearby, and there's something for a family outing all within a quarter-mile of
one another."

Over the past month, it was difficult to find a parking place downtown some
weekends as the Five Sullivan Brothers center hosted state dart and pool
tournaments, as it has done for the past several years. The Waterloo Black Hawks
recorded a record attendance year at Young Arena, and that venue, approaching 15
years old, has in the past hosted non-ice events such as wrestling.

The Cedar Valley's other two emerging tourism assets are on the UNI campus --
the Gallagher-Bluedorn Performing Arts Center, still less than 10 years old, and
the McLeod Center, barely 2 years old, an up-and-coming sports and entertainment
venue.

And in Waterloo, the Grout Museum's Sullivan Brothers Iowa Veterans Museum,
which just opened last November, already is attracting bookings such as military
reunions.

Look for more growth in years to come as the Riverloop Expo is utilized. The
Two-Cylinder Club has previously expressed interest in helping the Cedar Valley
TechWorks develop, holding out the hope for something this area has needed and
deserved for some time: a permanent historic exhibit of Waterloo-made John Deere
tractors.

Having such a permanent exhibit at TechWorks -- at the approximate birthplace of
the "Waterloo Boy" tractor -- could be a boon to ag tourism and a "front door"
to showcase TechWorks' projected agricultural product development.

To see more of the Waterloo-Cedar Falls Courier, or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.wcfcourier.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, Waterloo-Cedar
Falls Courier, Iowa Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090419-OO-EDITORIAL-Nothing-to-do-in-Cedar-Valley-C-mon-0419

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: OO


                        Copyright 2009 Waterloo Courier


                              694 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NO THANKS TO GIVE

BYLINE: By William J. Dean ;
William J. Dean is a lawyer.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 526 words


President Abraham Lincoln's Thanksgiving Day Proclamation for 1863 begins, ''The
year that is drawing toward its close has been filled with the blessings of
fruitful fields and healthful skies.'' As the United States observes its
national holiday, 120 years later, it should be mindful that 22 drought-stricken
countries in Africa have enjoyed neither fruitful fields nor healthful skies.

Reports of the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Food Program,
both agencies of the United Nations, are warning of intense human suffering
across the African continent, west to east, and in the south.

Drought conditions in Senegal will

reduce agricultural production by 85 percent in large sections of the country.
Food, feed and seed reserves are depleted in Mauritania. Crop losses could reach
50 percent in the northern and upper regions of Ghana. Food shortages and famine
exist in parts of Chad. Three million Ethiopians are affected by drought; in
Mozambique, four million. Lack of irrigation water has resulted in a 50 percent
drop in wheat plantings in Zimbabwe. Botswana, Swaziland and Lesotho have had
only one-half of their normal rainfall. Behind each of these figures lurks a
world of suffering.

The drought is one problem among many pressing down heavily on these countries:
population growth outstripping the growth in food supply; inadequate programs to
promote domestic food production; wars and the influx of refugees disrupting
farming; heavy insect infestation of crops; widespread outbreaks of rinderpest,
the infectious disease affecting cattle; a reduced capacity, because of the
scarcity of foreign exchange, to cover food deficits by commercial imports.  The
result is that significant numbers of the 150 million people living in the 22
countries face, in the words of the Food and Agriculture Organization's Director
General, Edouard Saouma, ''the most serious economic distress and shortage of
food, which may reach proportions of hunger and malnourishment on a massive
scale.'' A great human drama is unfolding in our midst and we in the Western
world, whether we like it or not, are key participants in the outcome.  The Food
and Agriculture Organization is requesting from donor nations $76 million to
provide seeds, fertiizer, tools and vaccines for control of animal diseases, and
4.2 million metric tons of food for the drought- stricken countries.

 To date, far less than the amount of aid needed has been pledged.  The
consequences of the wealthier nations' failure to help avert such suffering
would be awesome: starvation, malnutrition and hunger for the people of some of
the poorest countries in the world, and shame for those who could help but did
nothing.  I shudder to think of the judgment that future generations would pass
on our moral stature if we callously ignored this unfolding tragedy.  In 1973
and 1974, the drought and accompanying famine in West Africa and East Africa
claimed several hundred thousand lives and caused lasting injury to many others
from malnutrition.  The response today from the world community must be that of
the Holocaust survivors: Never again!

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              695 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Gloucestershire Echo

                           September 5, 2015 Saturday
                                   Edition 3;
                                National Edition

Open day showed rural skills needed

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 393 words


CITY dwellers were able to enjoy a peaceful afternoon down on the farm, when
Gloucestershire College of Agriculture opened its gates to the public on
Saturday.

The college, in a beautiful rural setting at Hartpury, operates its own 397-acre
farm, both on a commercial basis and to provide a practical training ground for
students.

It is very much a livestock business and usually has two dairy herds, a flock of
155 ewes, between 40 and 60 beef cattle and 36 sows.

The college has 85 full-time students, but new facilities have been and are
being introduced to cope with an influx of students under the Youth Training
Scheme.

During the past academic year, staff have given agricultural and horticultural
training to about 200 YTS youngsters.

Under the scheme, students are placed on local farms, but receive training from
the college at its centres throughout the county.

"The average farm isn't able to give his student as much opportunity to operate
machinery as he might like because of the cost of that machinery," explained
college vice-principal Lionel Carter. "It's very useful if we can give them
initial instruction. Then the farmers are likely to allow them further
experience on their own farms." Undertaking a relevant YTS scheme has now become
the normal way for a 16-year-old school leaver to enter the world of agriculture
, but the college stresses that the schemes are also open to youngsters already
employed on the land and in farms who would like to receive extra training. They
should approach their employers if interested. The college farm is run
commercially to help staff retain first-hand experience of the industry, but it
does mean that they stand to be affected like any other dairy farmer by the
Common Market milk quota cutbacks.

Mr Carter said: "We are having to look at our farming system and the decision as
to how we deal with the matter will come in the autumn. It is certain we will
end up with fewer cows, but we're not yet certain how many."

One major feature of the open day was the importance of conservation, while
taking into account modern farming pressures. The country farming and wildlife
advisor was on hand to answer questions.

Also on show were thousands of bees which had escaped a recent incident when
many others died. Investigations are continuing to find out if aerial crop
spraying on another farm was the cause.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GLE


                      Copyright 2015 Gloucestershire Echo
                              All Rights Reserved


                              696 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Kashmir Images (India)

                              July 18, 2014 Friday

JKSCCC earns 27 Cr up to ending June: Minister

LENGTH: 459 words

DATELINE: Srinagar


Srinagar, July 18 -- The Jammu and Kashmir State Cable Car Corporation (JKSCCC)
has earned Rs 27. 06 crore from April to June ending, 2014 on Gulmarg Gandola
operations which was Rs. 19.27 crore during the corresponding period of last
fiscal.

This information was given at a meeting convened under the Chairmanship of
Minister for Tourism, Ghulam Ahmad Mir, to review the functioning of JKSCCC,
Gulmarg Development Authority (GDA) and tourism related activities being carried
out in the Gulmarg area here today.

Minister for Agriculture Production Ghulam Hassan Mir was also present in the
meeting.

Addressing the meeting, the Ministers called for proper utilization of available
resources for the comfortable stay of the tourists at tourist destinations,
saying that it would go a long way in conveying the hospitable nature of the
people of the State and help in increasing the influx of tourists to the State.
They sought detailed project report of measures taken for maintenance of Gulmarg
Golf Course.

They stressed the need for maintaining sanitation and hygienic environ at
Gulmarg. They said that cleanliness should be focused area and the hoteliers
should also be taken on aboard in this regard so that the pristine glory of the
destination is preserved.

Reviewing the physical and financial targets of the Corporation set for current
fiscal, the meeting was informed that Rs. 40.13 crore have been realized while
over 6 lakh persons enjoyed Gandola ride during 2013-14. As many as 11,133
passengers were ferried at Makhdoom Sahib Ropeway earning Rs. 8.42 lakh from
April to June, 2014 and hoped for good response from the visitors in future, the
meeting was informed.

The issues relating to maintenance of sanitation, provision of financial,
technical assistance and issuance of snow-bike and excursion vehicles licences
to new beneficiaries at Gulmarg tourist spot, parking of vehicles at proper
places, safety and security of tourists at different tourist destinations were
also came up for discussion during the meeting.

The meeting also reviewed the pace of progress on various ongoing developmental
works being carried out at various other tourist destinations including at
Veerinag, Cheshmashahi, Kishtwar, Bhaderwah and Jammu.

Among others, Secretary Tourism and Culture, Zaffar Ahmed Bhat, Director,
Tourism, Kashmir, Talat Parvez, MD, JKSCCC and Chief Executive Officer, GDA,
Tufail Matoo, MD, JK TDC, Shamim Ahmad Wani, Secretary, Royal Golf Course
besides representatives from Tourist Trade Associations, Gulmarg and Tangmarg
attended the meeting.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Kashmir Images. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 Kashmir Images
                              All Rights Reserved


                              697 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                 Bath Chronicle

                               September 2, 1998

Vision of Tibet;
 Elizabeth Sheehan has captured the essence of the fascinating culture of
Buddhist Tibet.

BYLINE: Christopher Hansford reports

SECTION: News, Pg.6

LENGTH: 301 words


IN THE west where spirituality is hard to uncover, many of us have a love for
the Himalayan Kingdoms of Tibet and Ladakh which is difficult to understand
given that most of us have never set foot inside the countries.

Fortunately we have people like Elizabeth Sheehan who has sought to capture the
cultures of Tibet and Ladakh on film.

Her work, which captures on film two ancient cultures threatened by politics,
poverty and the spread of globalisation is now on show at the Hotbath Gallery in
Bath.

Buddhism came to Tibet in the seventh century and gradually replaced, but also
to some extent fused with, the previous local Bon religion. Practised in Tibet
by an enormous number of people for over 1,000 years, Buddhism penetrated every
aspect of Tibetan culture and there is nowhere in the country where its
influence is not all pervading. The language, art, architecture, medicine and
music in Ladakh reflect the influence of Tibetan Buddhism and both countries
consider the Dali Lama to be their spiritual leader.

Elizabeth says: "Life in Ladakh is distinctly different yet threatened by other
forces. The ancient culture is threatened by the influx of global products and a
money economy. Life for the majority of farmers prior to 1974 when the country
was opened to outsiders was dictated by the seasons, deeply seeded in ceremony
and united by strong family ties. The influx of Western approaches to
agriculture, tourism and lifestyle continue to threaten the delicate balance
that exists in this fascinating country of extraordinary people."

The exhibition runs until the end of September. All the photographs are for sale
and all the proceeds go to the Tibet Foundation, a non-government organisation
that directly seeks to preserve Tibetan cultural and human rights.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                      Copyright 1998 Bristol United Press


                              698 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                          February 26, 1992, Wednesday

PEST CONTROL RULES SEEN SURVIVING FREE-TRADE PACT

BYLINE: CRAIG DUNLAP; Journal of Commerce Staff

SECTION: MARITIME, Pg. 12B

LENGTH: 483 words

DATELINE: MIAMI BEACH


The Bush administration favors more open markets, but not at the cost of
exposing U.S. consumers and domestic agricultural producers to disease and pests
from overseas, a top U.S. Department of Agriculture official said.

Such market-opening measures as the proposed North American Free-Trade Agreement
and the Caribbean Basin Initiative offer substantial opportunities to the
refrigerated transportation industry, said Jo Ann Doke Smith, USDA ssistant
secretary of marketing and inspection services.

Government regulations perceived to be hampering growth within the agricultural
sector will be reviewed, but the government must ensure that whenever
regulations are lifted, adequate standards remain in place to block importation
of disease and pests, Ms. Smith said.

"We will not do anything to impact our domestic market. We don't need to export
disease or to import it," she said Monday at The Journal of Commerce- sponsored
Refrigerated Transportation conference here.

Any decisions concerning current inspection or admittance regulations must be
based on scientific knowledge, not on politics, which "can destroy an industry
or a commodity overnight," Ms. Smith said.

Such declarations don't always ring true, said one grower who both exports and
imports produce.

"It isn't fair the way government works," said David Warren, president of
Central America Produce Inc. in Pompano Beach, Fla.

Because of widely publicized government alarms, businesses relying on California
cantaloupe suffered last year when a poorly cleaned truck-trailer caused
salmonella bacteria to be passed to a load of cantaloupe, Mr. Warren said.

Another near-miss was a USDA effort to fumigate imported asparagus even though
the process would leave the vegetable covered with an unappetizing methyl
bromide residue, Mr. Warren said.

The government "needs to do the right thing, but you must be sensible," Mr.
Warren suggested.

Another concern for the federal government is the impact more freely admitted
Mexican produce will have on U.S. growers, Ms. Smith said.

But fears that cheaper Mexican goods will severely harm the domestic industry
could be outweighed by consumer demand for affordable fruits and vegetables
year-round, she said.

Also, she added, the influx of produce from such Latin American countries as
Mexico and Chile boosts money-making opportunities to the refrigerated
transportation industry.

Ms. Smith also noted that U.S. imports of flowers and plants from the Caribbean
and Latin America constitute an $ 8 billion industry, with the cut flowers sold
in grocery stores making up the fastest-growing segment.

Technological advances in refrigerated transportation now provide year-round
supply of produce, fish, meat and flowers, and if consumers around the world are
offered affordable goods available throughout the year, they will buy them, Ms.
Smith said.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1992 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              699 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                          September 15, 1998, Tuesday

Canadian farmers hog wild over US sales

BYLINE: BY THEOPOLIS WATERS

SECTION: COMMODITIES/CHEMICALS/ENERGY; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 501 words

DATELINE: KANSAS CITY, Mo.


Packer challenges, increased hog production and the end of grain subsidies have
contributed to a bump in hog shipments from Canada's prairie provinces into the
north central United States. And until Canadian pork plants are upgraded, new
facilities built and long-term solutions to labor disputes are found, exports to
the United States are expected to climb.

In July, the Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service in North Dakota, the largest port of entry for pigs entering the United
States from Canada, tallied nearly 221,000 hogs, compared with 126,136 a year
ago.

After Thorn Apple Valley shut the doors to its Detroit fresh pork processing
plant, some believed TAV's hogs would wind up in the hands of Midwest packers.

STRIKE OVER

Instead, a few weeks before Thorn Apple announced its plans, Maple Leaf Foods in
Ontario ended a long and bitter strike. This kept a few hogs in Canada while the
remainder were disbursed among packers in Indiana, Illinois and Pennsylvania,
according to industry sources.

They said a high percentage of hogs arriving into the Dakotas, Iowa and
Minnesota are from Manitoba, with a few from Alberta and some recently from
Saskatchewan after a plant breakdown.

Labor unrest in Red Deer, Alberta, which began in early May and ended in
mid-July, may have contributed to the influx during that period, said Martin
Rice, a Canadian Pork Council spokesman.

However, those numbers have moderated following the strike settlement, he added.

APHIS figures show that in April, a month before the Alberta labor action,
133,020 hogs arrived, peaking at 220,895 in July then dipping slightly to 203,
819 for August.

Before 1995, the Canadian government subsidized grain shipments from the
Canadian prairies to the West Coast for export.

SUBSIDIES END

Since then, a World Trade Organization ruling eliminated such subsidies,
resulting in less expensive grain for hog producers in the central region.

Suddenly, farmers were stuck with grain and turned to selling it to hog feeders,
generating tremendous growth in the hog industry for that section of the
country, said Ron Plain, University of Missouri livestock economist.

Construction is under way at Maple Leaf's Brandon, Manitoba, plant, which when
completed will boast a weekly kill capacity of about 65,000 head and handle hogs
from Manitoba, eastern Saskatchewan and western Alberta, Mr. Rice said.

He also said there are plans for another pork processing plant to be built in
Winnipeg and since the strike in Red Deer was settled, there's more than enough
capacity to accommodate hogs in central Canada.

Mr. Plain contends that even though a new plant is being built in Manitoba and
another considered in Winnipeg, Canada's pork processing industry is relatively
inefficient. Canadian processors will either have to become more competitive or
hogs will continue to stream into the United States, slaughtered and the meat
sent back across the border, he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1998 Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              700 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                           September 28, 2008 Sunday

Carnegie Museum scientists are busy uncovering the present -- and future

BYLINE: Mary Ann Thomas

LENGTH: 1867 words


When government authorities in South Carolina fretted over a potential influx of
the light brown apple moth earlier this year, they contacted the Carnegie Museum
of Natural History.

John Rawlins, the museum's head of invertebrate zoology -- essentially all
things that are not mammals, birds, reptiles, fish or frogs -- took on the rush
job.

The light brown apple moth is a nasty invasive species from Australia that
doesn't just devour one or two types of plants, but many. If it spreads in the
United States, the moth has the potential to defoliate a wide variety of
vegetation.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture and the U.S. Forest Service frequently turn
to Rawlins' section to identify insects for general surveys or specific
monitoring of problematic pests.

With 11 million prepared specimens and another 2 million to 3 million still to
be cataloged, the Carnegie has one of the largest insect collections in the
world. Its holdings of Lepidoptera -- moths and butterflies -- is ranked in the
world's top 10 collections. If any insect needs to be identified, Rawlins'
section has the specimens for reference and the scientific expertise to know
what to look for.

According to Rawlins, the federal government is panicking over the Australian
moth. "It's so difficult and obscure to identify," he says.

After conducting a micro-dissection of the moth from South Carolina, the
examination determined that it was not the dreaded light brown apple moth.

"It's about identification and screening," Rawlins says, looking at a freezer
full of specimens that his staff still has to process.

"One of the things that worry me most," he says, "what if, say, there is a
purple-eyed zingo bug out there? Who is watching for the unknown?"

Sometimes, the answer is: the scientists of the Carnegie Museum of Natural
History.

With less than 1 percent of its holdings on display, the public sees a mere
sliver of the work and collection efforts of the 25 scientists found hovering
over specimens and high-tech equipment examining DNA, and working on their other
duties.

Unlike the exhibits, these Carnegie researchers are behind closed doors, down
long corridors in a maze of offices with century-old oak shelves broken up by
sections of modern, air-tight, environmentally controlled storage cases.

The researchers also are scattered throughout the world collecting specimens.

With more than 20 galleries and the Powdermill Nature Reserve research field
station in Rector, the natural history museum has amassed more than 21 million
objects.

Although most famous to the general public for its dinosaurs, with the largest
collection of Jurassic dinosaurs in the world, most of the museum's research
staff is dedicated to the collection and identification of other specimens from
all corners of the globe.

"Visitors would be stunned to know what we really do," says Bob Androw, a
scientific preparator. He can be found sifting through tree samples with
wood-boring insects looking for known pests such as the destructive emerald ash
borer, an exotic Asian beetle that had been decimating ash trees. He and others
will process about 10,000 samples for the USDA in a six-month period, screening
for certain species and archiving the specimens.

Experts on identification

Because Carnegie scientists are in the business of documenting all life, they
are called upon frequently to identify a pantheon of specimens.

"In the old days, it was about research," Rawlins says. "However for us, it's
very important for the museum not just to educate and entertain and not just to
be scientific, it's also important to serve people now."

Federal and state governments contract with the museum for identification,
research and help with wildlife surveys.

"Since we are specialists, sort of like medical pathologists, we can tell what
species there are," Rawlins says.

To the public, museums hold dead things, but its research mission is to actually
document as many living organisms as possible.

The museum's holdings of insects continues to grow, with about 300,000 bugs
coming in a year. "It's important to have a collection from the past, but it is
extremely important to have the collection growing -- it's documentation tools
for things that might seem inconsequential now but might become critically
important later," Rawlins says.

And the museum's current research turns up new species on a regular basis.

About 40 bugs have been named after Bob Davidson, collection manager in
invertebrate zoology. He is an international expert in beetles, the most
successful of life forms boasting the largest number of known species -- more
than 400,000 -- in the animal kingdom.

"I spend half of my time identifying," says Davidson, who sits next to boxes of
beetles, with contents of individually pinned beetles with tags and descriptions
-- written in very small type -- of capture date, place, species and the name of
the collector.

In addition to examining specimens, Davidson spends a considerable amount of
time shipping the creatures out.

He lends out more than 1 million specimens to more than 150 scientists a year.
Currently, about a quarter of a million species are not in the building; they're
in the laboratories of researchers in South Africa, Poland, Brazil and
elsewhere.

Davidson often is on-loan himself, out of the building as he continues to gather
new specimens from all over the world. He recently spent a month in Alaska above
the Arctic Circle collecting beetles as part of a larger effort for long-term
monitoring of wildlife.

While Carnegie researchers continue to identify and survey animals and send them
around the globe, others are posting their work on species in cyberspace.

Chen Young, associate curator in invertebrate zoology, has posted a field guide
of crane flies of Pennsylvania. With drawings, identification information and
distribution, Young has attracted several thousand visitors since he set up his
Web site late last year.

While the crane fly might not be a household name, the insect, which looks likes
a mosquito, is an important food source for a number of animals and is a good
indicator of water quality and, as such, is a popular study creature.

Young's Web site landed him an invitation to conduct research on the crane flies
in the Arctic.

"You want to do basic surveys," Young says. "For example, to study global
warming and its effect, you have to look back 50 years ago and have data
available."

The CSI of the natural history

While some scientists focus on building their collections, others relay on the
decades of collecting to help with research on issues such as global warming.

Researchers are looking at samples of the plant gallium, a native ground cover
known for its airy and elegant shape, collected in Pennsylvania from the late
1700s to the present. They will try to demonstrate that the plant is flowering
14 days later that it did a century ago.

Cynthia Morton, associate curator and head of botany uses her collection to
study changes in plants over time and uses the specimens for DNA research.

Specifically, Morton extracts DNA from a plant and develops "relationship
trees," which are blueprints of the genetic material of specific varieties of
plants.

"So a cancer researcher will look at these 'relationship trees' and if they know
of a plant that has properties for a drug, but it's difficult to grow, then that
researcher can look at another plant closely related to it and that's where our
research can help," Morton says.

Morton's department conducts DNA research on local plants for public projects.
Several years ago, they extracted and examined the DNA of London Plane trees
that were planted in the Schenley Plaza in Oakland.

Working with the Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy, Morton made a startling
discovery: The DNA for the Schenley Plaza London Plane trees was the same as the
DNA from other plane trees secured from a number of growers on the East Coast.

If the trees all have the same genetic make-up -- grown from generations of the
same cuttings -- they are sitting ducks for the next blight or disease.
Essentially, swatches of this popular tree planted in parks and yards throughout
the Eastern United States could be easily wiped out.

"We're so concerned about the biodiversity in the wild," Morton says, "but what
about the biodiversity of the plants we use in our parks and backyards?"

Because governments and homeowners buy their stock from commercial nurseries,
which many times propagate their products from the most successfully grown
trees, scientists like Morton can assess genetically what is growing in our
urban environment.

"We don't know how widespread our urban diversity is declining but we would like
to be able to help give some biodiversity back and work with the nursery
industry," Morton says.

Finding what's there

The smallest North American land snail, Punctum Minutissimum, is now the most
common snail in the state.

Or is it?

Timothy Pearce, head of the section of mollusks, is trying to learn how many
types of snails live in the state and where. So far his multi-year project has
turned up 125 species.

"If you think it's important to preserve all species, you need to know what is
rare and where it lives," he says.

People bring in leaf litter for Pearce to examine and extract the tiny creatures
such as Punctum Minutissimum, which is the size of a pinhead.

Pearce is looking at county-level distributions of snails and has made only a
dent in the state. So far, he and his predecessors have identified 112 snail
species in Allegheny County. It will take him visiting sites throughout the
commonwealth -- and processing the specimens -- for a true reading on the snail
population.

And he is puzzled by the low number of species in Northeastern Pennsylvania.

For example, existing records show that Columbia County has only three species
of snails. That cannot be.

"So, I had two hypotheses, is it low diversity or low sampling?"

So, Pearce and his wife, Alice Doolittle, who works for the Western Pennsylvania
Conservancy, took a trip to Columbia County earlier this year to sample the
local snail population.

They turned up 37 species, demonstrating a woeful lack of information and field
work.

And these are not idle numbers. Pearce's work will serve as a baseline from
which scientists can measure the snail population in years to come. "I'm late,
but somebody in the future will be grateful for this," he says.

Although not sexy like dinosaurs, or as Pearce put its, they're no "charismatic
megafauna," snails and other mollusks are the nuts and bolts of everyday life
and their populations affect the food chain.

"They're the ones doing the work but not getting any glory," he says.

They are the food supply for mammals, birds, baby fireflies and other insects.
In fact, female birds consume snails for calcium to produce egg shells that are
sturdy.

Although snails recycle nutrients, turning leaves into soil, their existence
often is taken for granted. That is until there's a population crash or another
disturbance affecting animals.

"They could be the canary in coal mine," Pearce says. "But we don't know what
the canary sounds like at this point, and if it would stop singing, we wouldn't
notice."

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2008 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              701 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        Townsville Bulletin (Australia)

                             May 22, 2013 Wednesday
                                  1 - Edition

Prime Site Ludwig's visit proves a let-down

BYLINE: Craig Currie, Ray White Rural

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 347  words


RAY White Rural Townsville agent Craig Currie provides the first in a regular
column on issues in the rural and agricultural sector in North Queensland.

IT has been a busy time for the all sectors of the beef industry with the Beef
Crisis Summit held at Richmond, and cattle sales in Emerald, Charters Towers,
Roma and Gracemere all reporting a decline in prices over the past couple of
weeks

About 300 or so producers were left with a sour taste in their mouths after
Federal Agriculture Minister Joe Ludwig departed from the Beef Crisis Summit at
Richmond without acknowledging the crowd.

During the proceedings, Mr Ludwig refused to comment on any of the resolutions
put to the meeting, except that he was there to listen and take proposals back
to Cabinet.

The main resolution from the meeting called for an introduction of a form of
foreign aid to purchase 100,000 head of cattle from northern Australia at a
farm-gate floor price of $1.50/kg.

Drought conditions are tightening. This, combined with the appalling decision
made by the Labor Government to shut down the live export trade two years ago,
has caused an influx of cattle on to the market.

Over the last couple of weeks eight rural properties were taken to auction, last
week former Burdekin Agricultural College and the associated Cane Farm and four
separate grazing parcels at Millaroo were offered up for sale by the State
Government.

The former Burdekin Agricultural College was sold at auction for $5 million to
an unnamed Burdekin family. The college's Cane Farm sold for $7 million to the
Galea Family of Mackay. Both of these properties were marketed by Kevin Currie,
Ray White Rural Townsville and Cass Arboit, Ray White Burdekin.

The four separate parcels at Millaroo ranged in size from 41ha to 102ha.

They were marketed by Raine and Horne Ayr and were passed in at auction.

Avocavale (5957ha) pastoral holding at Ravenswood was sold for $1.575 million by
Lorin Bishop, Elders, Charters Towers to buyers from Charters Towers.

Langlo Vale, Georgetown (13,637ha 3117 head of cattle) was offered for sale by
Topx, Richmond.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BUL


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              702 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              The Sentinel (Stoke)

                                  May 2, 2001

Disused farm may become craft village

BYLINE: by Tania Shakinovsky

SECTION: Agriculture, Pg.2

LENGTH: 215 words


A NEWCASTLE couple are set to build a GBP 200,000 tourist spot to showcase local
craft talent.

Up to 30 jobs could be created by Karen and Dennis Slater's plan to turn their
disused farm into a traditional craft village and holiday centre.

The couple, who run Slater's Country Inn at Maerfield Gate Farm in Baldwins
Gate, hope the scheme will bring an influx of tourists to the area.

Karen, aged 40, said: "This is a very exciting project which we hope will help
boost the economy of the area.

"We want to create an old-fashioned village so it will be like walking into
stores from days gone by with a range of high quality craftsmanship displays
from unusual handmade gifts to furniture and pottery.

The craft village, boasting 24 units, will be surrounded by 12 holiday rooms and
other plans include an indoor garden centre and tea rooms.

Newcastle Borough Council planning committee has approved the proposal but
complications over a further development has delayed the scheme.

The couple are appealing against a planning condition that stipulates they
cannot build a five-bedroom house for their family on the site until the craft
centre is up and running.

Anyone interested in signing up for the craft village or wanting further
information can telephone Karen Slater on 01782 680052.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

                          Copyright 2001 The Sentinel


                              703 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                           November 24, 2015 Tuesday

EBRD: Refugee crisis puts pressure on transition countries

LENGTH: 212 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 London: The EBRD's latest outlook for the economies revealed that the refugee
crisis is putting economic pressure on a number of countries in transition.





 Turkey is estimated to be hosting more than two million refugees, while in
Jordan they account for almost one-fifth of the population. Countries that share
borders with Syria and Iraq have experienced a major influx of people escaping
the conflicts there.



 The Regional Economic Prospects report said, &ldquo;This massive influx has
strained public services, government finances and labour markets.&rdquo; In
south Eastern Europe, several countries have seen large numbers of refugees
transiting their territories. For instance, more than 145,000 migrants, mainly
of Syrian origin, are estimated to have passed through Serbia since January
2015, a ten-fold increase on the number in 2014.



 It provides forecasts for the EBRD region that includes countries in central
and south-eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union and southern and eastern
Mediterranean. The report refers to recent analysis of Turkey's labour markets
showing that the inflow of refugees, who overwhelmingly do not have work
permits, results in the displacement of informal, low-educated, mostly female
Turkish workers, primarily in agriculture.



LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              704 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                            April 16, 2016 Saturday

12% Panvel farm land converted to non-agro use

BYLINE: Umesh K Parida

SECTION: NAVI MUMBAI

LENGTH: 252 words


NAVI MUMBAI: Panvel taluka has seen as much as 12% of the agricultural land
being converted for non-agricultural purpose in the last six years, indicating
the development in and around the area, said officials.

"Land owners are showing no interest in agriculture due to rise in land value
and development of agriculture is limited to rural area," said Panvel tehsildar
Dipak Akde.

The taluka had 28,025 hectares (ha) of agricultural land in 2010, which came
down to 24,740 ha in 2015. Around 3,285 ha of agricultural land has been
converted for non-agricultural use, during this six-year period, the officials
added.

"Most of the land was converted for residential housing projects. The conversion
order was passed by the tehsildar's office after completion of due procedure,"
said Rahul Lomate, official, Panvel tehsildar office.

Of the 3,285 ha agricultural land converted for non-agricultural use, just 652
ha was for industrial purpose, while 2,186 ha was for other purposes in 2010.

Agricultural land conversion to industrial and other purposes was highest in
2010 but from 2011, not a single piece of land was converted for industrial
purpose. The highest conversion of agricultural land (8%) was in 2010.

Akde added that increasing connectivity, upcoming airport project and real
estate boom are the reasons for increasing number of agriculture land plots
being converted for residential use. "The influx of reputed builders in and
around Panvel is also a big reason," he added.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              705 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                             July 28, 2009 Tuesday

Govt urged to address tariff barriers

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 459 words


Exporters said despite lower import duties, fruit and vegetables still faced
obstacles to expansion abroad, due to non-tariff barriers and high
sanitary-standard requirements.

Chusak Chuenprayoth, president of the Thai Fruit and Vegetable Producers
Association, yesterday said the government must focus on negotiating a reduction
of non-tariff barriers with trading partners, as emerging protectionism was
obstructing export opportunities.

"Thai fruit and vegetable exporters have not enjoyed as much benefit as they
should from the FTAs, as many non-tariff barriers have been raised to obstruct
export growth," said Chusak.

To ensure exporters reap the highest benefits from FTAs, the government should
include sanitary and phytosanitary standards in negotiations, said Chusak.

"The government must concentrate on solving non-tariff barriers for agricultural
products exports; otherwise, FTAs will benefit only the industrial sector," he
said.

Under current FTAs, Thai agricultural goods enjoy lower rates and often zero
tariffs. However, many countries have raised sanitary-standard requirements, to
protect their markets from an influx of low-tariff imports.

He also urged the government to include ready-to-eat fruit and vegetables in FTA
negotiations.

The government should also support a plan to set an export standard for the
agricultural sector and increase technological support for farmers to respond to
demand, Chusak said.

Thailand is the world's seventh-largest food and agriculture supplier. About
one-third of the population is employed in agriculture.

The key problem facing exports is farmers' lack of knowledge about agricultural
standards, he said.

Chusak, who is also president of Kamphaeng-Saen Commercial, the Kingdom's
leading exporter of fruit and vegetables, said his company's turnover was
expected to increase to $12US million (Bt408 million) this year, due to higher
export volume.

As the firm has adapted to the food-safety standards of many highly developed
countries, its exports will continue to increase gradually, he said.

However, many Thai fruit and vegetable exporters have not yet adapted themselves
to the strict standards required by importing countries.

Chusak said all firms had to invest heavily in both money and time to
restructure their plantation and production procedures if they are to satisfy
foreign requirements.

He said his company's export volume increased by 5 per cent in the first half of
the year, thanks to rising demand for healthy food. The company exports 180
tonnes of fresh fruit and vegetables a month.

Chusak said the global recession caused a 30-per-cent fall in exports last year.
However, the firm's foreign sales have increased this year since it diversified
its markets to serve more emerging nations.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 Nation Multimedia Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              706 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                               TODAY (Singapore)

                           February 25, 2016 Thursday
                                  APM Edition

Street eats

BYLINE: Evonne Lee

SECTION: SUF; Lifestyle; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 765 words



HIGHLIGHT: What to eat, drink, buy and do in London's famed Borough Market and
Brick Lane Market


The influx of migrants of different nationalities between 1981 and 2011 has made
a significant impact on the diversity of culinary offerings in London.

In this multicultural city where over 300 languages are spoken, there are no
less than 65 Michelin-starred food establishments serving an extensive range of
cuisines from Asian to Caribbean, French, Middle Eastern and South American.

BOROUGH MARKET

Markets are a microcosm of London's cosmopolitan social mix and a good way to
explore its food options. Head for Borough Market, London's largest and oldest
farmer's wholesale and retail market located in proximity to the London Bridge.
This market, which dates back to the 13th century, is managed by a charitable
trust comprising volunteers who are passionate about ethically sourced food.

The showcase of over 100 stalls offers artisanal seasonal produce and food
products from £2 (S$4). The selection of ethnic offerings that spans the globe
is astounding. You can find European-style cured meats (think prosciutto, ham
and chorizo sausages), crusty Italian breads like ciabatta and focaccia,
Shanghainese dumplings, Spanish olives and sundried tomatoes, and Japanese
ramen.

If there's one item to savour, Bill Oglethorpe's Kappacasein (grilled toastie
bubbling with three gooey cheeses between crisp sourdough bread) for £5 is worth
every calorie!

At the southern end of the market on Park Street stands Monmouth Coffee, a
35-year-old establishment that serves coffee using high-quality fair-trade beans
produced by sustainable farms. Prices start from £1.70 for an espresso.

Lunch market: Monday and Tuesday, 10am-5pm.

Full market: Wednesday and Thursday, 10am-5pm; Friday, 10am-6pm; Saturday,
8am-5pm. Closed on Sunday.

Directions: Take the underground tube to London Bridge station. Follow the
signboards, and ride the escalator that leads directly to the market entrance on
Southwark Street.

BRICK LANE MARKET

Over at Brick Lane, in East End London, this bustling flea market used to be the
Jewish enclave before the influx of South-Asian migrants in the 1970s.

Located on the fringe of London's affluent city centre, Brick Lane's
transformation from a slum and its Jack-the-Ripper history into a trendy
rendezvous for those in search of the retro, vintage, and antiquated, has been
remarkable.

Art-wise, Brick Lane's offerings are just as eclectic. As you roam the food
stalls, your eyes will be drawn to splashes of colours that have made Brick Lane
a hot spot for street art. These include works by Banksy, the United Kingdom's
popular graffiti-master-cum-filmmaker.

London's best Jewish-styled bagel bakery that has been serving Londoners since
1977 is right here. Pop into the 24-hour Beigel Bake and order its best sellers:
Hot salt beef with gherkins or the smoked salmon with cream cheese at £3.70
each.

Stroll southwards and you'll come across Dark Sugars, a chocolate boutique where
every mouthful promises a luxurious chocolatey experience. Inside, large slabs
of compound chocolate are displayed to showcase the wide selection of chocolate
with every filling imaginable, ranging from the simple to the exotic. This is
also the place to grab a piping-hot chocolate spiced with nutmeg, cardamom,
cinnamon and even chilli from £3.

For good artisanal coffee, look for a black London cab. You'll find The Black
Cab Coffee Co owner Gray serving freshly brewed cuppas out of his cab, popularly
known as a hackney carriage during the 1950s and was originally drawn by horses.
For just £2, you get an aromatic espresso. For an indulgent cuppa, crown your
espresso with ice cream (vanilla or salted caramel) for an additional £3.50.
Other brews like cappuccino, latte and flat white are just £2.50 each.

Brick Lane is not just confined to its namesake but also spills into the side
streets. As you navigate the labyrinth of stalls, coffee joints, tea rooms and
shops, you'll discover that it doesn't quite fit the bill of a flea market. Yes,
there's second-hand furniture, old magazines and vinyl records, bric-a-brac,
outdated fashion and quirky crafts. There's also a bit of this-and-that: Barbie
dolls, Indian saris, pots and pans, jewellery and the occasional pop-ups selling
imported produce from Asia to the Middle East.

In the midst of all this, you'll also meet aspiring young fashion designers
showcasing indie designs, artists peddling their creations and aspiring
musicians at live street performances.

Opening hours: Every Sunday, 10am to 5pm.

Directions: By London tube, alight at Aldgate East and walk 8 minutes. Or alight
at Liverpool Street and walk 12 minutes.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tucking into salt beef bagel.
The place to get London's best Jewish-styled bagels.
Entrance to Borough Market.
Chocolate boutique, Dark Sugars.
Order coffee from a black London cab.
Meet aspiring street artists and check out the street art at Brick Lane.
Kappacasein, one of the coolest hot things to eat.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2016 MediaCorp Press Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              707 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                             Sunday Nation (Kenya)

                                 March 8, 2015

Koskei accuses MPs of receiving bribes

BYLINE: ANITA CHEPKOECH   -1

LENGTH: 414  words


Agriculture Cabinet Secretary Felix Koskei has accused MPs of taking bribes to
protect illegal sugar importers.
Mr Koskei yesterday said MPs have refused to hand over a report of  the House
Committee on Agriculture that would pave the way for  prosecution of those
behind the illegal imports.


He said the probe team, which was constituted last year, had conducted
investigations into how cheap sugar that destabilises the local market gets into
the country. However, the report is yet to be even tabled in Parliament.
"The MPs are taking me in circles each time I ask them to present the report.  I
heard that they are receiving bribes from the cartels so that they can continue
shielding them," said Mr Koskei.
RESPONSE
He revealed this while commissioning Chemelil Sugar Company, which had closed
down due to mechanical  problems. Kisumu Governor Jack Ranguma and Nandi Senator
Stephen Sang attended the event.
It was a response to criticism from some leaders in the cane growing areas who
accused him of being unable to stop the influx of contraband sugar.
Kisumu County MPs Fred Outa (Nyando), James K'Oyoo (Muhoroni), Rose Nyamunga
(Kisumu Women Representative) and the County Assembly Majority Leader Samwel
Angow earlier held a parallel meeting  to discuss challenges facing the sector.

When they later joined the main dais where the minister was a chief guest, they
asked him to explain why the government was busy dishing out money to revive
millers  instead of stabilising the market.
Mr K'Oyoo said the cost of sugarcane production was too high and that delays in
payments had made it difficult for farmers to plant on time,  therefore denying
them profit. "There is a lot that the government is not doing to make our sugar
industry as competitive as other countries," he said.
'MUTILATED' REPORT
Mr Outa said: "The government has failed to bring to book barons who flood our
market with cheap imports. It's, therefore, a waste of time to give machines
whereas the sugar market is not stable."
In a rejoinder, the minister asked the leaders to desist from inciting farmers
against the government.
Mr Koskei said some cartels that had been caught by the inter-agency
surveillance team had been taken to court: "But some of the most wanted barons
are listed in the report that the legislators are hiding. They are mutilating it
to suit personal interests."


"Mr Outa is a member of the committee that has been insincere while handling the
investigations," added the minister.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1383


                       Copyright 2015 Nation Media Group
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              708 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                             March 1, 2012 Thursday

Democratic Republic of Congo : REDD pilot project integrated geographically
Mambasa Project

LENGTH: 503  words


Reference: P-Z1-C00-032
Approval date: 27/04/2011
Start date: 18/08/2011
Appraisal Date: 29/11/2010
Status: OngoingOngo
Implementing Agency: DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVA TION OF NATURE AND
TOURISM
Location: Democratic Republic of Congo
The project will capitalize on the many initiatives underway and planned across
the pilot area, ensuring both the overall coordination, the strengthening of
current activities and launch additional initiatives in REDD + systemic
perspective. It will aim to build the means to answer a short, medium and long
term issues for the area, which can be synthesized by the massive influx of
people associated with inappropriate land management, better served by
renovating roads and subject to increasing pressure from the mining, slash and
burn agriculture, the industrial use but mainly artisanal wood and charcoal for
use in a regional context and low-tech productivity activities. To better target
activities, the project was divided into four sub-zones (SZ): 1. RFO 2. CBNRM 3.
Permanent Production Forest 4. Protected forest unaffected[#x6d4]
Activities to be undertaken at local level: "Establish a Pilot with the
Administrator of the territory and under the responsibility of the CN-REDD"
Support the functioning of the Agricultural Rural Management (CARG) of territory
in his giving a cross-sectoral dimension, "Develop a plan in a participatory
planning and agricultural development across the area," Evaluating scenarios of
deforestation and degradation "business as usual" (BAU) and Alternative and
potential REDD + for the area; "Educate authorities and traditional leaders to
organize and manage their space," Strengthening brigades forest and equip,
organize and motivate a system of monitoring and patrolling with mixed teams
(villagers, rangers and police), "Instituting a mediation to track complaints
and facilitate resolution of conflicts;" Making an anthropological study to
deepen the dialogue with indigenous peoples and to better formulate a critical
path of development in line with local aspirations[#x6d4]


SZ2, 3 and 4: Mapping the land situation of sub-areas, identify and monitor
cases of conflict, facilitate their resolution or arbitration at their bodies
with the assistance of two surveyors and two mediators land[#x6d4]
SZ2: Continue the improvement of agricultural techniques involved with
WCS[#x6d4]
SZ3: Supporting ENRA forestry company and the communities living on the property
to release an analysis of conditions for success of a sustainable industrial
development (WCS)[#x6d4]

SZ4: Improved quantification of needs and advise communities in agricultural
development and agro forestry with the help of instructors[#x6d4]
SZ4 Establish community structures for reforestation and sustainable
agricultural development (fuelwood, agroforestry, nurseries, seed drills of
alternative products and fields of cassava multiplication)[#x6d4]
SZ4: Make the micro zoning participatory study the properties of soils and
agricultural poten

country :Congo, the Democratic Republic of the
Ltd[#x6d4]

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2012 Tenders Info
                         Syndigate.info, Al bawaba.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              709 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            April 30, 1991, Tuesday

Legislator faces ethics complaint

BYLINE: By John Harmon Staff writerlegislators; habersham/county; ethics;
investigations; water; development

SECTION: STATE NEWS; SECTION D; PAGE 02

LENGTH: 318 words


A federal Agriculture Department worker in Habersham County has filed an ethics
complaint against state Sen. John C. Foster (D-Cornelia), alleging the senator
called the worker's supervisor to complain about the employee's opposition to a
reservoir project the senator supports.

Dell Branson, director of the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation
Service (ASCS) office for Habersham and Rabun counties in the northeast corner
of the state, contends that Mr. Foster contacted ASCS Georgia Director Ralph
Hudgens on April 17 "with the intent to place me under so much duress that I
would change my opinion" on the proposed 420-acre Hazel Creek reservoir, which
Mr. Foster and many business interests support.

In an interview, Mr. Hudgens confirmed that the senator contacted him.

"Senator Foster called me and said, Your man is putting his nose in things he
doesn't need to be involved in,' " Mr. Hudgens said. "I told him it was a local
issue and I was not going to tell Mr. Branson what side of the issue to be on."

Mr. Foster declined to discuss the allegation. "We have a state ethics
commission of which I have the greatest confidence," he said.  I will let them
review the charge. I will not dignify his charge with any comment."

When the Hazel Creek reservoir was proposed last year, Mr. Branson organized
farmers to fight a $ 7 million bond referendum to finance it. Business leaders
said the water would help Habersham handle an influx of newcomers, while farmers
feared it would increase taxes and promote development incompatible with poultry
farming. Voters defeated the referendum.

Mr. Branson later was chosen chairman of a Habersham water-resource committee
that on April 2 recommended a smaller, less expensive project rather than the
Hazel Creek plan.

The ethics panel will review the complaint in June, executive secretary C.
Theodore Lee said.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: mug of John C. Foster

                    Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution


                              710 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            January 13, 2012 Friday
                                  ALL EDITION

Jobless claims rise on seasonal influx

BYLINE: State Journal staff, wire services

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B8

LENGTH: 544 words


Applications for weekly unemployment benefits spiked last week, largely because
companies let go of thousands of workers after the holiday season.

Weekly applications rose by 24,000 to a seasonally adjusted 399,000, the Labor
Department said Thursday. That's the highest level in six weeks.

Economists said such a jump is typical in early January and downplayed the
increase. It followed three months of steady declines that brought applications
to their lowest level in more than three years. And weekly unemployment claims
have been below 400,000 in nine of the past 10 weeks.

U.S. Cellularplans 4G service

U.S. Cellular said it will begin 4G LTE service in Madison, Milwaukee and seven
other Wisconsin communities within the next three months. The company says the
service platform is ready and it is testing its first 4G LTE devices.

The so-called 4G is the fourth generation of cellular wireless technology that
is supposed to deliver up to 10 times the data transmission speed of 3G mobile
devices.

U.S. Cellular also said has activated a new cell site in downtown Sun Prairie.
It is one of 16 cellular towers the company added in 2011.

State meat rules could be changed

Gov. Scott Walker has authorized state agriculture officials to amend meat
inspection rules and allow Wisconsin's specialty meat plants to sell their
products across state lines for the first time.

Currently, only meat from plants inspected by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
can be sold across state lines. Amending the state rules will incorporate new
federal regulations and allow meat from state-inspected plants to be sold across
the border.

The rule changes are subject to a public hearing and need final approval from
the Legislature. Wisconsin has about 275 state-inspected meat plants and about
145 federally-inspected plants.

Larger meat producers have been able to ship across state lines for years. Their
plants are reviewed by federal inspectors, unlike the smaller plants that are
checked by state inspectors.

Kohl's to open West Coast studio

Kohl's Corp. is adding its first design studio on the West Coast, while doubling
the size of its design office in New York.

The moves underscore how serious the department store chain is in its commitment
to expanding and improving its exclusive brands, which now account for 51
percent of its total revenue.

The chain, based in Menomonee Falls, says it will open a design studio in Santa
Monica, Calif., which will host a team of 20 trend and graphic arts
professionals. The company's design studio in New York will double in size to
100,000 square feet by 2014.

Sears downplays loan report

CIT Group has decided to stop financing loans to suppliers waiting to be paid by
retailer Sears, according to published reports.

New York-based CIT Group, which makes loans to small and mid-size businesses,
said it doesn't comment on specific customers.

Sears Holdings Corp., which is based in Hoffman Estates, Ill., said it disagrees
with CIT's decision but said it won't have a big impact on its operations. It
said that CIT's payables represented less than 5 percent of its inventories, and
noted that other lenders are still financing the loans.

It also pointed to its $4.2 billion in liquidity, along with its recent
restructuring moves and cost cuts.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2012 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              711 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              July 28, 2008 Monday

Japan farmers voice concern over WTO proposal on farm trade

LENGTH: 488 words


Text of report in English by Japan's largest news agency Kyodo

Tokyo, July 28 Kyodo - Japanese farmers expressed growing concern Monday about a
possible influx of cheap imported farm products as Japan is poised to accept
compromise proposals by the World Trade Organization for a free trade accord
which requires sharp tariff cuts on key farm products.

The compromise plans, presented last week by WTO Director General Pascal Lamy,
state that each rich country is allowed to designate 4 per cent of all farm
products as sensitive products to be exempted from steep tariff cuts.

Tokyo wants at least 8 per cent of all farm products to be exempted from sharp
tariff cuts, but Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Minister Masatoshi
Wakabayashi told reporters late Sunday night in Geneva that he no longer has
prospects of securing the 8 per cent target.

An official of the JA Gunma prefectural union of agricultural cooperatives,
said, "I'm worried what will become of Japanese agriculture if cheap imported
farm products are coming" in addition to a deteriorating business environment
amid rising costs for fertilizer and feed.

A farmer in Okinawa Prefecture, where sugar cane is a primary agricultural
product, said that lowering tariffs on sugar from the current 305 per cent
"become a matter of life and death" and could ruin the local economies in some
regions.

A farmer in Hokkaido said, "I feel anxious about the continuation of agriculture
."

Meanwhile, Chief Cabinet Secretary Nobutaka Machimura reiterated the government
stance of seeking to get 8 per cent as the exemption target at the ongoing WTO
trade talks of the Doha Round, saying that otherwise Japan cannot protect some
100 items deemed necessary to be highly protected.

Under the WTO compromise plans, developed countries like Japan may raise the
ratio of sensitive products by 2 percentage points to 6 per cent in exchange for
increasing the amount of low-tariff imports.

Of the total 1,332 items in farm products, Japan currently imposes levies of
more than 200 per cent on 101 items designated as important products to protect
from cheap imported products.

With an 8 per cent exemption, Japan can cover all 101 items it wants to shield
from cheap imports.

With a 6 per cent exemption from steep tariff cuts, however, Japan can secure
only about 80 items as sensitive products for exemption from tariff cuts and
thus it is likely to be forced to give up maintaining high tariffs on some farm
products.

Such sensitive farm products for Japan include rice, wheat, sugar, pork and
peanuts.

As for rice, which Tokyo apparently places top priority on domestic protection,
Japan now charges a tariff of 778 per cent on milled rice.

If the WTO members clinch a deal in the Doha Round, Japan is likely to be forced
to sort out key farm products for the limited scope of exemption from steep
tariff cuts, observers said.

Source: Kyodo News Service, Tokyo, in English 0354 gmt 28 Jul 08

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2008 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              712 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                Vanguard (Lagos)

                                 March 14, 2016

Mile 12 Mayhem - Hausa Traders Flood Ogun Cattle Market

BYLINE: Daud Olatunji

LENGTH: 385 words


Scores of traders from the Mile12 Market, Ketu, Lagos have stormed the Kara
Cattle Market at Isheri in Ogun State following the continued closure of Mile 12
market after the bloody clash between Hausa and Yoruba traders.

Confirming the influx of the traders from Mile 12, Lagos to Kara cattle market
in Ogun State, the state commissioner for Agriculture, Mrs. Ronke Sokefun said
the government would not send them away rather would accommodate them.

Sokefun, who visited the affected Kara Market said the government has perfected
plans to relocate the Kara Cattle Market at Isheri to Ogere area of the state.

The commissioner said the plan to relocate the market was due to the rampant
accidents caused by the trucks parked around the market and in order to move the
traders from the city to commodity environment.

The commissioner, however, advised the new traders to maintain peace and obey
the rules and regulation of the state for their own benefit.

Sokefun also assured them that the government was not sending them away,
promising that the government will provide a better market for them at Ogere.

"The state government is aware that traders from Ketu market have decided to
relocate here, we welcome them. The government is very compassionate and we are
not sending them away but, we will relocate them to Ogere because the government
is concerned about the security of the people.

"We will also move the cattle market to the new market in order to reduce the
rate of accidents caused by the trucks parked around the market," she said.

However, the Seriki of the Kara cattle market, in Isheri, Ogun State, Chief
Muritala Babalola solicited for the support of the government to clear the bush
of the new market at Ogere.

Babalola also appreciated the government's effort of accommodating the new
traders.

The leader of the Ketu traders, Mr Samsideen Arowolo appreciated the government
for giving them opportunity and not sending them away.

Arowolo also assured the government that they will always abide by the rules of
the state and promise to be law abiding .

" I appreciate the Ogun state government for the opportunity they give us and
for not sending us away as we thought.

" We are traders and transporters, and we are also peacemakers and we promised
to always abide by the rules and regulation of the state".

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              713 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               New Era (Windhoek)

                                October 26, 2012

A Devoted Mother and Astute Politician [interview]

BYLINE: Lorraine Kazondovi

LENGTH: 993 words


NEW Era journalist

interviewed Omaheke Regional Governor,

on her achievements, challenges and her general outlook on life and the future.
McLeod-Katjirua has been nominated to contest the position of Deputy Secretary
General of the ruling party, against education minister Dr Abraham Iyambo at the
party's upcoming watershed congress slated for November 29 to December 2.

"Thank you very much. I am a Namibian woman, I was born in Windhoek but I grew
up in Gobabis. I left the country in 1975 and received qualifications in
Agricultural Public Administration. I am also a teacher by profession. In 1989,
I came back to Namibia under Resolution 435."

"I left the country as a teenager for exile before independence because of what
was happening then. I left through Botswana to Zambia then to Tanzania, Angola
and then to Germany. When I came back to Namibia, I worked in the agricultural
industry as an extension technician before I joined politics. I worked with the
Swapo regional office and became a regional councillor in 2001. I was elected
(by the councillors) as Governor of the Omaheke Region in 2002 and was
officially appointed by President Hifikepunye Pohamba as Governor in 2010."

"I did not venture into business. I am a housewife with a son and daughter. My
son was born in exile and my daughter is what they call a born free. I balance
my home life with my work life and it takes good planning skills to enable you
to do both."

"Since I've been at the helm of the region a lot has taken place. There are
health facilities in all the constituencies and they are doing well. We have
schools across the region as well as rural water supply. We are able to provide
clean and potable water for all our people. I can also proudly say that although
crime exists, it is not skyrocketing in my region. It is controllable. Our
residents enjoy peace and stability."

"Obstacles are always there. You cannot always have everything smooth-sailing.
Unemployment is one of the biggest obstacles in the region. The government is
the biggest employer since there are no industries or factories in the region.
Commercial and communal farming also employs a significant number of people. We
survive on government capital projects such as road construction for employment,
but you must remember that that is not permanent employment. We have also not
been able to supply housing for everyone. We still have squatters or informal
settlers. However, the Build Together programme and the Shack Dwellers
Association are taking that into consideration. There are also financial
constraints as the residents' demands surpass the supply from government.
Government has to cater to thousands of human desires.

"We are addressing the unemployment obstacle by looking at how to attract
investments to the region. It is a hell of a challenge however, considering the
large influx of people coming into the region at an alarming rate. Some come in
through the resettlement programme, because every Namibian is free to live
anywhere in the country. Urbanization is unfavourable because the region only
has one town, Gobabis, with a high influx of people. Every citizen wants to live
where there is light at night, but they settle anywhere when they are unable to
find jobs."

"I do not think I'm better than anyone else, but I may be seen to be the right
person. I am ready to take any assignment no matter how high or low therefore my
candidacy is justified. It is not an easy position since there are a lot of
issues of concern to deal with concerning Namibians. We need to look at the
issue of passion killings. We have tried demonstrating but we have not gone to
the core and causes of the issue. We need to start by investigating in order to
arrive at the core reasons for the killings. We should compare notes and look at
the similarities and causes of this issue to get to the core of it. I will not
be able to resolve it alone because it is a national concern. We should also
look at the high percentage of unemployment and we need to combine forces. The
Swapo Party manifesto and government policies need to be implemented for the
improvement of the lives of the Namibian people."

"Government is doing what it is supposed to be doing because you find women
governors, parliamentarians and ministers. We cannot expect 100 percent, but I
believe we will heed the call in the near future. Namibia is a young nation that
has recognized the importance of gender equality and I believe we will overcome
this problem."

"The Omaheke Region is not unique from any other region in the country. Here and
there you hear reports of passion killings but I have no statistics at this
point. One of the causes could be the abuse of drugs and alcohol, however this
issue needs to be thoroughly studied."

"Yes I am ware of the situation and I have met with the constituency
councillors. I cannot quantify its severity, however I have suggested that a
report be compiled and forwarded to the Ministry of Agriculture [Water and
Forestry], which is the line ministry. We first need to determine what is on the
ground. "

"Road carnage is one of our major challenges. Whether the accidents happen in
Omaheke or any other region in the country, the feeling remains the same.
Efforts have been made but we need to continue to mobilize our communities. We
should never say it is enough, because road users may not have heard the
messages correctly. Despite the efforts, we have not curbed road carnage,
therefore we need to continue to mobilize road users."

"Other than the drought in Omaheke, veld fires have also ravaged the region. We
must be careful and stay away from making unwanted veld fires. They are
destroying grazing and robbing animals of grazing. Veld fires are man made, but
it is hard to establish in every case how a fire was started. It could be by
smokers or hunters. It is destroying our vegetation. When the sun is too hot,
bottles can also ignite fires therefore we must stop littering."

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              714 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                           September 14, 2012 Friday

Pakistan: Pakistani exporters express concerns about free trade with India

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: KARACHI


KARACHI, Sept. 14 -- Pakistan's agriculture exporters have expressed concerns
over free trade with India under the most favoured nation (MFN) status as they
believe that it will adversely affect the country's exports, sources said on
Wednesday.

CEO Harvest Tradings Ahmad Jawad said Pakistan could greatly benefit from the
import of agricultural produce such as wheat, spices, tea and other edibles to
meet production shortfalls at competitive prices. Jawad said that although
restrictions on trade and an uncertain political situation affected official
trade with India, unofficial trade continued through the Kashmir border,
particularly in agricultural products.

"India is a vegetarian country by a wide margin. In this respect, the Pakistani
vegetable and fruit market has a lot of trading potential with India," he said.
President Farmers Associates Pakistan Dr Mohammad Tariq Bucha said that they
were not against trade with any country but trade with India should be on a
level playing field.

"Indian agriculture is highly subsidised and ours is highly indebted," he said.
There are heavy taxes on agriculture input in Pakistan and GST is collected in
advance, which does not happen in any other part of the world, he said.

"India's power for agriculture use is free, while cost increases in Pakistan due
to lifting underground water, as canal water is short," he said. Moreover, price
of urea is approximately 50 percent higher in Pakistan and diesel prices are
also higher by approximately Rs32 per litre.

"India gives finance at six to seven percent mark-up while we receive finance at
17 percent," Bucha said. Bucha suggested that the government should also include
stakeholders in the policy making.

"If India wants to become a favoured nation, it should release some water from
Sutlej and Ravi rivers and prove that Pakistani farmers are brothers of Indian
farmers," he said. Stakeholders of Pakistani rice fear the influx of Indian rice
as only five percent duty exists on imports of rice in Pakistan while India has
imposed 80 percent duty on its import.

Granting MFN status to India threatened Pakistani rice growers and traders with
the arrival of Indian rice in Pakistani markets, said President Basmati Growers
Association Hamid Malhi.

"We are not against MFN status being given to India but we want a level playing
field otherwise our trade will suffer huge losses, as there is no comparison in
import duty of the two countries," he said. Despite depreciation of the value of
the Pakistani rupee, business has not picked up mainly because of a simultaneous
depreciation of the Indian rupee and increase in the domestic cost of production
due to increase in prices of seed, fuel, fertiliser, insecticides, pesticides
and farm wages.

Vice Chairman Rice Exporters Association of Pakistan Safdar Mehkri said that
India had affected their exports to the Middle East and Gulf countries as it was
selling rice at cheaper prices as compared to Pakistan. Iran was a big market
for Pakistani rice but due to international sanctions trade was affected.
Payment became an issue because banking structure was not available, he said.

Pakistan grows approximately 6.25 million tons of rice, which had increased from
five million tons during the last 10 years. "Increase in the crop size shows
that farmers are getting benefits despite the fact that input cost increased
many times during this period," he said.

President Union of Small and Medium Enterprises (UNISAME) Zulfikar Thaver said
the SME rice exporters were put out of business due to an increase in prices in
finer varieties in the local market while shippers were not securing orders.

At this rate, rice exports would suffer and unless the cost of production was
reduced growers would not be in a position to lower the prices to enable
exporters to compete with India, he said.

Pakistani farmers say that India is far ahead of Pakistan in technology. Jawad
said that Indian farmers were far more educated than Pakistani farmers. Their
decisions were usually timely and effective, he added.

"The major reason for this success is the IT industry that has placed India high
on the pedestal of the international business community," he said. India could
become a large market for Pakistani oranges. According to an estimate, Pakistan
can export 400,000 tons of these to India, annually. This export would fetch
$1.2 billion in the next two years. India is also the largest importer of
Pakistani dates. Last year India imported dates worth three billion rupees and
Pakistan could raise this by an extra billion quite easily, he said.

Pakistan can export products such as cotton yarn, chaunsa mango and vegetables
to meet the Indian demand Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right
Vision News. For any query with respect to this article or any other content
requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              715 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 6, 1988 Saturday

July jobless rate pushed up by student influx

BYLINE: ALISON PIPA; GAM

LENGTH: 1243 words

DATELINE: Ottawa ONT


BY  ALISON PIPA
 The Globe and Mail
  OTTAWA
  An influx of young people into the labor market pushed the unemployment
rate in July to its highest level since January, but that might worry
politicians more than economists.

Statistics Canada reported that the seasonally adjusted unemployment
rate rose to 7.9 per cent in July. That was up 0.3 percentage points from
the June rate of 7.6 per cent, which was the lowest in seven years.

Increases in the number of unemployed outpaced gains in employment. The
seasonally adjusted level of employment rose 25,000 in the month to an
estimated 12.36 million in July. However, in the same month, unemployment
rose by 46,000 to 1.06 million.

The labor force expanded in July to 13.42 million from 13.35 million in
June, mainly because of a steady flow of students into summer jobs. The
participation rate among people aged 15 to 24 jumped 1.3 percentage points
to 70 per cent, following the large decline recorded in June. As a result,
unemployment among young people rose sharply, up 0.8 percentage points to
12 per cent.

For people 25 and over, the participation rate - the number of people
in the labor force expressed as a percentage of the population - remained
at 66 per cent. Unemployment for the same age group increased only 0.1
percentage points to 6.8 per cent.

In general, Statscan makes adjustments to take into account the
summertime surge in the labor force caused by students looking for work.
However, many economists say that on a statistical basis, July is a
volatile month and therefore the figures should be interpreted carefully.

"July has always been a volatile month," said Michael McCracken,
president of Ottawa-based Informetrica Ltd. "Even with seasonally adjusted
data, you get these kinds of movements caused by changes in the number of
people deciding to stay in or out of the labor force."

He said that on a three-month moving average basis, the unemployment
rate for men aged 15 to 24 continued to improve in July, to 12.6 per cent
from 12.7 per cent in June. On the traditional four-month moving average
basis used for women aged 15 to 24, unemployment also declined to 11 per
cent from 11.1 per cent.

According to Statscan economist Ken Bennett, the July unemployment
figures look negative mainly because of statistical aberrations that made
the June numbers unusually low.

"The June estimate (of unemployment) is not typical in either sampling
variability or in responses to the survey. The rate this month is more in
line with what we've seen recently," he said.

Mr. Bennett noted that slower growth in employment since the beginning
of the year is the main reason why unemployment has begun to stabilize
rather than continue to decline at the pace it did last year. In 1987, the
economy created an average of 40,000 jobs a month. By contrast, employment
in the first seven months of this year grew an average of only 25,000 jobs
a month.

Last month, Finance Minister Michael Wilson suggested that the low
unemployment rate registered in June was a signal that the federal
Government's economic policies were successful. The move up to 7.9 per
cent unemployment in July, the highest level since January's 8.1 per cent,
could be bad news for the Government if it is considering calling an
election soon.

However, Mr. McCracken said that even with slower employment growth,
the Government does not have to worry yet.

"There is nothing in these numbers that suggests a move into a
recession. The regional distribution of these employment figures are
certainly not bleak. Some of the provinces whose economies were hot (such
as Ontario and Quebec) are cooling, while unemployment in some parts of
Atlantic Canada and British Columbia is dropping."

Only Nova Scotia, Saskatchewan and British Columbia posted decreases in
their unemployment rates, while Prince Edward Island's remained unchanged.

Among the various sectors of the economy, only agriculture and
manufacturing saw gains in employment. Primary industries other than
agriculture, as well as transportation, communications and other
utilities, and public administration all registered decreased employment
in July.
July unemployment rates for major cities, with June figures in brackets,
included: St. John's 11.1 (12.4); Halifax 7.8 (6.9); Saint John 11.3 (9.5)
; Chicoutimi-Jonquiere 8.9 (10.3); Quebec 7.7 (6.3); Trois-Rivieres 9.1
(7.0); Montreal 10.6 (9.2); Ottawa-Hull 4.7 (4.3); Sudbury 11.5 (10.1);
Oshawa 4.5 (4.4); Toronto 4.3 (3.7); Hamilton 4.9 (5.4); St. Catharines-
Niagara 3.7 (5.1); London 4.1 (3.4); Windsor 7.8 (7.6); Kitchener-Waterloo
4.6 (6.4); Thunder Bay 6.7 (5.3); Winnipeg 7.6 (7.5); Regina 6.5 (6.7);
Saskatoon 8.1 (8.7); Calgary 8.9 (7.9); Edmonton 8.6 (7.3); Vancouver 10.0
(9.8); Victoria 9.7 (9.8).
EMPLOYMENT FIGURES
  Statistics Canada reported these actual job figures for July, compared
with the previous month and a year earlier (estimates in thousands):
                 July    June     July    July   June   July
                           1988     1988    1987      1988     1988   1987
CANADA
 Labor force                                  13,872   13,666   13,277
Employed                                      12,820   12,693   12,419
Unemployed                                     1,052      973    1,158
NEWFOUNDLAND
 Labor force                                     268      255      258
Employed                                         226      215      218
Unemployed                                        42       40       40
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND
 Labor force                                      68       67       66
Employed                                          61       61       59
Unemployed                                         7        6        7
NOVA SCOTIA
 Labor force                                     440      425      424
Employed                                         401      388      379
Unemployed                                        39       37       45
NEW BRUNSWICK
 Labor force                                     345      341      341
Employed                                         306      302      298
Unemployed                                        40       39       43
QUEBEC
 Labor force                                      3,501    3,445    3,453
Employed                                          3,172    3,149    3,104
Unemployed                                          329      295      350
ONTARIO
 Labor force                                      5,290    5,229    5,148
Employed                                          5,035    4,989    4,852
Unemployed                                          254      240      296
MANITOBA
 Labor force                                        553      545      545
Employed                                            512      509      510
Unemployed                                           34       36       35
SASKATCHEWAN
 Labor force                                        507      499      514
Employed                                            473      468      475
Unemployed                                           34       31       38
ALBERTA
 Labor force                                      1,339    1,324    1,307
Employed                                          1,230    1,229    1,181
Unemployed                                          109       95      125
BRITISH COLUMBIA
 Labor force                                      1,560    1,537    1,522
Employed                                          1,404    1,383    1,344
Unemployed                                          157      154      178

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1988 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              716 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                   Al-Shorfa

                             July 10, 2014 Thursday

Jordan agricultural exports drop due to Syrian crisis: report

LENGTH: 172  words


The Syrian crisis and the influx of refugees to Jordan have disrupted
agriculture and food trade and led to a loss in exports according to an
international report, the Jordan Times reported Wednesday (July 9th).

The crisis led to a 25% decrease in Jordan's agricultural exports to Syria and a
30% decline in agricultural imports, affecting farmers and traders, according to
a UN Development Programme and Overseas Development Institute report, "Towards a
resilience-based response to the Syrian refugee crisis".

"Commerce with Syria has been cut dramatically, affecting the economies of
neighbouring countries and also individuals who turned to Syria as a source of
employment, goods and services," the report said.

The fiscal impact of the crisis on the kingdom's education, health, electricity
and water sectors exceeded $850 million in just two years (2012-2013), it added.

Earlier this month, the UNHCR and the government called on the international
community to step up assistance to enable Jordan to deal with the impact of the
crisis.


LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 851


                            Copyright 2014 Al-Shorfa
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              717 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Weekly Times (Australia)

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FIRST Edition

Kiwis chase cash cow across the Tasman

BYLINE: MEGAN McNAUGHT

SECTION: DAIRY; Pg. 110

LENGTH: 428  words


INDUSTRY WELCOMES NEW PLAYERS

NEW Zealand dairy farmers are coming to Australia in droves -- and they are
being welcomed with open arms by the Australian dairy industry.

Australia has always been a popular location for NZ farmers, according to
industry members, but they have been coming in growing numbers recently.

More affordable land prices, quality of life and a better cash flow were a few
of the reasons offered for the growing trend.

The Tasmanian industry is also cashing in on foreign investor interest in
Australian dairy farms.

Last week the industry launched Dairy 500, an alliance with factories, industry
and government, which aims to attract investment from Europe and NZ and increase
production by 25 per cent over five years.

Australian Dairy Farmers president Allan Burgess was not surprised by the influx
from NZ.

''The Kiwis have their own challenges at the moment, with land prices,'' he
said. ''Land is much more affordable in Australia at the moment.''

He said he saw the trend as a positive development.

''It is hard to see a downside,'' he said.

''At a time when the growth of our national production is flat, getting people
from outside this country to invest in the industry is one option we are looking
at to increase milk production.''

United Dairyfarmers of Victoria president Doug Chant also believes the NZ
migration is good for the Australian industry.

''It has been happening for a number of years but more are coming at this point
in time,'' he said.

''All of the milk factories are operating below capacity so anything that helps
with throughput so factories can pass money on to farmers is a good thing.''

Fonterra Australia is also aware of the trend and Australian representatives
have a stall at the Mystery Creek Field Days in NZ.

Fonterra milk supply manager Steve Nelson said attracting overseas investment
was a good way of growing milk supply in Australia.

''New Zealanders have always been quick to recognise an opportunity for
investment,'' he said.

''Australia offers good return on capital invested and also easier access in
terms of entry costs.''

Warrnambool Cheese and Butter Factory is also welcoming the influx of NZ
farmers.

Managing director John McLean said the team of field officers was currently in
NZ recruiting suppliers.

The team was holding two meetings and expected at least 60 farmers to attend
each of them.

''If anyone is thinking of coming over then we just explain there are a range of
options over here,'' he said.

''It is all part of the battle for milk.

''We see this as an opportunity to help us grow our milk supply.''

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: WKT


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              718 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                              May 27, 2012 Sunday

Climate coup: King of mangoes set to lose its crown to kesar

BYLINE: Himanshu Bhatt & Melvyn Thomas

SECTION: AHMEDABAD

LENGTH: 304 words


VALSAD: Here is some sour news for mango lovers. Valsadi hafoos (alphonso),
considered the king of mangoes, is losing its crown to kesar.

In fact, mango farmers in south Gujarat, which contributes nearly 60% of the
total mango produce in Gujarat, say days are not far when Valsadi hafoos may go
off the shelves. The vagaries of climate have hit hafoos the most and
maintaining a Valsadi hafoos orchard is becoming a costly affair.

This has forced a large number of mango farmers to switch to kesar, whose
maintenance cost is half that of hafoos.

Upkeep of a Valsadi hafoos orchard of 2,500 trees costs Rs 22 lakh to Rs 25 lakh
for a farmer, while that for kesar is Rs 10 lakh to Rs 12 lakh.

"Growing Valsadi hafoos is a gamble now. You lose four out of five times because
of onslaught of climate changes," said Baalu Desai, a farmer in Navsari.

The influx of Valsadi hafoos in Gadat Agriculture Marketing Co-operative Society
(GAMCS) in Navsari, one of the biggest markets of south Gujarat for this
particular variety, has declined sharply from 35,000 tonnes a year to just 8,000
tonnes. The share of hafoos has come down to 8% in the total mango produce from
35%.

N L Patel, head of horticulture department, Navsari Agriculture University
(NAU), said, "It is a fact that many mango farmers in the region have shifted to
kesar. A minor change in temperature leads to immediate withering of flowers and
fruits in hafoos." Rajesh Shah, an award winning mango farmer from Kannadu
Biliya village in Vapi taluka, said, "After five to six years, one may not know
the real taste of Valsadi hafoos.".

Kishore Desai, board member of GAMCS, said, "Hafoos is on the verge of
extinction."

"These days having a tree or two (of hafoos) is a status symbol for farmers,"
said Sanjay Naik, a mango farmer in Gandeva.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              719 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                Daily News Egypt

                             April 20, 2012 Friday

African migrants flood Israel after perilous treks

LENGTH: 1188 words


JERUSALEM: Hrity spent three months chained to half a dozen people on a basement
floor, beaten with sticks and chains that gave off electric shocks, on a ration
of just a spoonful of rice a day.

Now in Israel, the 26-year-old migrant from Eritrea said she was freed only
after a $30,000 ransom was delivered in cash to Israeli accomplices of her
Bedouin Arab captors.

"I can't believe I survived it all. I still feel very weak and dizzy just
standing sometimes," she said, telling the story of her captivity and journey
across Egypt's Sinai desert, translated by her cousin Teklezghi, also a migrant
in Israel, who borrowed from her parents and friends to pay for her freedom.

Some 60,000 African migrants fleeing authoritarian rule in Eritrea and fighting
in neighboring Sudan and what is now South Sudan have crossed illegally into
Israel across the relatively porous desert border with Egypt.

Half of them arrived in the past two years - more than 3,500 since January alone
- and growing numbers of homeless migrants are camped out in Israeli city parks.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has vowed "to stop this flood we are all
witnessing".

Hrity is settled for the moment with Teklezghi in rented quarters in Jerusalem's
walled Old City, but her flight for safety may not be over.

The influx of African migrants has fed into a larger Israeli concern about
maintaining a Jewish majority population, an issue which has led to policies
that limit eligibility for citizenship in Israel. Jewish immigrants are
automatically given citizenship but that option is not open to most African
migrants.

Some of the thousands of laborers imported from Asia and Latin America to work
in the agriculture sector or caring for the elderly and infirm have also been
denied permanent residence or citizenship, even for family members born in
Israel.

Since January, Israeli law has been amended further to punish migrants caught
entering illegally with up to three years in jail. A detention centre near the
Egyptian border is being enlarged to accommodate thousands more inmates.

"These people aren't refugees, they are first and foremost infiltrators to
Israel," said Yossi Edelstein, a senior Interior Ministry official, reflecting
Israel's official view.

'Infiltrators'

Israel is not the first choice of destinations for many African migrants. Most
head to the country because it can be reached overland and because European
countries have become more strict about letting asylum-seekers in, Edelstein
said in an interview.

The recent fighting in Libya and cases of treacherous seas claiming African
victims travelling on rickety boats have exacerbated the situation and
encouraged even more to flee toward Egypt and finally wind up in Israel.

Israeli humanitarian aid groups, some with help from local authorities and the
UN refugee agency, UNHCR, have opened soup kitchens and shelters to accommodate
the most dire cases, especially women with infants and small children.

"We are on the verge of collapse from the demand," said Tamar Schwartz, director
of Mesila, a Tel Aviv aid group.

Physicians for Human Rights operates a clinic in the southern reaches of Tel
Aviv where many migrants congregate. Many migrant women seek abortions after
having been raped during their trek, and some are treated for gunshot wounds
suffered on their journeys, officials at the clinic said.

Edelstein said Israel was trying to stop the illegal influx - a fortified fence
is under construction along its Sinai border with Egypt to keep out the migrants
as well as armed infiltrators - and says it is trying to find places where
African migrants could be deported safely.

So far about 1,000 Sudanese, offered $1,000 apiece, have agreed to leave Israel
voluntarily, Edelstein said.

Israel had planned to seek the repatriation of some hundreds of South Sudanese,
but may put those plans on hold given the latest fighting between that country
and neighboring Sudan, with whom it split just last year.

In response to legal challenges from human rights groups, the Israeli government
has pledged to its Supreme Court that it will not punish employers who hire
African migrants. The promise effectively allows the migrants to work, but only
on temporary visas, not formal work permits, and only pending further policy
decisions.

An Israeli legislative committee session on the issue recently discussed the
possibility of Israel permitting migrant workers to replace imported labor from
abroad, though immigration officials insist they would not agree to such a move.

Parliament speaker Reuven Rivlin, a member of Netanyahu's right-wing Likud
party, thought Israel had a "sacred obligation" to help displaced people given
that it was founded as a haven for Jews after centuries of persecution, minutes
of that meeting show.

"We are a people that know to respect a person fleeing his country for fear of
his life," Rivlin said.

But he added the swelling numbers of migrants posed a "strategic" problem for
Israel, and urged steps to ensure "these people seeking political asylum are
rescued, but that this doesn't involve a chance for them to seek Israeli
citizenship."

Looking for a way out

When Hrity left Eritrea in July 2010, she had no clear destination in mind but
was vaguely considering Europe.

She travelled to neighboring Sudan, where she paid $1,000 to pay off a gang that
threatened her with rape, and then went on to Khartoum. Later she tried to flee
to Juba, the capital of South Sudan, but she said Bedouin Arabs abducted her en
route and took her to the Sinai.

"I wanted to go to Europe but I was taken to Sinai. I didn't want to come to
Israel," Hrity said in an interview, asking that her last name not be used.

She said she was kept in a basement with other women and children, and that she
was sometimes forced along with the other women to undress before being beaten.

During three months in captivity, she was branded with metal rods or tied to a
pole, she said. Her captors also beat the bottoms of her feet and forced her to
phone her cousin Teklezghi in Jerusalem so he could hear her screams.

Human rights activists in Israel have taken similar testimony from other women
migrants.

It took Teklezghi several weeks to raise her ransom. Her parents sold their home
in Eritrea for about $10,000 and he borrowed the rest from fellow migrants in
Israel.

Israeli police have arrested a suspect who has been identified by Teklezghi and
other migrants as the man who took the cash from them so their relatives in
Sinai could go free.

The suspect, an Israeli Arab, has since been charged with extorting tens of
thousands of dollars in ransom for Hrity and other Eritrean nationals and
transferring the money to their captors in Egypt.

Court papers called the suspect a "main link" in a suspected criminal gang also
alleged to be based in Palestinian territory.

Several weeks after her experiences, Hrity seems too dazed to think about the
future.

She works day jobs, wrapping sandwiches at an eatery and cleaning homes, hoping
to make enough money to repay her ransom debt to her family and friends.

"I don't know how I could ever repay them all, even if I work for 10 years," she
said.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 11


         Copyright 2012 Daily News Egypt - Egyptian Media Services Ltd.
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              720 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Daily Post (North Wales)

                            August 7, 2014 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Keep your diseased cattle out of Wales

SECTION: FARM AND COUNTRY;FEATURES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 183 words


THE Welsh Government wants a crackdown on the influx of potentially infected
cattle from England.

Testing cattle before they arrive in Wales could help control bovine TB, said
deputy agriculture minister Rebecca Evans.

She has written to Defra secretary Liz Truss highlighting concerns that Wales'
strict testing regime could be compromised by England's more relaxed approach.

Mrs Evans wants Defra to remove England's pre-movement testing exemption for
cattle that are tested every three to four years.

It follows an incident earlier this year which saw cattle from Cumbria being
moved across Britain before testing positive for bovine TB.

Mrs Evans said: "All herds in Wales are subject to an annual bovine TB test, but
many herds in low risk areas in England are only tested once every four years.

"While I appreciate the testing regime in England has been designed to reflect
the local disease picture, it does mean that cattle can potentially be moved
from England into Wales without ever having been tested for TB."

Mrs Evans urged Welsh farmers to buy only animals which have been pre-movement
tested.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DPW


                       Copyright 2014 Trinity Mirror plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              721 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                      South China Morning Post (Hong Kong)

                                  June 7, 2000

Beidaihe's triple cocktail dilemma

BYLINE: Willy Wo-Lap Lam

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1132 words


EVERY SUMMER, the eyes of China watchers are glued to a choice strip of sand in
the Bohai Sea called Beidaihe, where Communist Party leaders hold a series of
informal meetings on matters of state. Seldom, however, does the agenda mean so
much for the nation - and carry such long-term significance - than this year.

The three major items to be discussed are the World Trade Organisation (WTO),
development of the western provinces, and Taiwan. As with previous years, the
Beidaihe conferences are due to start about August 10. Yet preparation work
already started last month, a few weeks earlier than usual.

How the mainland will prepare itself for the onslaught of multinationals will
dominate the economic agenda. As Premier Zhu Rongji, who is overseeing
preparations for the WTO, said recently: "The wolf is really coming, but many
people still don't get it." Or, as a senior minister put it in a WTO-related
meeting in Beijing last week: "There is too much fear and too little solid
work." Translation: most ministries and regional administrations are afraid of
the socio-economic impact of the influx of foreign goods and services. Yet not
enough has been done to ensure that domestic industry, agriculture and the
services will survive - and perhaps even prosper - in the climate of
globalisation.

As Mr Zhu reiterated, however, time is running out. China only has a grace
period of two to three years before the barriers come down and multinationals in
areas ranging from agriculture to telecommunications rush in.

Top priority is being given to nurturing state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and
other economic entities so they will not be knocked out by the global giants. As
one Beijing-based think-tank member put it, the ministries are engineering a
rash of mergers to create conglomerates that can take on foreign behemoths.

This applies especially to areas such as finance, where SOEs have little
experience but where multinationals have a big edge.

For example, in anticipation of the gradual opening of the securities field, a
number of state stock brokerages, including those under the commercial banks,
will be merged so that they can better compete with multinationals. The think
-tank economist, however, cited a number of difficulties. Corporate marriages,
particularly when accomplished under executive orders, often do not make for
efficiency. Often, political factors such as lobbying by regional cadres and
party factions play a big role in the State Council's decision on how many
"world-class conglomerates" will be set up and where they will be located. More
importantly, there is a disturbingly large number of cadres who, having never
agreed to join the WTO so soon, insist that the best way out will be to erect
open, as well as hidden, barriers. Some regional cadres have told Beijing they
cannot guarantee law and order within their jurisdictions because of the
unemployment problem that will be generated.

Analysts said that during the Beidaihe meetings, President Jiang Zemin and Mr
Zhu, who made the unpopular decision on early WTO accession, have to thrash out
a national consensus on how to meet perhaps the most daunting challenge the
nation will face in the first decade of the new century.

The second issue to be tackled, the development of the 11 western areas, will be
no less formidable. And WTO accession may have complicated an already difficult
problem. As a Chongqing-based planner put it, influx of capital - perhaps the
single most tangible benefit of WTO membership - will benefit eastern China much
more than the west.

However, the arrival of the multinationals will deprive the west of its rarest
commodity: talent. "A fierce battle has already erupted between multinationals
and coastal SOEs for engineers and English-speaking managers," the planner said.
"Very few government departments or companies in the west can come up with the
money and the job prospects to lure top-flight personnel."

More than half a year after the announcement of the revive-the-west programme,
little headway has been made in attracting foreign companies or east China
-based SOEs to invest in destitute provinces and regions such as Guizhou,
Ningxia or Tibet. A State Council source said Beijing had, via executive decree,
designated about 100 SOEs as "pioneers in rebuilding the west". Yet how much
money they will be prepared to commit to projects in the west remains one of the
questions to be handled on the hot sands of Beidaihe.

Taiwan remains a wild card. This is evident from the following contradiction. Mr
Jiang and Mr Zhu have speeded up the accession process partly with the belief
that, with the WTO under its belt, Beijing will have more flexibility in using
methods including military options against Taiwan. However, reunification, if
accomplished by force, could negate the bulk of the economic gains that will
accrue from WTO.

In the run-up to Beidaihe, hawks including the generals have urged tough tactics
in view of the fact that WTO membership will at least partially shield the
mainland from the sanctions that the West would impose on China following an
armed "liberation" of Taiwan. Mr Zhu and State Councillor Wu Yi, among others,
have cautioned against impetuosity. For example, the premier recently indicated
that "rash action (against Taiwan) will jeopardise many years of work" in
integration with the international market.

Even moderate cadres, however, are giving views that would ordinarily be
considered hawkish. For example, a senior minister had this to say about the
temporary abstinence from the use of force. "For strategic reasons, we must
withdraw our fist. Yet we are pulling back our fist so that we can strike back
harder."

The Beidaihe meetings will decide whether the PLA should finalise its "war
preparations" or whether Beijing should reciprocate the peace feelers proffered
by Taiwan president Chen Shui-bian, such as restarting dialogue between
quasi-official bodies. Mr Jiang is said to be leaning towards a more moderate
path. During his sojourn to Shanghai last month, Mr Jiang asked the mainland's
chief Taiwan negotiator, Wang Daohan, to remain in office for two more years.

Less sanguine observers on Taiwan fear that despite Mr Chen having given no
excuse to Beijing to start warfare, the Jiang administration may go for an
irrational course because of an unforeseen domestic crisis.

The pessimists say that if unemployment worsens significantly after joining the
WTO - and demonstrations by workers and farmers snowball into a national crisis
- there is a temptation by the party leadership to use a war with Taiwan to
divert attention and to re-impose control.

Willy Wo-Lap Lam is a Post associate editor

willy@scmp.com

Graphic: beach7gfa

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                  Copyright 2000 South China Morning Post Ltd.


                              722 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           November 15, 2012 Thursday

NZ placed to reap rewards in an eco-conscious world

SECTION: NEWS; General

LENGTH: 810 words


Mandatory emissions standards for new vehicles, an electrical "smart grid" and a
stocktake of our clean green image are among a raft of ways New Zealand could
benefit itself and tap into a global green economy projected to top $3.6
trillion by 2050.

A report released today by the University of Auckland Business School and
consultancy Vivid Economics proposes an ambitious blueprint for "green growth",
with homegrown export potential ranging from sustainable agricultural products
and geothermal energy to second-generation biofuels.

It has found New Zealand could benefit from green investment in two main ways -
exporting to countries investing in green assets and technology and importing
new technology and ideas to boost world-leading policies here.

It makes recommendations for our major industry sectors, including tourism,
agriculture and forestry and envisages an energy-efficient electricity network
and eco-friendly buildings.

The report backs improving standards and infrastructure to meet an influx of
electric cars, urges investment in public transport and second-generation
biofuels, and proposes mandatory light vehicle emission standards for new
vehicles.

Other findings echo those of another high-level report presented to the
Government"s Green Growth Advisory Board last year.

The economic potential in global green growth is vast - the market to supply
low-carbon power and building technology could be worth more than $3.6 trillion
in 40 years, while opportunities in low-carbon power alone could be $465 billion
a day, spread across a range of technologies.

But one of the key authors and former special adviser to the Australian
Government, Kathryn Smith, told the Herald it was the wellbeing of New
Zealanders, not economic gains, that was the report"s main focus.

The country was already well placed to action many of the recommendations.

"I know New Zealanders are rightly proud of a lot of their environmental
performance, but there is a lot of scope to do better," she said.

"That will not just improve the environment for future generations, but will
also have other benefits like lower fuel emissions, more comfortable homes and
higher-producing industries - there"s a lot to build on."

Opposition parties have urged the Government to adopt the measures.

Pure Advantage, a lobby group formed by top business leaders, believes New
Zealand has the potential to generate billions of dollars in new high-value
economic growth while improving the environment.

Yet the opportunities presented in the report have not been fully realised,
according to the group"s chairman, Rob Morrison.

"If they had been realised, we would already be seeing significant economic and
environmental gains - but as of yet we are not."

Mr Morrison said it was industry that would be taking the next steps, with
action coming after "concerted and focused discussions" at boardroom level.

Professor Jacqueline Rowarth, professor of agribusiness at the University of
Waikato, especially agreed with recommendations to boost research and
development and retain high-level support for the country"s brand. Anything less
was "economic treason".

University of Canterbury senior economics lecturer Dr Eric Crampton saw much to
like in the report but had some concerns.

"I worry that some of the identified opportunities may impose cost well in
excess of potential benefit."

Dr Crampton cited "perverse effects" that regulatory mandates could have on
building, with energy-efficiency standards discouraging people from renovating
their homes.

He said imposing carbon dioxide emission standards on New Zealand vehicles, when
the country did not make vehicles, mostly shifted to other countries used cars
New Zealanders would have bought.

"We already have seen evidence of reduced used car availability and higher
prices consequent to the Government"s recent regulatory measures that
effectively barred Japanese imports produced prior to 2005," he said.

"Further, shifting towards greater use of electric cars because of New Zealand"s
low electricity emissions-intensity would only work if we were able
substantially to expand our base of hydroelectric or geothermal generation."

What is green growth?

*The definition of green growth varies, but the report released today defines it
as "growth which maintains or improves wellbeing while staying within ecological
constraints".

*A report prepared for a Government advisory group last year stated green growth
began "with realisation that economic growth and environmental sustainability go
hand-in-hand - and that this needs to be increasingly reflected in policies and
actions". And the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
has defined it as "fostering economic growth and development while ensuring that
the natural assets continue to provide the resources and environmental services
on which our well-being relies".

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              723 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          PNG Post-Courier (Australia)

                             April 19, 2010 Monday
                                   1 Edition

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 246 words


from page one

"Many plantations and blocks are not ready to offer better incentives for the
general labourers and casuals. The influx of labourers migrating to Southern
Highlands will have a severe impact on our coffee plantations," he warned.

Mr Temon said many plantations and processors were not ready to keep coffee
pickers from leaving during the coffee season. He said the anticipated labour
shortage would result in cherries rotting away on trees. The Western Highlands
is the country's largest coffee producer, accounting for between 42 to 46 per
cent (CIC - Coffee Report No. 34) of the country's annual exports. This yearly
production rate directly represents about K250 million in export earnings that
Mr Temon feared would likely drop in the years ahead due to the imminent labour
shortage.

He proposed that a strategic plan should be established by the CIC and the
Agriculture Department to deter the anticipated exodus of labourers moving to
the LNG project.

He added that there were about 80 coffee plantations, 50 blocks of 10 to 30
hectares and 350,000 smallholder growers in the province. Mr Temon, who owns the
60-hectare Koibuga Plantation, said his concerns were serious as the exodus of
labourers would affect the industry if nothing constructive was done to stop the
exodus.

He said over the past 10 years coffee accounted for more than 40 per cent of
total agricultural exports and 12 per cent including minerals and 5 per cent to
gross domestic product (GDP).

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PTC


                   Copyright 2010 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              724 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                            June 19, 1991 Wednesday
                                  Late Edition

Africa needs food to save millions of lives- UN

BYLINE: Peter Stephens

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 578 words


A United Nations agency warned yesterday that without huge donations of
emergency food aid from countries such as Australia, the death toll in Africa's
famine may exceed three million.

The Food and Agriculture Organisation of the UN said yesterday that despite
early warning of the widespread food shortage in Africa, donations of aid had
lagged behind levels in previous famine years.

At least 5.5 million tonnes of food were needed to stave off the effects of the
drought, the FAO said, but just 3.3 million tonnes had been pledged by countries
and donor organisations.

The FAO report indicates that the famine will hit hardest in Ethiopia, Sudan,
Mozambique, Somalia, Liberia and Angola. Other countries facing serious food
shortages include Burkina Faso, Chad, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Guinea, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mauritania, Niger, Sierra Leone and Uganda.

Virtually all these countries are affected by the drought and, in many cases,
the food shortage has been compounded by an influx of refugees, civil war and
bad economic policies.

The FAO estimates that civil strife and famine have created 3.5 million refugees
and left more than five million people displaced within their own national
borders.

In some cases, countries are almost exchanging one problem for another, as
Somalian refugees flee to Ethiopia and Ethiopian refugees cross into Somalia.

In southern Africa, crop production is below average this year, leaving little,
if anything, for distribution to the starving north, the FAO said. "Production
will decline in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Madagascar, Mozambique and Lesotho; no
country in the sub-region will have exportable surpluses available in 1991.

Thus, the current food aid to Africa must come from donor stocks in the United
States, European Economic Community, Canada, Argentina and Australia.

"Unless there is a massive acceleration of the flow of food aid to the affected
populations, we are going to see widespread deaths from starvation between now
and the next harvest at the end of the year," the director-general of the FAO,
Mr Edouard

Saouma, said in a statement released in Washington.

Mr Saouma also warned that, just at the time when millions of Africans needed
most help, the world seemed to be suffering from boredom with repeated calls for
donations.

"The danger is that Africa could become the forgotten continent," he said. "The
international community is becoming aid-weary." A senior official at the World
Bank supported the FAO's findings, saying that as many as 15 million people were
at risk in Ethiopia and Sudan alone.

The chief of food security for the African region, Mr Harry Walters, said that
for many in the developed world, news of another drought in Africa was "a little
like the boy crying wolf".

Aid organisations, and often the governments of the countries affected by
drought, did not respond quickly enough to these "slow onset disasters".

Mr Walters said it seemed sometimes that "people have to start dying on
television before the aid arrives".

He said the latest drought had convinced the World Bank that it had to do more
to prepare for such disasters. Droughts happened so often that they should be
included in the bank's long-term planning for the region.

The FAO said that since 1961, food production in Africa had declined on a per
capita basis by 20 per cent.

"The overall situation couldn't be worse for these countries," Mr Saouma said.
"Every minute, every hour there is a delay, hope dims and lives are being lost."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 1991 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              725 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                   West Central Tribune (Willmar, Minnesota)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             May 20, 2015 Wednesday

Kandiyohi County serves as state bird flu response hub

BYLINE: Carolyn Lange, West Central Tribune, Willmar, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 738 words


May 20--WILLMAR -- Kandiyohi County is not only the epicenter of a deadly bird
flu that has already affected nearly 8 million turkeys and chickens in
Minnesota, but the county is also the hub for state and federal response teams
that are coordinating the testing, euthanizing and cleanup of farms in 21
counties that have been hit with the virus.

By all accounts, the county has done a good job of hosting as many as 200
employees from the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the state Department of
Agriculture and nearly 100 computers at its emergency operations center in
Willmar during the course of the outbreak.

"It's phenomenal," said Dr. Rick Riesland, an incident management supervisor
with the USDA.

During a presentation Tuesday to the County Board, Riesland said Kandiyohi
County is a "role model" for how a community can respond to this type of an
emergency.

"Thank you, thank you, thank you," Riesland said. "We could not do it without
all the cooperation we've been getting."

Kevin Plante, with the Minnesota Department of Agriculture, praised local
businesses and employees from county departments who have been involved with the
process, especially Don Ericson and Kim Lindahl who supervise the county
emergency operations program,

"They've been phenomenal to work with," Plante said. "Kandiyohi County and
Willmar should be very proud of their people."

Ever since the bird flu hit Minnesota in early March, the county emergency
management facility, which is located in the law enforcement center in Willmar,
has been filling up with state and federal experts who have traveled to Willmar
from nearly every state to do the work.

Ericson said it's kind of like relatives coming for a holiday and deciding to
stay for three to four months.

That analogy was very close to the truth for Riesland, who lives in Wyoming and
arrived in Minnesota on Easter.

The influx of people and equipment has stretched the limits of the county
facility but everyone is "adjusting," Ericson said.

"Every little corner is utilized," said Commissioner Doug Reese, who was able to
take a tour recently.

The press has not been allowed inside the emergency center since the avian
response teams moved in.

When the county designed and built the law enforcement center about 15 years
ago, the commissioners thought the emergency operations area would be used for a
short-term crisis response to emergencies such as tornadoes.

Never in his wildest dreams did Commissioner Harlan Madsen think the facility
would be the home base for a massive statewide response to the deadly avian
influenza.

Of the 88 farms affected in the state, 33 are in Kandiyohi County.

"This is a life-changing event," Madsen said of the effect the virus has had on
the economic and social makeup of the community.

Madsen said he's grateful that county staff and leaders had the foresight to
build the emergency operations center as big as they did so that the community
was able to respond to this agricultural crisis.

Ericson said he intends to invite emergency management directors from other
counties to come here to witness the emergency operations area is run, which
could help those counties in a future situation when they may become the central
hub.

Although the number of new sites testing positive for avian influenza has
slowed, there is still much work to do as testing of birds and barns continue.

Because each situation is different, Riesland said the timeframe for returning
turkeys and chickens to disinfected barns varies. He said it's not uncommon for
the process to take two to six months before birds can be returned to barns.

"The recovery is going to be huge," Ericson said.

He said there are still many unknown factors about the highly pathogenic H5N2
avian influenza and what may happen next.

It's anticipated that warm, summer weather will help reduce instances of the
virus, but Riesland said "your guess is as good as anybody else's'' if the virus
will return again this fall.

What is known, he said, is that the virus does not affect food safety and so far
does not appear to affect human health.

Riesland said research is underway for a vaccine, but he said that process takes
many years and could have consequences for exporting poultry to countries that
won't accept meat that has been exposed to vaccines.

___ (c)2015 West Central Tribune (Willmar, Minn.) Visit West Central Tribune
(Willmar, Minn.) at www.wctrib.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150520-YM-Kandiyohi-County-serves-as-state-bird-flu-response-hub-0520-20150520

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YM


                      Copyright 2015 West Central Tribune


                              726 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                            April 20, 2011 Wednesday

Belgium: Development of rehabilitation technologies and approaches for
multipressured degraded waters and the integration of their impact on river
basin management

LENGTH: 366  words


Start date:2009-05-01
End date:2013-12-31
Project Acronym:AQUAREHAB
Project status:Execution
Duration:56 months
Project Reference:226565
Project cost:8582277 EURO
Project Funding:6584659 EURO
Within the AQUAREHAB project, different innovative rehabilitation technologies
for soil, groundwater and surface water will be developed to cope with a number
of hazardous (nitrates, pesticides, chlorinated and aromatic compounds, mixed
pollutions, ) within heavily degraded water systems. The technologies are
activated riparian zones/wetlands; smart biomass containing carriers for
treatment of water in open trenches; in-situ technologies to restore degraded
surface water by inhibiting influx of pollutants from groundwater to surface
water; multifunctional permeable barriers and injectable Fe-based particles for
rehabilitation of groundwater. Methods will be developed to determine the
(long-term) impact of the innovative rehabilitation technologies on the
reduction of the influx of these priority pollutants towards the receptor.


A connection between the innovative technologies and river basin management will
be worked out. In a first stage of the project, the technologies and integration
of their impact in river basin management will be developed in three different
river basins (Denmark, Israel, Belgium). In a second stage, the generic
approaches will be extrapolated to one or two more river basins. One of the
major outcomes of the project will be a generic river basin management tool that
integrates multiple measures with ecological and economic impact assessments of
the whole water system. The research in the project is focused on innovative
rehabilitation strategies to reduce priority pollutants in the water system
whereas the generic management tool will include other measures related to flood
protection, water scarcity and ecosystem health.
The project will aid in underpinning river basin management plans being
developed in EU Member States, and will demonstrate cost effective technologies
that can provide technical options for national and local water managers,
planners and other stakeholders (drinking water companies, industry,
agriculture.

country :Belgium
Ltd.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright Tenders Info 2011
                        Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              727 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Idaho Business Review (Boise, ID)

                               November 20, 2006

Growth in network of Magic Valley small towns has been good for Twin Falls
businesses

BYLINE: John M. Foster

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 732  words


Growth in the network of small towns that make up the Magic Valley has been good
for Twin Falls businesses. Con Paulos described Twin Falls as being "wildly on
track. " "I think we are becoming a boom town, to be very honest with you," said
Paulos, long-time owner of Magic Valley car dealerships. Residents from
Kimberly, Buhl, Jackpot - even Hailey and Bellvue - travel to Twin Falls for the
items they can't find in small towns.

In the old days that meant department stores and car dealers. Now it means
franchise retail and the mall. And as the Magic Valley's small towns are growing
with an influx of retirees and former Californians, they are fueling a boom in
Twin Falls. "We have a lot of new people moving into town, opening up
businesses, who are here from California," said Bob Ringer of Hammack
Management. "Three years ago there were quite a few empty spaces. One of our
shopping centers was 25 percent vacant. Now it's 3 or 4 percent vacant. " The
town is also growing beyond its traditional commercial footprint. For years it
was Blue Lakes Boulevard or nothing for a viable retail business. Now there's
new development on Pole Line Road not far from the canyon, and more is planned.
That's fueled in part by a widening of Pole Line, which will be officially
unveiled later this month. Mitch Humble was hired earlier this year as the
community development director for the city of Twin Falls. Last month he was in
the middle of a search for an economic development director for the town. "Since
I've been here, there hasn't been a whole lot of empty retail," Humble said with
a soft Texas drawl. New retail centers are in development, including one at
Washington and Pole Line, with Wal-Mart expected to be the anchor tenant. The
next nearest Wal-Mart is in Jerome, Humble said. A little west down Pole Line
from that development is a plot of land being considered for a retail
subdivision. The site has been zoned, Humble said, and preliminary platting was
done last month. As the hub city for the Magic Valley, Twin Falls has an influx
of people each day who work at the large employers that have found the town in
recent years. Solo Cup has a presence in the area. Jayco, a recreational vehicle
company, is expanding its production plant in Twin Falls, Humble said, and is
planning two more buildings in town. When Jayco opened the plant in Twin Falls
two years ago, the company projected 80 employees. Today the plant employs
almost 200, and the expansion may mean another 125 jobs. Dell, the computer
manufacturer, has a call center in Twin Falls that employs between 700 and 800,
Humble said. And the Magic Valley dairy industry has exploded with small family
spreads expanding to offer everything from artisan cheeses to raw material for
prepackaged macaroni and cheese. "That's the stuff we're happy about," he said.
Commercial facilities are no longer empty, and the average wage has climbed $2
per hour, Paulos said. "Unemployment has been as low as 2.5 percent," he said.
Paulos' car dealerships in Twin Falls and Jerome are growing, despite the fickle
nature of the industry. "Overall our businesses are very healthy," he said.
"We've seen substantial growth over the 27 years I've been there. " He's served
on the Twin Falls Chamber of Commerce board for five years. He served two terms
on the Jerome Chamber of Commerce and has twice been past president of that
group. He said the boom is a result of 25 years of focus on the economic
development of the region. Five years ago Jerome and Twin Falls joined together
in a regional effort to promote the area. The communities of the Mini-Cassia
region joined in, as did Buhl and other small towns. Even Blaine County to the
north participated, Paulos said. But it's Twin Falls that's felt the best of the
boom. It's allowing city officials to focus on projects the city has found
difficult to accomplish, like rejuvenating the classic downtown neighborhood.
Part of Humble's job is urban renewal, and the urban area there is to renew in
Twin Falls was an appealing part of his new job. Downtown Twin Falls is on the
south side of the city, far away from the freeway, canyon and retail traffic.
"There is so much potential there to be a great destination," he said. "When I
showed up in town for the job interview, the first time I was here, one of the
first things I sort of latched onto is this great, great downtown. "

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              728 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          Pretoria News (South Africa)

                             May 07, 2015 Thursday
                                   E1 Edition

Migration policy overhaul to deal with foreigner influx

BYLINE:  Siyabonga Mkhwanazi

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 490 words


South Africa's policy to contain the influx of illegal immigrants is being
reviewed with a new law in the works to cater for economic migrants.

For the first time in the history of the country there will be a policy on
economic migrants once the legislation has gone through all the pro-cesses and
approved by Parliament.

Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba told journalists at Parliament, before his
budget vote speech yesterday, that an extensive review of migration policy was
under way.

The country has a number of refugees and asylum seekers, but there is no policy
in place to accommodate thousands of economic migrants, who enter the country
every day.

This was confirmed by Gigaba yesterday when he said most of the foreign
nationals in the country come here because of better |opportunities.

Gigaba said the Green Paper on migration would be finalised by March next year.

Extensive consultations on this policy framework had been held with various
stakeholders, he said.

They have developed the structure of the Green Paper and it will have 10
chapters.

As South Africa did not have a policy on economic migrants, the economic
migrants entered the country illegally and clogged up the system on asylum
seekers.

Home Affairs records show that there were more than 330 000 immigrants, who
entered the country legally between 2010 and this year, but stayed on after
their visas had expired.

The policy framework would also address the issue of foreign students with
critical skills, and how the government could retain them, said Gigaba.

"You can't keep amending legislation when the broader policy framework does not
give you enough space," he said.

The minister said the new policy framework would be able to give the government
space to breath on economic migrants.

What the government was trying to do was to conduct an extensive review of the
migration policy.

Gigaba said the country's porous borders would also be fixed.

The establishment of the Border Management Agency (BMA) will bring together all
agencies, operating at the points of entry, under one roof.

He said the legislation on the agency would be brought before Parliament this
year.

He hoped the new law would be approved by Parliament next year for the agency to
start operating.

In the meantime, six points of entry will be identified to be used as pilot
projects for the new Border Management Agency.

The agency will integrate all government departments in the border posts, to
flush out syndicates, illegal immigrants and drug-dealers.

"We have 11 agencies operating at the points of entry, and operating as
individual departments, none of them taking an instruction from a single command
centre," said Gigaba.

However, this would come to an end once the Border Management Agency comes into
operation in 2017, he added.

It will include, among others, Home Affairs, the police, the defence force, the
South African Revenue Service and the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PN


                Copyright 2015 Independent Newspapers Pty (Ltd)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              729 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                THE KOREA HERALD

                              June 21, 2015 Sunday

Farmers hit by MERS, drought, FTA

LENGTH: 477 words


The spread of Middle East respiratory syndrome is battering the nation's
economy, which was showing signs of recovery, sapping consumer spending and
economic activity.

The agricultural sector is no exception. Experts said farmers were suffering
from a decrease in demand for agricultural products as people avoid crowded
places like department and discount stores.

According to the Korea Foodservice Industry Research Institute, local
restaurants reported an average 38.5 percent drop in sales from June 8 to 14,
negatively affecting the suppliers of food as well.

"The outbreak of MERS is also leading to cancellations of various tour programs
to provide rural life experiences, one of the major income sources for some
agricultural villages," a Seoul official said.

Severe drought dries up farmland in Gangwon Province, despite efforts to
artificially water the fields. (Yonhap)

According to news reports, about 90 percent of 840 "farm experience villages"
across the nation suffered cancellations after the MERS outbreak late last
month.

Making matters worse is the worst drought in almost four decades, which is
hitting the entire nation.

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs Lee Dong-phil vowed to muster
62.5 billion won ($56 million) to fight this year's drought. The money will
provide water to struggling farms.

Market watchers said the drought was expected to cause a surge in prices of
vegetables and other agricultural products.

The continued weak yen has also hit farms. According to the Agriculture
Ministry, outbound shipments of fresh and processed food products in May was
$480.4 million, down 8.1 percent from a year earlier.

Korea's farming industry is already facing difficulties as the nation is
preparing for more imports of rice, the nation's major staple, and an influx of
cheaper Chinese products as a result of bilateral free trade agreement.

Korea opened its rice market this year to foreign suppliers after ending its
20-year import quota system. The government said that it would set a 513 percent
tariff on imported rice. But five rice-exporting countries including the U.S.
and China have opposed it at the WTO, demanding a drastic cut to the tariff.

Korea concluded a free trade agreement with China, its largest trading partner.
The FTA is awaiting the National Assembly's ratification.

Recently, the government has infuriated farmers by announcing a plan to import
10,000 tons of "meal rice" which is not for industrial purposes.

Farmers are sensitive to the import of meal rice as it is expected to compete
with Korean products.

They argue that the government has no reason to import meal rice at a reduced
tariff, as the nation already opened its market at a 513 percent tariff. They
said the government must immediately call off the plan as it is feared to
further dent domestic rice prices.

By Chung Joo-won (joowonc@heraldcorp.c

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 The Korea Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              730 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                   The Robesonian (Lumberton North Carolina)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           November 10, 2015 Tuesday

City balks on solar farm

BYLINE: Sarah Willets, The Robesonian, Lumberton, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1081 words


Nov. 10--LUMBERTON -- Lumberton City Council members left their regular meeting
Monday night with an assignment.

"Do some homework on solar farms," Mayor Raymond Pennington told the group
following a lengthy public hearing on a proposed solar installation that ended
in gridlock and the matter being tabled until January.

Stone Solar Farm LLC is seeking to rezone about 56 acres of land off of Colony
Drive and Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, north of Popes Crossing Road, to build a
5-megawatt solar farm. The request was tabled after two failed motions, and a
second hearing on a conditional-use permit for the same project was not
conducted. Councilmen opposed to the rezoning cited concerns of nearby
residents, although no residents spoke against the project during the hearing or
at Planning Board meetings.

The proposed site is outside of city limits, but within Lumberton's
extraterritorial jurisdiction. Power would be sold to Duke Energy.

If approved, the installation would have the capacity to power 750 to 800
average homes for a year, according to Jerry Dudzik, chief operating officer for
Carolina Solar Energy, which plans to co-develop the site with Strata Solar.

Solar company representatives touted an influx of temporary jobs; added revenue
for local hotels, restaurants and equipment rental companies; the possibility of
tax revenue if the site is annexed into the city; and said they would leave no
trace of the installation when its 30-year life expectancy runs out.

"If the land wants to go back to agriculture, it can go back to agriculture.
That's why we don't use cement and chemicals out there. We take all the panels
out of every solar site unless that site is renewed," said Steve Petersen, an
attorney representing the developers.

Most of the surrounding land is vacant but Councilman John Cantey, who led the
charge to deny the rezoning request, said the farm would be an eyesore,
especially to Lovette Road residents.

Cantey said he visited the site on Monday and found that four families live
within one-tenth of a mile of the proposed farm. In total 26 families live
within nine-tenths of a mile, he said, and many don't want solar panels in their
backyards.

Tom Hester, a real estate appraiser who is licensed by the state, said during
the hearing that he has "not been able to find anywhere that being close to an
adjacent solar farm has any effect on property values."

Cantey also raised concerns about the potential health effects of solar farms --
an issue currently being weighed by Robeson County commissioners as well.
Planning Director Brandon Love told the council that during a recent Lumber
River Council of Governments seminar on solar farms, an expert with North
Carolina State University said there were no harmful effects.

Solar company representatives did not specifically address concerns about
radiation, but said residents would likely prefer living near a solar farm over
other uses allowed in the current zoning district.

"It's easy to sit or live in Raleigh and dictate what a resident on Lovette Road
would find offensive," Cantey said.

Cantey said he is "just not ready" to approve a solar farm in Lumberton,
particularly with Councilman Leon Maynor, who was not at the meeting, absent. A
solar farm is already operating on Old Whiteville Road.

A motion to deny the rezoning request failed by a 4-3 vote, with Precinct 8
Councilman Erich Hackney and Precinct 2 Councilman John Robinson supporting the
motion along with Cantey.

An alternate motion to pass the request failed after Councilman Robert Jones
flipped his vote. The solar companies will give their presentation again in
January.

"I thought it needed to be extended and have some more consideration before it
is decided. You need a little time to talk to people and explain to them what
it's about," Jone said after the meeing.

Outgoing members Pennington, Councilman Harry Ivey, Jones and Councilman Don
Metzger were honored during the meeting with remarks from the council and a
performance of "Glory, Hallelujah" by a choir from The Church of the Living God,
which received a Pride in Lumberton award at the start of the meeting.

Newly-elected council members will be sworn in Dec. 14.

In other business, the council:

-- Referred to the Planning Board a request to rezone property at 700 Roberts
Ave. to be used for retail development. The council also forwarded a
conditional-use permit request from Melvin Morris for an arts venue at that
location.

-- Approved the designation of the following Community Revitalization Funds:
$200 for pine straw for a median on Pinedale Boulevard; $2,000 to Communities in
Schools BakPak Pals program; $2,550 to the Toys 4 Kids program; and $1,300 for
Colors of Life for Thanksgiving and Christmas programs.

-- Referred to the Planning Board a request to rezone property at 2870 Kenny
Biggs Road for a trucking business, a barbershop and a salon.

-- Set a public hearing for Dec. 14 on annexing property on Harrill Road between
Hardin and Oak streets.

-- Authorized the city clerk to investigate requests to annex Sleepy Bears RV
Park on Kenric Road and property on Roberts Avenue between Old Whiteville Road
and Glisson Street.

-- Awarded the financing of several city vehicles to Lumbee Bank for five years
at 2.11 percent and seven years at 2.59 percent.

-- Authorized Public Works to appropriate $80,376 from the water and sewer
capital reserve fund for upgrades at the waste water treatment plant.

-- Authorized City Attorney Holt Moore to negotiate a potential real estate
purchase.

-- Tabled until January a request to rezone property at the intersection of
Flair Fold Drive and Caton Road for retail use.

-- Declared city property as surplus to be auctioned Dec. 29 at Lloyd Meekins &
Sons Auction Company.

-- Appointed Glen Heintz to the Robeson County Public Library board.

-- Voted to give city employees Dec. 23, Dec. 24 and Dec. 25 as paid days off.

-- Authorized the Electric Department to purchase a 2011 Ford Ranger for $12,999
to replace an outdated truck.

-- Authorized Electric Department to purchase two vacuum bus breakers for
$40,416.

-- Awarded permits for Sign City to place three hospital signs on West 27th
Street.

-- Proclaimed November Home Health Month in Lumberton.

-- Authorized the release of October property taxes.

Sarah Willets can be reached at 910-816-1974 or on Twitter @Sarah_Willets.

___ (c)2015 The Robesonian (Lumberton, N.C.) Visit The Robesonian (Lumberton,
N.C.) at www.robesonian.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20151110-QK-City-balks-on-solar-farm-1110-20151110

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QK


                         Copyright 2015 The Robesonian


                              731 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        The Balochistan Times (AsiaNet)

                            January 10, 2014 Friday

Qaim appreciates WB assistance for development of Karachi

SECTION: Vol. XXXVIII No. 10

LENGTH: 358  words


Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah has said that Karachi is very important
port city of Pakistan and the government has planned to mobilize its resources
to implement mega development projects to convert it into a most favourable city
of the World.

He said that better provision of clean drinking water, efficient sewerage,
sanitation and mass transit system were the main areas for investment to change
the face of the city.

This he said while talking to Rachid Benmessoud, Country Director of the World
Bank (WB), who called on him at CM House here on Thursday.

He said that though Sindh Government is trying its best and investing huge
amount for the development of the city, but as the city population is rapidly
increasing and has crossed  20 million due to influx from all over the country
and other countries of the world, foreign investment is required to achieve the
goals.

The Chief Minister appreciated contribution and financial assistance being
provided by World Bank for improvement in Education, Agriculture and Water
sectors.

He said that by investment of World Bank Financial Assistance upto $400 million
in Education Sector, $450 million in Agriculture and Water Sector considerable
improvement in the social development of the province is to be achieved.

He also appreciated the financial assistance of $66 million grant of the World
Bank for the management sector of education department under the global
partnership for education programme most probably be implemented in June 2014.

However, the Chief Minister invited the attention of the WB for further
assistance in development projects of Karachi.

He said that Sindh Government was investing huge amount to maintain law and
order in Karachi and trying its best to overcome this issue within shortest
possible time.

The Country Director of World Bank Rachid Benmessaoud, took keen interest in the
development of Karachi. He said that urbanization is long term and most
difficult subject and it needs leadership, and coordination among all
stakeholders to make it a success.

He also expressed satisfaction over the uplift work being carried out in the
metropolis with the WB funding.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 The Balochistan Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              732 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Patriot

                            January 10, 2014 Friday

Qaim appreciates WB assistance for development of Karachi

SECTION: Vol. 13 No. 10

LENGTH: 358  words


Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah has said that Karachi is very important
port city of Pakistan and the government has planned to mobilize its resources
to implement mega development projects to convert it into a most favourable city
of the World.

He said that better provision of clean drinking water, efficient sewerage,
sanitation and mass transit system were the main areas for investment to change
the face of the city.

This he said while talking to Rachid Benmessoud, Country Director of the World
Bank (WB), who called on him at CM House here on Thursday.

He said that though Sindh Government is trying its best and investing huge
amount for the development of the city, but as the city population is rapidly
increasing and has crossed  20 million due to influx from all over the country
and other countries of the world, foreign investment is required to achieve the
goals.

The Chief Minister appreciated contribution and financial assistance being
provided by World Bank for improvement in Education, Agriculture and Water
sectors.

He said that by investment of World Bank Financial Assistance upto $400 million
in Education Sector, $450 million in Agriculture and Water Sector considerable
improvement in the social development of the province is to be achieved.

He also appreciated the financial assistance of $66 million grant of the World
Bank for the management sector of education department under the global
partnership for education programme most probably be implemented in June 2014.

However, the Chief Minister invited the attention of the WB for further
assistance in development projects of Karachi.

He said that Sindh Government was investing huge amount to maintain law and
order in Karachi and trying its best to overcome this issue within shortest
possible time.

The Country Director of World Bank Rachid Benmessaoud, took keen interest in the
development of Karachi. He said that urbanization is long term and most
difficult subject and it needs leadership, and coordination among all
stakeholders to make it a success.

He also expressed satisfaction over the uplift work being carried out in the
metropolis with the WB funding.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2014 The Patriot
                              All Rights Reserved


                              733 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                            January 9, 2014 Thursday

Qaim appreciates WB assistance for development of Karachi

LENGTH: 366  words

DATELINE: KARACHI


Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah
has said that Karachi is very important port city of Pakistan
and the government has planned to mobilize its resources to implement
mega development projects to convert it into a most favourable city
of the World.


     He said that better provision of clean drinking water, efficient
sewerage, sanitation and mass transit system were the main areas for
investment to change the face of the city.
     This he said while talking to Rachid Benmessoud, Country
Director of the World Bank (WB), who called on him at CM House here on
Thursday.
     He said that though Sindh Government is trying its best and
investing huge amount for the development of the city, but as
the city population is rapidly increasing and has crossed
20 million due to influx from all over the country and other countries
of the world, foreign investment is required to achieve the goals.
     The Chief Minister appreciated contribution and financial
assistance being provided by World Bank for improvement in
Education, Agriculture and Water sectors.
     He said that by investment of World Bank Financial Assistance
upto $400 million in Education Sector, $450 million in Agriculture
and Water Sector considerable improvement in the social development
of the province is to be achieved.
     He also appreciated the financial assistance of $66 million grant
of the World Bank for the management sector of education department
under the global partnership for education programme most probably be
implemented in June 2014.
     However, the Chief Minister invited the attention of the WB for
further assistgance in development projects of Karachi.
     He said that Sindh Government was investing huge amount to
maintain law and order in Karachi and trying its best to overcome
this issue within shortest possible time.
      The Country Director of World Bank Rachid Benmessaoud, took keen
interest in the development of Karachi. He said that urbanization is
long term and most difficult subject and it needs leadership,
and coordination among all stakeholders to make it a success.
     He also expressed satisfaction over the uplift work being carried
out in the metropolis with the WB funding.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              734 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            December 2, 1994 Friday

LENGTH: 319 words


FARGO (AP) -- The North Dakota Farm Bureau wants to allow non-farmers in the
state to invest in large-scale livestock farms. The Farm Bureau passed a
resolution at its convention Wednesday in Fargo in favor of an exemption to the
state's anti-corporate farming law. It would allow North Dakotans to invest in
livestock production or processing facilities to increase value-added
agriculture.

The bureau wants to limit the exemption to specialized facilities of no more
than 160 acres. ""This will allow producers not only to produce the raw product,
but to gather some of the financial opportunity beyond just the production of a
raw commodity,'' said Ken Bertsch, director of government relations for the Farm
Bureau. If the idea becomes law, Bertsch said he doesn't expect an immediate
influx of large-scale livestock operators into the state. ""If nothing else,
just the climate makes us different than other states that deal with large-scale
corporate livestock giants like,'' Bertsch said. ""We have natural barriers to
that already, in population and climate. Lynn Jacobson, a hog farmer and
secretary-treasurer of a pork cooperative in Crosby, said the change proposed by
the Farm Bureau would make his operation easier to run. He said many local
business people want to invest in his business, but the corporate farm law
prohibits them from doing so. David Saxowski, a North Dakota State University
law specialist in the agricultural economics department, said the state's
anti-corporate farming law was initially passed in the 1930s. It was amended in
1981 to include exceptions for family farm corporations. Another lesser-used
exception is for cooperatives in which at least 75 percent of the members are
North Dakota farmers. Other exceptions are for lenders who acquire land in loan
forfeitures, churches and other charities that acquire land as gifts and mining
companies that intend to mine the land.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 1994 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              735 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                      March 12, 2000 Sunday Final Edition

Calif. dreamin' a nightmare: Sprawl Brawl / With rapid growth, the Golden State
is rapidly running out of land for homes. A revolt by the snarling masses over
development may be imminent

SOURCE: Christian Science Monitor

BYLINE: Daniel B. Wood

SECTION: Sunday Reader; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 1160 words

DATELINE: Temecula, Calif.

California's century-and-a-half land rush is finally running out of land.

In a story with hard implications for the frontier American mindset -- the dream
of a family home with a yard -- a soaring number of people in America's
end-of-the-rainbow state say they have reached the end of the line, and their
wits, over sprawl.

After a decade of population influx averaging 600,000 people per year, as many
as 18 million more -- the current population of New York State -- are due before
2025.

"The key challenge facing this state for the next century will be growth," says
California historian Kevin Starr. "The remorseless devouring of landscape is
pushing increasing multitudes toward a meltdown of rebellion over quality of
life."

In San Diego -- once the unsnarled backwater of California cities -- every
leading candidate for city, county, and state office says the No. 1 voter issue
is now traffic.

Two hours north, a Los Angeles headline reads, "Opponents urge judge to block
largest development in southern California history."

Agricultural Central Valley Flooded by Two Million People in 20 Years

The Central Valley, provider of half the nation's fruits and vegetables, has
seen an influx of two million residents over 20 years -- a development that
shrank cropland by 500,000 acres. American Farmland Trust (AFT) now ranks the
valley as the most threatened farm region in the nation.

Current projections are that the 600-km-long by 75-km-wide valley will grow from
5.5 million people to 12.5 million by 2040. If that forecast holds, a million
farm acres will be lost and another 2.5 million acres will be put at risk,
according to AFT.

"Americans continue to think we have unlimited land resources, so we just keep
expanding without noticing we are creating a future that is not sustainable,"
says Carol Whiteside of Great Valley Center, a private, nonpartisan group that
is trying to unite diverse interests in the valley for sustainable growth.

"Unlike Europe ... we don't have the same strong central governments that can
act in the best interests of their public."

With demand in coastal cities driving up housing costs, fists of development are
encroaching into every empty corner of the state. Without a statewide body to
oversee such growth, local officials follow their own needs and visions, often
without regard to the big picture.

One development model -- that of the mall and adjacent bedroom community -- is
being replicated from inland valleys to the Sierra Nevadas. In many places,
monster-size homes are consuming open space. The result, for many, is a kind of
population indigestion.

"Many areas can no longer sustain a rich and nurturing institutional life," says
Starr. "We are moving beyond the ability of churches, synagogues, and schools to
provide organization, polity, community."

In the Sacramento region, hours of delay on freeways have grown 1,000 per cent
since 1986. According to Caltrans, the state transportation authority, 162,000
hours of delay from traffic in 1986 climbed to more than 1.8 million hours in
1998.

Observers say a large-scale, statewide revolt is imminent, on the scale of
1978's Proposition 13, the tax-cutting measure that dominoed coast to coast.

"The new revolt will be draconian. It will force a debate that will reach back
to Jefferson and Hamilton in the founding days of the republic over whether and
how to live more densely," says Starr.

The threats to farming, water quality, clean air, and quality living have
prompted several moves to help force regionwide solutions to state problems.
Groups such as the Great Valley Centre in the mid-Central Valley, the Fresno
Business Council to the south, and Valley Vision Regional Action Partnership in
Sacramento are building regionwide coalitions that include environmentalists and
farmers, business people and residents. The idea is to pool resources and ideas,
create long-term agendas, and open dialogue between antagonistic sectors.

"The job of organizations like ours is to draw attention to benefits of thinking
regionally," says Kevin Eckery, president of Valley Vision, which draws
representatives from each of the region's six counties. "We look at open space,
traffic issues, housing prices, jobs, income, schools in an effort to create a
balanced community."

Members recognize longer-term planning will help all sides achieve their goals.

"If one county or city comes to agreement to ... keep development in a downtown
core and the neighbouring county doesn't, you haven't solved your problem," says
Debora Nankivill of Growth Alternatives Alliance, five organizations that came
together in the Fresno region. "People here are starting to change ideas and
principles on a regionwide basis, ... realizing that if you get the blueprint
right, all of your issues are helped. And if you don't, they are all hurt."

In Silicon Valley, a group known as Joint Venture has been examining the problem
of soaring housing prices -- one of the reasons sprawl has been pushed to areas
of the Central Valley, San Bernardino, and Monterey counties. The group is
conducting an inventory of all urban land in Silicon Valley available for more
affordable, denser housing. "We feel if we can expedite more affordable housing
here, that will ease the pressure to elbow into other areas of the state," says
Ruben Barrales of Joint Venture.

State officials are also increasingly realizing the folly of helter-skelter
growth. Recognizing that California's 58 counties, 473 cities, and many special
districts "create a confusing array of government," an assembly commission last
month announced a task force to examine the "fundamental structure of governance
in California."

Environmental Deterioration Could Jeopardize Economy

State treasurer Phil Angelides, who has 15 years' experience in real estate
development, is working to identify the point at which California's economic
strength will be jeopardized by environmental deterioration -- resulting in the
exodus of businesses. "If we continue to grow the way we are, consuming land
without regional planning, we will injure ourselves, not only environmentally
but also economically," he says.

Others argue that California's current uproar over sprawl is related to economic
cycles of boom and recession, and will eventually abate.

"The talk about pollution, congestion, housing that is not affordable reflects
the state's current peak business cycle, in which everything is ... running
ahead of (the state's) ability to grow," says Michael Dardia of the California
Policy Institute. An economic slowdown, he says, will allow the supply of
housing, commercial space, roads, and infrastructure to catch up with demand --
without resulting in cries of a lost utopia.

Dardia adds: "There is nothing magical about farming, which is also resource
intensive. ... The other side of this debate is that if you don't allow growth,
nothing is affordable."

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Monica Almeida, New York Times; The largest housing development
ever approved by L.A. County -- the Newhall Ranch -- will be set in the rolling
hills beyond Santa Clarita houses in the foreground.

TYPE: News

               Copyright 2000 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              736 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                           October 30, 2014 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITION

US OFFERS FARMERS AID TO HELP HONEYBEES

BYLINE:  ROB SCHULTZ  rschultz@madison.com, 608-252-6487

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 417 words


Wednesday's announcement of an influx of federal money to Midwestern farmers and
ranchers to improve the health and habitat of the declining honeybee population
was lauded by an insect expert who said they play a critical role in agriculture
production.

"Habitat loss is a big issue with honeybees. So the ability to produce more
resources for them will certainly help them out," said Patrick Liesch, a
UW-Madison entomologist.

USDA Secretary Tom Vilsack announced $4 million in technical and financial
assistance to Midwestern farmers and ranchers to help honeybees that pollinate
an estimated $15 billion worth of crops every year. States that are receiving
the money are Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota.

The money will provide guidance and support to producers to implement
conservation practices that will provide safe and diverse food sources for bees.

The $4 million is a follow-up to $3 million from the USDA earlier this year to
help the bee population.

"The future of America's food supply depends on honeybees," Vilsack said in a
USDA news release. "This effort is one way USDA is helping improve the health of
honeybee populations."

Agriculture production has been threatened by a decade-long decline in
commercial honeybees due to habitat loss and pesticide use, according to the
USDA. It also said that a disease called colony collapse disorder also
contributed to a 30 percent loss of honeybees over last winter.

From June to September, the Midwest is home to more than 65 percent of the
commercially managed honeybees in the U.S., according to USDA data. They've
struggled to find abundant and diverse food to build up hive strength for the
winter as new subdivisions full of weed-protected lawns replace pastures and
fields, Liesch said.

"There aren't as many prairie fields and weedy pastures that are important food
resources for honeybees," Liesch said. "We don't see enough weeds in non-crop
areas that are so important to them."

Appropriate cover crops or rangeland and pasture management are some of the
conservation practices that the USDA will explain to farmers and ranchers.
Besides providing quality food and habitat for honeybees and other pollinators,
those conservation practices also can reduce erosion, increase the health of
their soil and inhibit invasive species.

Funding will be provided through the Environmental Quality Incentives Program.
Applications are due Nov. 21.

For more about technical and financial assistance, see go.madison.com/EQIP.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2014 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              737 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                               Corkman (Ireland)

                                October 4, 2012

Multi-million euro upgrade at Moorepark

SECTION: GENERAL NEWS

LENGTH: 348 words


TEAGASC has lodged an application with Cork county Council for a new
multi-million euro extension to its research and training facility at Moorepark
in Fermoy.

The state owned company is seeking permission for a new two-story building at
its Moorepark complex, which will incorporate additional office space, new
research and educational facilities and associated ancillary accommodation. The
project, a joint collaboration between Teagasc and FBD Insurance, will also
involve the removal of existing prefabricated research, educational buildings
and office buildings, and the expansion of its car-parking facilities.

The head of Moorepark's Animal and Grassland programme, Pat Dillon, told The
Corkman that expansion is part of an ambitious plan to meet the expected growth
in agriculture after the abolition of the milk quota system in 2015.

"There are three key drivers behind expansion at Moorepark, the first being the
fact that almost half of our personnel are currently operating out of
prefabricated buildings. This is a positive thing as it shows how the centre has
expanded in recent years," said Mr Dillon.

"The second factor is that over the past two years Moorepark has been identified
as a leading industry research centre. This new extension will help cement that
reputation," he added.

Mr Dillon said the final driver behind the expansion was the fact that Teagasc
are also playing a greater role in education, through increased collaborations
with third level institutions.

"We are heavily involved with both the Dairy Business degree and the Farm
Management diploma at UCC and well as having significant ties with UCD," said Mr
Dillon.

He pointed out that Moorepark is in a perfect position to cope with the expected
influx of young people into the agriculture sector post 2015.

"Degree and diploma students from UCC spend six-months at Moorepark availing of
our research facilities. This planned extension will help us to expand our
facilities and help develop Moorepark into a key educational and research
facility for the Irish agriculture industry," said Mr Dillon.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              738 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               The Jerusalem Post

                             March 13, 2009 Friday

Gov't looks to cut back on foreign workers to help local unemployed

BYLINE: RUTH EGLASH

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 749 words


Plans to cut back on the number of foreign workers in Israel and encourage
Israelis to work in their place have been set in motion as a response to the
country's rising unemployment and growing economic recession, representatives of
the government indicated Thursday.

According to sources in the Finance Ministry and the Bank of Israel, the number
of foreigners arriving here to work in construction or agriculture could be
significantly reduced in the near future, with concrete programs already under
way to retrain unemployed Israelis in these fields.

"We are already making a concerted effort to reduce the number of foreign
workers," Meir Shpigler, director of the Foreign Workers Department at the
Immigration Authority, told The Jerusalem Post Thursday.

He said that the newly formed government authority had started to initiate
several deterrents in an attempt to reduce the influx of foreign workers,
including increasing the costs for them to come here, and taking out newspaper
ads to warn them of the risks.

Already the construction industry has received 12,000 fewer workers than it did
in the same period last year, and agriculture workers have been cut back by
17,000, said Shpigler. He added that it was unlikely that the number of those
working in caregiving would change, because the need in Israel was too great.

Currently, there are close to 100,000 legal migrant workers in Israel and up to
150,000 here illegally. Most are employed in construction, agriculture and
caregiving.

In January, Bank of Israel Deputy Governor Zvi Eckstein announced
recommendations to drastically reduce the number of foreign workers in the
country.

He told the Post Thursday that the first stage in this process was to remove the
illegal workers by 2010, a step that would open up the various industries to
local employees.

"This is not something new. It has been discussed for many years," said
Eckstein, who is also an economics professor at Tel Aviv University. "There is
already a concerted effort by the Interior Ministry to fight this phenomenon,
with additional legislation expected to follow soon in the Knesset."

He added that "this is even more important now, given the economic situation."

However, Shevy Korzen, executive director of the nonprofit Hotline for Migrant
Workers, commented that "whenever there is an economic recession or crisis,
there is always talk about cutting the number of foreign workers, but in our
experience this is just rhetoric.

She explained that "they always like to use the foreign workers as scapegoats,
but political interests keep the flow of foreign workers coming in, and the
manpower agencies make a lot of money from it."

According to Korzen, whose NGO lobbies for the rights of foreign workers in
Israel, curbing their entrance into the country is actually a positive step, and
the organization plans to push the new government to streamline the system to
ensure greater checks and balances.

She said her group had already seen a sharp increase in the number of migrant
workers made redundant by the economic crisis. Unfortunately, she pointed out,
most prefer to stay in the country and try to find work until their visas
expire. They are not entitled to any type of state unemployment benefits.

"It is very lucrative for the manpower agencies to bring in foreign workers.
Unfortunately there are at least 10,000 who are unemployed," said Korzen, adding
that the Hotline, along with partner NGO Kav L'oved, (the Worker's Help Line),
has been pressuring the government to create bilateral agreements with a few key
countries and monitor the number of migrants who enter.

"With the economic recession, we only expect the situation to get worse," she
said.

Shmuel Armon, a representative of Achioz - the National Association of
International Manpower Companies in Israel, said that the manpower agencies,
which are responsible for bringing the bulk of legal foreign workers into
Israel, were not yet feeling the crunch of government cutback plans.

"At this stage, it's more a case of them increasing the supervision of the
process but not yet cutting back," he said, adding that most of the private
companies were supportive of government efforts to improve Israel's unemployment
situation.

"It's a legitimate response," added Armon. "However, I'm sure there are not many
Israelis who would be willing to work as a caregiver for 24 hours a day. Most
[Israeli] workers are only willing to work for eight hours, and they would never
want to live away from their families."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: THERE IS always talk about cutting foreign workers during an
economic crisis, 'but in our experience this is just rhetoric,' says the
director of the Hotline for Migrant Workers. (Credit: Illustrative photo: Ariel
Jerozolimski/The Jerusalem Post)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 The Jerusalem Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              739 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The Northlines (India)

                             August 23, 2013 Friday

Minister lauds role of local investors in tourism

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, Aug. 23 -- Asking the local investors to come forward, Minister for
Agriculture, Mr. Ghulam Hassan Mir today said that local investors have a
pivotal role in creating adequate and world class tourism infrastructure in the
state particularly in the valley, a globally acclaimed tourist destination.

The Minister said this after inaugurating Hotel White Palace at Khanyar this
morning.

With ever increasing influx of tourists to the valley, Mr. Mir said creation of
standard tourism infrastructure is the need of the hour adding that local
investors could help the state to fill this gap and government is always ready
to encourage them at every level. He asked big business houses to make
investment in the tourism sector to tap the flourishing business market besides
it would also help to create job opportunities for the locals, he added.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Northlines. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Northlines
                              All Rights Reserved


                              740 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Gloucestershire Echo

                                 August 2, 1999

Battle goes on - farmers
 Mixed reaction as ban is lifted

SECTION: Agriculture: Beef, Pg.2

LENGTH: 211 words


Gloucestershire beef farmers have welcomed the lifting of the European Union ban
on British beef.

But they say they still face a struggle against cheaper imports and red tape to
win back their share of the market.

The ban on exporting British beef was lifted yesterday. County farmers were
cautious in welcoming the move.

Mike Hill, who farms at Ashchurch, near Tewkesbury, said: "We're still going to
struggle because of the influx of cheaper European beef and the strong pound.

"We're also competing against European farmers who can use growth hormones,
which are banned here. It doesn't seem right that we're competing against that.

"Some of the beef is produced in areas where there is very cheap labour that you
can't get in England.

"It seems an almost impossible situation for us."

Jan Rowe, 55, has run Whalley Farm at Whittington for more than 30 years with
his brother Roger.

He said: "It will take a long time to get back our market share because the ban
has been replaced by bureaucratic red tape."

EU veterinary experts have given British beef the all-clear. Exports were banned
on March 7, 1996, because of the BSE alert.

Conditions imposed mean any exported cattle must be under 30 months old and the
the meat removed from the bone.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1999

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: Jan Rowe

                      Copyright 1999 Gloucestershire Echo


                              741 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            March 4, 1992 Wednesday

Marketing boards

BYLINE: Patrick Moser; GAM

LENGTH: 247 words

DATELINE: Toronto ONT


So Alain Dubuc of La Presse thinks that farmers don't deserve the
protection or representation of the Canadian government in the GATT,
according to his recent comments (Farmers Can't Hold Consumers Hostage -
Feb. 25). He assigns Jacques Proulx's motives in demanding that Canada get
to keep its marketing boards to merely advancing the cause of Quebec
sovereignty. This viewpoint is entirely ignorant of the political and
economic realities of the agricultural market, as well as being somewhat
paranoid.

Today's farmers are getting far less remuneration than they deserve for
their production mainly due to pressures from consumers for better quality
at lower prices. However, Canadian farmers are hit particularly hard from
the influx of inexpensive but lower-quality products that emanate from the
United States. Without the protection of marketing boards for milk and
pork, for example, prices would drop through the floor, making farming
completely unprofitable in Canada. Besides, given the high level of
agricultural subsidies and aids given in the United States and most
European countries, Canadian farmers have a right to demand that they keep
theirs.

So what is wrong with the head of the Quebec farmers' union making a
reasonable and justifiable demand? Mr. Proulx should be applauded for his
articulation of the interests of the Canadian farmer, not criticized. As
for Mr. Dubuc, he should be sentenced to one month at hard labour on a
farm for a lesson in reality.
  Patrick Moser
Toronto

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1992 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              742 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                           August 19, 2009 Wednesday

Minnesota farmers beginning to feel financial stress

BYLINE: By Tom Webb twebb@pioneerpress.com

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 389 words


After a stretch of prosperity, financial stress is rising on Minnesota farms.

The number of farm borrowers in farmer-lender mediation has climbed more than 50
percent this fiscal year, with a big influx in the past six months, the
University of Minnesota reports.

In Minnesota, with six weeks still remaining in the fiscal year, 967 imperiled
farm borrowers have entered into a state-approved mediation program. That
compares with 640 farm borrowers in all of fiscal 2008.

Officials believe there's no mystery why.

"We don't collect specific information on this, but everyone knows what the
trends in agriculture are -- prices are below the cost of production in dairy
and hogs, and the price of feed is going up," said Dick Senese, the U's
associate dean for community vitality and public engagement.

In addition, the recession has "increased financial pressure on the rural
economy, and a lot of farm operations rely on off-farm income," Senese said.

Food and agriculture have been among the strongest sectors of the Minnesota
economy, even as housing, finance and manufacturing all slumped. Minnesota farm
incomes hit record levels in 2007, a feat nearly equaled in 2008.

But that prosperity was fueled by record grain prices, which was devastating to
grain users such as hog producers, poultry operators and dairy farmers.

The Minnesota Legislature created the mediation program during the farm crisis
of the 1980s. Minnesota farm borrowers facing foreclosure must be offered the
option of mediation, which gives a 90-day period to renegotiate, restructure or
resolve their debts.

"It gives all the parties an opportunity to sit down and talk, and the mediator
serves as a go-between," said Rob Holcomb, a U extension educator in the
Marshall regional office. "They try to take a lot of the emotion out of the
situation. If cooler heads prevail, oftentimes there's a solution other than a
foreclosure."

But not every troubled farm borrower wants to bother with mediation -- only
about one-third do. Of those who do, a compromise or restructuring occurs in
about 80 percent of the cases, Senese said.

The number of mediation cases began creeping up in 2006, and began to accelerate
this spring. Open mediation cases have roughly tripled from July 2008 to this
past July, reaching 488 cases, U officials say.

Tom Webb can be reached at 651-228-5428.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              743 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 12, 2016 Tuesday

The Land Grab for Farm Data

LENGTH: 360  words

DATELINE: New York



 Atlanta: Growing Georgia has issued the following news release:



   Farmers are adopting smart-sensor technologies and connected farm equipment
more quickly than ever, stretching each season to eke out greater yield from
finite acreage.





 This rise in so-called precision agriculture has precipitated a massive influx
in unstructured "bushels to bytes" farm data, creating new opportunities for an
industry that has previously operated solely in the physical realm.



 A new frontier



 From government agencies to commodity traders, hedge funds, biotech companies
and, of course, seed, chemical and fertilizer manufacturers, everyone wants a
piece of the "internet of farming," as evidenced here and here.



 Specifically, ownership and control of agronomic and equipment data is
understood to have dramatic escalating value. Which seed varieties were the most
successful and where? Which plant populations performed best? Whose
recommendations (e.g. nitrogen programs) outperformed their peers?



 Which input datasets are used for these recommendations, how were they acquired
and are they standardized and accessible? How are the big companies actually
using the data? Who has access, how long have they been acquiring it and how
long do they keep it? Which documents did I sign to give them access?



 Make no mistake, the ambiguity around the value of this data is intentional.
Nobody wants to initiate paying for something that has always been free.



 Regrettably, those who least understand the true value of the data produced are
farmers themselves. Our neighbors around the country give their data away for a
pittance, or worse. Yet, data is one of the most valuable things farmers
harvest.



 There's no doubt that there is confusion around the "hard value" of data.
Farmers tell me, "Look, I know that my data has value because everyone wants it.
The part that frustrates me is that companies want my data in return for some
undefined 'value.' Meanwhile they are often upselling me for additional services
that would not exist without my data."





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              744 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Kashmir Images (India)

                             August 23, 2013 Friday

Local investors should play a pivotal role in tourism sector: Mir

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, Aug. 23 -- Asking the local investors to come forward, Minister for
Agriculture, Ghulam Hassan Mir Friday said that local investors have a pivotal
role in creating adequate and world class tourism infrastructure in the state
particularly in the valley, a globally acclaimed tourist destination.

The Minister said this after inaugurating Hotel White Palace at Khanyar Friday
morning.

With ever increasing influx of tourists to the valley, Mir said creation of
standard tourism infrastructure is the need of the hour adding that local
investors could help the state to fill this gap and government is always ready
to encourage them at every level.

He asked big business houses to make investment in the tourism sector to tap the
flourishing business market besides it would also help to create job
opportunities for the locals, he added.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Kashmir Images. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 Kashmir Images
                              All Rights Reserved


                              745 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                           February 11, 2016 Thursday

UN warns of threat to food security from overuse of antibiotics

LENGTH: 463 words

DATELINE: Lahore



UNITED NATIONS:  The overuse of antibiotics and other antimicrobial agents is
impacting rural livelihoods and food
security, and requires globally coordinated efforts, the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) said Wednesday.


 Speaking to European ministers of health and agriculture at
a conference on antimicrobial resistance in Amsterdam, FAO Deputy
Director-General Helena Semedo emphasized that antimicrobial
agents foster increasing resistance among the very microbes that cause the
infections and disease they were designed to quell, thereby
threatening to reverse a century of progress in human and animal health.
 "Antimicrobial resistance is a global threat that
in this inter-connected world cannot be solved in Europe alone,"
 Ms. Semedo said.
 "We have to help save live-saving drugs," she added.
 Aside from the human health considerations, Ms. Semedo
underscored that the emergence of microbes resistant to
antibiotics and other pharmaceutical agents puts animal health at
risk and consequently has an impact on rural livelihoods and
food security.
 While resistance develops as part of natural adaptation, it is exacerbated by
inappropriate use of pharmaceuticals, and the
prevalence of resistance in the agricultural sector is generally
higher in animal species reared under intensive production systems.
 Although FAO favours prudent regulations and measures to
control the influx of medicines and reduce their use, Ms. Semedo
said that many rural smallholders and pastoralists often
face difficult economic choices and that counterfeit drugs
are rampant.
 "How can we eliminate hunger or improve sustainability when
we cannot cure sick animals? How can we reduce rural poverty when
the drugs given to ill farm workers and their families no
longer have effect?" she asked.
 While hailing the Netherlands in particular for reducing the amount of drugs
used in its livestock sector by almost 60 per cent in
recent years, Ms. Semedo noted that the real challenge is to
translate such efforts to countries in need with poor resources. The
risk of antimicrobial resistance appears to be particularly
high in countries where legislation, surveillance, prevention
and monitoring are weak or inadequate, she stressed.
 Broad improvements in hygiene, disease prevention,
veterinary oversight and accurate and affordable diagnostics, as
well as ensuring quality nutrition to improve the overall
health of livestock and fish through safe feed and suitable
breeds, are critical in reducing the overuse of antibiotics, she said.
 Considering that seven out of every 10 newly discovered
human diseases are of animal origin, she also highlighted the
centrality of farming practices and food systems in the effort
to contain antimicrobial resistance.


LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              746 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                             March 10, 2013 Sunday

California farms facing labor shortage as farmworkers age

BYLINE: The Monterey County Herald

SECTION: STATE

LENGTH: 458 words


SELMA (AP)   California's $44 billion agricultural industry faces a worsening
labor shortage as farmworkers age, more return home to Mexico and fewer new
migrants arrive to replace them.

The state's farming workforce is aging and shrinking for several reasons,
including stricter immigration enforcement, an improving economy in Mexico and
the lack of interest in field work among the children of farmworkers, according
to the Sacramento Bee.

"Basically, we're running out of low-skilled workers," said J. Edward Taylor, a
UC Davis, economist who has studied the migration of farmworkers from Mexico.
"The second generation doesn't do farm work. That's why we've relied on a steady
influx of newcomers. And the newcomers are in dwindling supply."

More than 70 percent of state agricultural producers expect a worker shortage
starting this spring and worsening through the growing season, according to the
California Farm Bureau Federation.

Lawmakers and farm lobbyists are discussing remedies, including granting legal
status to more than 1 million undocumented farmworkers and expanding the number
of visas for agriculture.

"We have to try to find a system that is not going to cause a major disruption
to our industry," said Bryan Little, the farm bureau's director of labor
affairs.

Manuel Cunha Jr., president of the Nisei Farmers League, representing 1,100
farms and other agriculture outlets, said his group's workforce fell by 20 to 30
percent during last year's harvest season. By September, some farm crews were as
much as 60 percent short of the workers they needed.

Cunha blamed increased farm audits by federal immigration officials and the
increasing dangers of crossing the border from Mexico.

"Workers were leaving agriculture because they were fearful of the audits and
getting busted," Cunha said.

The declining number of farmworkers is prompting some growers to switch to crops
that require less labor.

Chandler Farms, about 40 miles southeast of Fresno, decided to cut back on
peaches and plums and use more land to grow almonds, which can be harvested by
machine.

"I don't know if it is going to get better for a while," said Bill Chandler, who
runs the family ranch in Selma with his son.

Arcadio Castro, a foreman at the Chandler ranch, said workers in his Mexican
hometown of Zacatecas can't afford to pay a "coyote" to smuggle them across the
border and prefer construction jobs in urban areas.

So Castro, 59, has depends on veteran laborers willing to do work many of their
children won't consider.

"You're not going to believe me, but the older workers are better," Castro said.
"They go slower, but they work all day long. The younger ones start complaining.
They say, 'Oh, it's so hot.' Then they climb up a ladder and start texting."

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              747 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Pioneer (India)

                            February 7, 2010 Sunday

High-level panel needed to monitor rations supply, says Pokhriyal

LENGTH: 481  words

DATELINE: Dehradun


Dehradun, Feb. 7 -- In a bid to monitor demand and supply of rations, there is
need to appoint a high power monitoring committee comprising qualified persons,
as suggested by Uttarakhand Chief Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank in a CMs'
meet called to discuss how to check skyrocketing prices, convened by the Prime
Minister, Manmohan Singh, at Vigyan Bhawan in Delhi on Saturday.

Nishank also suggested that there is need to prepare a long-term policy to
control price rise. Due to less supply of foodgrain, the price of essential
commodities have gone up and has affected the budget of the common man and small
States, which are having less agriculture land so they have to depend on the
Union Government's quota.

To apprise the Prime Minister, he cited an example that during the tenure of the
Atal Bihari Vajpayee-led NDA, edible oil prices had gone up and to cope up with
that their Government had imported a huge consignment of edible oil.

By doing this he had forced stockers to bring their stored edible oil into the
market and the price came down within 10 days. The incumbent Government must
take such kind of step immediately to cope up with this prevailing situation in
the country. He also highlighted that lacuna in the Union Government's
agriculture policy and management of food supply.

Last year Uttarakhand had exported sugar at the rate of 17 per kg and thereafter
imported sugar at the rate of Rs 44 per kg. He demanded immediate intervention
of the Union Government to ensure food security of the nation. Uttarakhand
heavily depends on money order economy and influx of defense personnel so state
is more or less depend on public distribution system (PDS). The State is having
17.77 APL card holders and as per the sanctioned quota each card holder should
be given 35 kg foodgrain but is getting 17090 MT food grains per month against
the demand of 62195 MT. It means Uttarakhand is getting a mere 27 per cent
foodgrain against the demand, so he requested the Union Government should take
action in this regard.

A large number of people are left out of the BPL list, so there is need to
conduct a survey of BPL families. Talking about the sugar quota, the State could
not receive 38,160 MT of sugar because of unavailability of levy sugar in sugar
mills in between April 2008 to December 2009. To ensure availability of sugar,
the Union Government should have allowed Uttarakhand to collect levy sugar from
other State's sugar mills in case of unavailability of levy sugar in Uttarakhand
sugar mills. With an intention to check price rise, the State Government is
working hard and planning to provide essential commodities on reasonable prices
under the Uttarakhand Notified Commodities Distribution Order 2003. Published by
HT Syndication with permission from Pioneer. For more information on news feed
please contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 CMYK Printech Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              748 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                               walesonline.co.uk

                     February 2, 2017 Thursday 10:06 AM GMT

Brexit deal with New Zealand 'could destroy Welsh lamb farming', minister warns;

Rural Affairs Secretary Lesley Griffiths said the prospect of a free trade
agreement with New Zealand was a cause for concern

BYLINE: By Chris Kelsey

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 275 words


A farming union has welcomed the Welsh Government's warning that a free trade
deal with New Zealand could "destroy the Welsh lamb industry".

Rural Affairs Secretary Lesley Griffiths told the National Assembly's Rural
Affairs Committee earlier this week that the prospect of a free trade agreement
with New Zealand was a cause for concern.

"If we have this huge influx of New Zealand lamb it will absolutely destroy the
Welsh lamb industry," she said.

The Farmers' Union of Wales (FUW) has previously described the prospect of a
free trade deal with New Zealand as a perfect storm for Welsh agriculture.

Lesley Griffiths to meet farmers and environmentalists to discuss Brexit
concerns

FUW president Glyn Roberts said: "I wrote to the former Prime Minister in July,
highlighting our concerns regarding such a deal with a country which is in such
direct competition with ourselves. It is good to see that our Cabinet Secretary
for Environment and Rural Affairs has acknowledged that threat."

Mr Roberts described the opportunities represented by such a deal were as
negligible, adding : "New Zealand has a population of around 4.5 million, which
is about 1% of the size of the EU, and is 11,500 miles away.

"A free trade deal may be a great opportunity for New Zealand, but the benefits
for the UK as a whole are zero, and for agriculture are extremely negative."

Mr Roberts said he was concerned that the deal was being proposed for reasons of
political expediency by the UK Government, and that gaining a market of 4.5
million consumers on the other side of the planet could not make up for the
potential loss of a 500 million consumer market on our doorstep.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBWM


                         Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                              749 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois)

                           October 5, 2005 Wednesday

School honors retired ag teacher

BYLINE: Steve Hoffman

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 427 words


FARMER CITY -- It was nearly 20 years ago when Gene Elliott retired as an
agriculture teacher for more than three decades in Farmer City.

But last week, he found his dedication to the school system and town had not
been forgotten.

Elliott, 76, was added to the school's Wall of Fame, which honors people who
have had a significant impact on the Blue Ridge School District and/or education
in the district's communities of Bellflower, Farmer City or Mansfield.

The award began last year with the induction of Stan Courson, Jim Froman and
Merle Shelton. After the inaugural year, it was decided that there would be just
one recipient a year.

Elliott was a bit surprised at the honor.

"I was very elated," he said. "I was quite happy to be nominated, and a little
surprised. I've been a long time out of the system. I thought my place in the
annals of history were gone."

Long history in town

Elliott was a 1950 graduate of the University of Illinois, and in 1953 ended up
in Farmer City's Moore Township High School to teach vocational agriculture. He
continued to teach for 33 years, retiring in 1986 from Blue Ridge.

Under his direction as FFA advisor, the local chapter also won numerous section,
district, state and national awards. He also received an award from the Illinois
Association of Vocational Agriculture Instructors, which awarded him master
teacher honors. A Gene L. Elliott Scholarship Trust helps students further their
education upon graduation.

FFA has changed since Elliott's retirement, and he is pleased with the increased
participation in recent years.

"The thing I have enjoyed seeing most about FFA is the influx of girls. It's a
door that wasn't open to them before."

Good timing on retirement

The Wall of Fame honoree thinks back to the timing of his retirement in the
spring of 1986. In August of that year, he suffered an aneurysm, and said, "if I
hadn't retired, I would have been driving a school bus at that time."

He was given little chance of survival, but after an 8 1/2-hour surgery, he not
only lived, but regained an active lifestyle.

Elliott enjoys fishing, landscaping, and working outdoors. He and wife Mary
raised six children, two of whom are also teachers.

The Parents Advisory Committee for Blue Ridge High School started the Wall of
Fame, which is located in the hallway outside the high school gymnasium. Also
nominated this year were Darlene Corbin, Patricia Drake, Gust Ferri, Mary Ellen
Leonard, Marvin "Bud" Maynard, and Liz Roseman. Nomination forms are available
on the Blue Ridge Web site, www.blueridge18.org.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2005 The Pantagraph


                              750 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                           November 7, 2012 Wednesday

Assam Agitation benefited only middle class: Akhil Gogoi

SECTION: GUWAHATI

LENGTH: 425 words


GUWAHATI: RTI activist and former member of Team Anna, Akhil Gogoi, said that
the six-year anti-foreigner movement in the '80s was a middle class-inspired
agitation that benefited that class. He added it totally sidelined the economic
issues of the state and did nothing for the downtrodden.

In an interview with TOI on the eve of a two-day national conclave here on
infiltration that started on Wednesday, Akhil said his organisation Krishak
Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS)'s next agenda would be to make the issue a people's
movement in which the deprived masses, irrespective of their religious and
ethnic identities, take part and strive to find a solution objectively.
Anti-graft activist Anna Hazare and a host of other activists will take part in
the conclave.

Akhil explained that the Assam Accord signed in 1985 after the end of the Assam
Movement did not deal with some of the vital economic issues of the state like
land reforms and large-scale irrigation to boost the agriculture-based economy.

"The Assam Accord has no mention of establishment of educational infrastructure
for the benefit of poor and backward children. Instead, an IIT and a central
university were demanded in the accord. On the economic front, it is confined to
Numaligarh Refinery and the gas cracker project. Ideologically, the accord was
pro-corporate one," said Akhil.

He added the Assam Agitation created a concept of "'we' versus 'they'
nationalism", through which a division was created in the society, subsequently
resulting in many communities, especially the tribals, moving away from
mainstream Assamese society.

"In a nutshell, the Assam movement was a middle-class one and benefited the
middle class. The common and downtrodden people were only used in the movement.
Tribals later felt alienated. The economic question was completely overlooked
and, instead, a division was created in the society. The movement was more or
less remained confined to 'we' versus 'they'," Akhil maintained.

However, Akhil said the people's movement against the influx problem will not
tread religious, linguistic or ethnic lines. He added the effort will be to
bridge the divisions created among the communities post the Assam Agitation and
solving the problem of infiltration.

"We do not want to see the foreigner problem from the angle of religion,
language or ethnicity. There will be space for the aspiration of lower class and
indigenous people. Ours will be a humanistic and objective approach towards
solving the influx problem," Akhil said.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              751 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                             April 25, 2011 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Mongolia lays tracks for future; Will lay 5,000 km of railroad to enhance
mining, shake off China

BYLINE: Yuriy Humber And Daniel Ten Kate, Bloomberg News

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 796  words


Mongolia aims to quadruple its rail network so it can export coal, copper and
rare earths to nations such as Japan and South Korea under a plan to reduce
reliance on the Chinese market and boost economic development.

"The missing link in the Mongolian gold rush now is transportation
infrastructure," said Roland Nash, who helps manage about $150 million of
Russian stocks at Moscow-based hedge fund Verno Investment Management. "The key
for the Mongolians is to attract investments from as many different countries as
possible to lessen their dependence on China."

The landlocked nation's drive to lay more than 5,000 kilometres of track across
the country and to Russia's Far Eastern ports comes as a mining boom in the
world's most sparsely populated nation promises the greatest influx of wealth
since Genghis Khan conquered much of the known world in the 13th century.

Economic growth may surge to 23 per cent in 2013, more than twice the forecast
expansion in China, as large mining projects begin production, the International
Monetary Fund says.

Agriculture and mining each account for about 20 per cent of gross domestic
product. Aside from its main exports of coal and copper, the country also holds
oil, potash, iron ore and uranium, as well as rare earths used in electronics,
wind turbines and smart bombs.

Mongolia has grown increasingly dependent on commerce with China's 1.3 billion
people since the 1991 breakup of the Soviet Union: More than 75 per cent of
exports went to its giant neighbour in 2009, according to European Union
figures.

But the relationship hasn't always been easy. During a 2002 Mongolia visit by
the exiled Tibetan leader, the Dalai Lama, trains were held up near the
China-Mongolia border, a reminder of the country's vulnerability to pressure
from the rulers of the world's secondbiggest economy.

"Using the Russia route, Mongolia will have better access to a global market
rather than just dealing with China," said Chris Weafer, Moscow-based chief
strategist at UralSib Financial Corp. "You need that to maximize the commercial
value of its goods. Otherwise China dictates prices."

Mongolia this year is to start building a 380-km link from the Tavan Tolgoi coal
basin and Oyu Tolgoi copper deposit, two of the world's biggest untapped
resources, joining with an existing rail line north to Russia and south to
China.

An expanded rail network eventually will stretch directly from Tavan Tolgoi to
China and Russia. Extended train routes to the west and the north will link with
untapped silver, iron and coal deposits, according to Eurasia Capital,
Mongolia's biggest investment bank.

"A necklace of resource deposits lies across the south of Mongolia and the idea
is to connect it to rail, connect it to China, and have options with a route via
Russia," said Eurasia Capital analyst Dosbergen Musaev. "It's a policy that
defines what Mongolia will do over the next decade."

To prove Russia offers a realistic outlet, trucks filled with coal from Tavan
Tolgoi drove to Ulan Bator, where their cargo was loaded onto a maiden 30-car
train that left for Russia's biggest Far East port, Vostochny, on Oct. 28 last
year.

The "historical event" shows that Mongolian coal can travel via Russia to South
Korea and Japan, OAO Russian Railways Chief Executive Officer Vladimir Yakunin
said at the launch ceremony for the train

For now, Mongolia trucks its output into China, which is at least three times
more expensive than moving bulk commodities by rail, Musaev said. Trucks won't
be an option when output at Tavan Tolgoi and Oyu Tolgoi reaches projected
capacity, he said, given the high fuel and environmental costs.

While the Mongolian economy has been growing at an average six per cent rate
during the last 10 years, the expansion has fluctuated "sharply" from one per
cent in 2000 to 10 per cent in 2007 and minus 1.6 per cent in 2009, the IMF said
in a research paper this month.

The transition to a market economy in the early 1990s, severe winters and a
collapse in copper prices after a sharp rise in 2006-2007 help explain some of
the country's "boombust" cycles, it said.

The nation must avoid developing "Dutch disease," where the financial benefits
of a commodity boom lead to a hollowing out of other sectors, according to the
World Bank. In the Netherlands, the discovery of gas in 1960s drove up inflation
and damaged manufacturing.

Mongolia needs to find a more balanced model of growth, Prime Minister
Sukhbaatar Batbold said in Ulan Bator in March. He is trying to boost living
standards in a nation where about a third of the 2.7 million population lives
below the poverty line.

"Mongolia is making a geopolitical choice and gaining a stronger bargaining
position" by striving to boost transportation connections with Russia, Musaev
said.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Doug Kanter, Bloomberg News; A mining boom in Mongolia could create the
greatest influx of wealth for the landlocked country since Genghis Khan
conquered much of the known world in the 13th century.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2011 The Vancouver Sun, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              752 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                 Irish Examiner

                             May 13, 2015 Wednesday

Dairy convert Edward brings a scientific edge to farming

SECTION: IRELAND

LENGTH: 364 words


A native of Ballymoe, Castlerea, Co Roscommon, Edward jointly manages the family
farm with his father.

Until five years ago, the family was farming suckler cows and sheep, then they
converted to dairy in advance of this year s abolition of EU quotas.

The decision was made to convert to dairy farming and 140 dairy heifers were
bought.

Edward now manages the dairy enterprise, which has expanded to 260 cows.

He completed a level six Specific Purpose Certificate in Farm Administration at
the Agricultural College in Mountbellew in Co Galway. He is also a keen
supporter of Ireland s scientific approach to improving the national herd.

I am convinced of the need to use genomic bulls,  said Edward.

Last year, our replacement heifer calves had an economic breeding index of 202.
I aim to maximise milk from grass with concentrates kept to just 0.5 tonne per
cow per annum.

He measures and budgets grass weekly and has an ongoing grass-reseeding
programme. Edward s goal is to establish another dairy farm in the next five
years.

He works very closely with his Teagasc adviser Seamus Nolan, and is involved in
two farmer discussion groups.

Agriculture Minister Simon Coveney congratulated the 13 finalists who were
chosen from almost 800 students who completed agricultural training programmes.

The influx of so many enthusiastic, well-trained young people is a very positive
development for the agricultural sector,  said Mr Coveney.

The first runner-up award went to Michael Kennedy, Bridestown, Glenville, Co
Cork. He completed a level 6 Advanced Certificate in Agriculture (Dairy Farm
Management) at the Teagasc Agricultural College in Kildalton.

Michael manages the dairy home herd of 110 cows, as his father is in full-time
employment off the farm.

Michael s priority is to lift the current herd economic breeding index without
compromising fertility.

The second runner-up award went to James Kealy, Bendenstown, Rathoe, Co Carlow
who completed a Level 6 Specific Purpose Certificate in farm administration at
the Teagasc Regional Education Centre, in Tinahely.

[url=http://www.irishexaminer.com/ireland/?utm_source=link&utm_medium=click&utm_
campaign=recirc]DISCOVER MORE CONTENT LIKE THIS[/url

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Landmark Digital Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              753 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                      August 8, 1988, Monday, City Edition

Early return of migrants strains social services

BYLINE: MICHELLE JONES

SECTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1162 words



After the spring tomato and strawberry harvest in Florida Elba    Castillo, her
six brothers and sisters and her parents usually head to    the Midwest to pick
cucumbers, tomatoes, blueberries and other crops.

     But this year there was no summer work.

     "We went to Michigan to pick pickles and it was too dry," said    Castillo,
19. "Then we went to Indiana to pick tomatoes and it was too    dry there."

     The Midwest drought has sent the Castillos and hundreds of other    migrant
farm workers packing up early and returning to Florida months    before there
are any crops for them to pick here.

     Local service agencies, some of which close for the typically slow
summer months, say they're scrambling to provide clothes, food and    shelter
for the farm workers.

     "We are having to turn them away because we have no money at this    time
of the year," said Nelson Salinas, deputy director for programs    with Centro
Campesino in Floral City in Citrus County.

     Centro Campesino is a non-profit organization that provides food,
clothing and other necessities for farm workers, mainly in South    Florida.

     The Castillo family recently returned to Wimauma in Hillsborough    County,
stopping along the way at churches to ask for food and gas    money. When they
got to Florida, they found the fields empty and no    work available.

     Throughout the state the situation is the same.

     At the Coalition of Florida Farmers Organization in Homestead,    Arturo
Lopez, the executive director, says he is trying to get money    from the
federal government at least to help send the workers back to    their places of
origin, which are Florida, Texas and California.

     "There has been a drought relief bill enacted, but that is only    for the
farmers," Lopez said. "We are in the process of working with    organizations to
try to get money from the state people to at least    help with rent and food
until the workers can get food stamps."

     In Balm in southern Hillsborough County, the Good Samaritan Mission    has
been swamped with requests for food, clothing and money.

     "This is normally our slow time of the year," said Pastor Bill    Cruz,
director of the mission. "We usually have 15 to 25 families come    through on
Tuesday, our busiest day of the week, but lately we have    been having 120
families on Tuesday and almost as many the other    days."

     His wife, Dora, said donations are down and they have had to turn    people
away.

     "It breaks my heart to say no to someone who is in need of help,"    she
said. "This ministry depends entirely on individuals and some    : church
groups, and a lot of the people who help are gone up North for    the summer."

     In addition to food and clothing, the mission provides rent money    and
helps pay electric bills and visits to the doctor.

     "Last week we had to turn down all the people who came in for rent    and
electric money," she said. "All we had was $ 600 to buy rice,    flour,
shortening and pinto beans - the staples of the farm workers'    diet."

     St. Anne's Roman Catholic Church in Ruskin in southwestern    Hillsborough,
another place where migrants go to find help, only has    aid for those facing
an extreme emergency.

     "We can't help on an ongoing basis," said the Rev. Ed Lamp. "But    we know
there are more people than usual here for this time of the year    because we
are seeing more in attendance at our Spanish Mass."        The farm workers can
get food and clothing at the Beth-el Mission    of the Presbyterian Church on
U.S. 301 near Palmetto in Manatee County,    but only on Wednesdays during the
summer months.

     "We had 72 people come in last week," said Rafaela Pica, the
administrator.

     So far, the influx hasn't touched Hillsborough County school    officials,
but that's probably because they'll only begin surveying    migrant camps Monday
to see how many students they'll have next year,    said Jennie Megna, language
arts coordinator with one school-supervised    migrant program.

     Megna said the migrants' early return to Florida would be good news    for
migrant children, who could begin the school year on time.

 Typically, they begin coming in October, and catching up is difficult      for
many of them, she said.

     She said she doesn't foresee the school district having problems    coping
with the early return because they expect an influx in October    anyway.

     A program that teaches English and skills to those who want to get
better jobs, the Adult Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Program in    Tampa, has
been seeing double the number of farm workers that normally    come in the
summer months.

     Max Seiko, a job specialist with the program, which is run by the
Hillsborough County School Board with federal grants, said this    increase
means fewer students can enter the program later this year    because there is
only enough money for 120 a year.

     Two Mexican workers who speak no English, Emilio Guadalupe and    Gregorio
Carlos, recently returned from South Carolina where they went    to pick
cucumbers. But as in the case of many others, there were no    crops to pick.

     "We came home here because we knew there would be work"    eventually,
Carlos said in Spanish as he waited in line at the Good    Samaritan Mission to
obtain a week's supply of groceries. "We have    stretched the money we earned
last spring to last us as long as it    could."

     Carlos and Guadalupe live in Palmetto in a one-bedroom apartment    with
six other people.

     "They are working, so they are paying the rent," Carlos said.

     Guadalupe Santana and his family heard about the drought from an    aunt
who lives in Michigan, so his 12 brothers and sisters and their    mother didn't
even bother to leave Florida in search of work.

     "People who went up North just came back and said there is no work    so
don't even waste your time," Santana said.

     While they wait for the fall crops to come in, the Santanas live on
welfare checks, food stamps and whatever help the mission can provide.

     In addition to staples, Dora Cruz says they can use any type of    food -
especially canned items.

     "We are also in need of children's clothes at this moment,"' she    said.

     Tax deductible donations can be sent to the Good Samaritan Mission    at
P.O. Box 213, Balm 33503, or call the mission at (813) 634-7136.



LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE

                            Times Publishing Company


                              754 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Vallejo Times Herald (California)

                            April 2, 2008 Wednesday

New Ag commissioner not worried about influx of pests

BYLINE: By Danny Bernardini/The Reporter, Vacaville

SECTION: LOCAL

LENGTH: 278 words


Although he's walking into a job dealing with the eradication of two of the
state's most invasive pests, the county's new agriculture commissioner said he's
ready for the challenge.

Jim Allan - who leaves behind 19 years with San Joaquin County - officially was
named the new Solano County Agriculture Commissioner on Tuesday and said he's
not overly concerned about the Mediterranean Fruit Fly or the Light Brown Apple
Moth.

"The state and feds have those pretty well in hand, it's mostly a matter of
cooperating with them," Allan said. "I'm not intimidated by that process."

Allan, who will commute from Thornton, fills the position left by Jerry Howard
in January. Don Turko, director of human resources, said it was an exhaustive
search to find someone to assume the commissioner's role. Allan will take over
officially on April 14.

Allan said it was his experience as deputy ag commissioner and senior biologist
in San Joaquin County that set him apart. To become an ag commissioner, he said
someone needs to be licensed as a deputy commissioner and sealer of weights and
measures.

Add that to the eight licenses associated with being a biologist, and that
narrows the field of candidates. He said another factor is that most biologists
don't fancy leaving the field.

"It takes years to get through the process," he said. "Being a biologist is such
a good job, people don't want to promote."

As for the decision to leave his old post and assume a new job, Allan said it
wasn't a tough decision.

"Agriculture in Solano County is a lot like San Joaquin. It's a comfortable
fit," he said. "I've only heard good things about the staff. The timing was
right, so I went for it."

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2008 The Times-Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              755 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

Alberta farmers brace for hot, dry weather; Influx of grasshoppers also a worry

BYLINE: Sammy Hudes, Calgary Herald

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: CALGARY


A forecast of hot, dry weather for the upcoming months has many Alberta farmers
worried about crop production. "Above-normal temperatures" are likely until the
end of August in southern and central Alberta, according to Environment Canada
meteorologist Bill McMurtry.

This could be combined with less precipitation than normal, said McMurtry.

And with drier weather comes the potential for an increase of grasshoppers that
invade farmland.

"In general, the spring so far has been relatively dry in many locations,
particularly in the agricultural belt across the Prairies," McMurtry said.

Mark Cutts, a crop specialist with Alberta Agriculture, said the effects on
farmers could be "extensive."

"We could see an impact on yield," he said. "Moisture would certainly be
welcome."

If not, grasshoppers could plague the province's farms, Cutts warned.

"Once they hatch, if their conditions remain warm and dry, they'll be
productive.

"When they find a plant type that they favour in terms of their diet, then they
will just feed on that crop, so potentially they could have an impact on the
amount of plants that are in a field."

All that farmers can do at this point is pray for rain, said Lynn Jacobson,
president of the Alberta Federation of Agriculture.

"It's a waiting game for a lot of people now," he said. "If they don't get some
decent moisture in the next week or week and a half in some areas, it's really
going to start hurting the crop and the production."

Jacobson said some crops, such as chickpeas, hold out better against drought.
Others, like barley, could fare poorly.

"You can't really prepare beforehand," he said.

The forecast has some farmers worried about their livelihood.

"As a farmer, we grow barley to make money," said Brian Otto, who also harvests
wheat and yellow peas in Warner, about 70 kilometres southeast of Lethbridge.
"It's how we operate our farms, and certainly if we have reduced yield, that's
less to sell. It has a direct impact on the cash flow of the farm."

On Tuesday, canola farmer Steve

Selgensen was out spraying crops in his field in Hussar, about 100 kilometres
east of Calgary.

"There's different grades of sprays you can put on these crops, and everybody's
just looking for the cheapest bang for their buck because they don't want to
spend any more than they have to," Selgensen said. "It's looking not so good
right now."

Otto said he prepares for the possibility of drought by taking out crop
insurance.

"The years you have good crops, you have to be trying to keep that money set
aside for the eventuality," he said. "In southern Alberta, we're prone to
drought once in a while, so you've got to be prepared for that."

About 160 km north of Calgary in Sylvan Lake, farmer Jason Lenz said it's been
the driest spring in 15 years.

"The crops didn't germinate as vigorously," he said. "At this time of year, your
crops are a little bit thinner, just not as even as they normally are, and
that's directly related to the amount of moisture we have ... Our farm is in
generally a very high rainfall area, and to have dry conditions like this is
really uncommon."

Otto said there are systems to preserve moisture in the ground longer that
didn't exist 20 or 30 years ago, which help farmers in these situations.
However, they are otherwise powerless against the detrimental effects of the
weather. "The farmers are at the mercy of mother nature," he said. !@COPYRIGHT=©
2015 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Colleen De Neve, Calgary Herald; Hussar, Alta., area farmer Steve
Selgensen says while the situation is not dire yet, if the area does not get
rain soon, the growing season might be impacted.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 The Leader-Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              756 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Times of Zambia (Ndola)

                                August 05, 2014

Milk Output Rises to 452 Million Litres

BYLINE: Mwewa Shamatutu

LENGTH: 379 words


Agriculture and Livestock Deputy Minister Greyford Monde says small-holder dairy
farming has potential to enhance the development of the dairy industry in
Zambia.

Mr Monde said Government realises the key role that small-holder dairy farmers
play in the alleviation of poverty in rural areas.

He revealed that Government had so far constructed 50 milk collection centres in
the country and milk production had increased from 128 million litres per year
in 2005 to 452 million litres per year in 2013.

He was speaking during the 6th Annual Dairy competition prize-giving event held
in Chisamba yesterday.

Mr Monde said that advice and guaidnace was given on nutrition, artificial
insemination and genetics among others, during the various field days that were
held earlier this year for more than 200 small-scale dairy farmers in Namwala,
Choma and Monze.

Speaking at the same event, former Zambia National Farmers Union (ZNFU)
President Guy Robinson called on Government to consider promoting small-holder
farmers in the country to boost the

agriculture sector and realise its full potential in alleviating poverty
particularly in the rural areas.

Mr Robinson said the enthusiasm from the small-holder farmers in the
agricultural sector needed to be nurtured.

He also appealed to Government to consider reducing on hand-outs during the
budgeting process and instead protect local farmers from the influx of cheap
agricultural commodities from outside the country.

Meanwhile, a South Africa- based farmer Andrew Masterson, who was one of the
judges during the competition, also asked Government to create a level playing
field in the dairy industry between small-holder and commercial farmers.

Mr Masterson said small-holder farmers showed a lot of enthusiasm during the
field days that preceded the prize giving ceremony adding that this could not be
ignored because it was a recipe for growth in the industry.

He said the field days were a sign that Government had not neglected small-scale
farmers and called for a stronger partnership between the private sector and
Government to up their participation in future dairy competitions.

About 80 small-holder dairy farmers came from different parts of the country and
participated in the field day held at the ZAMBEEF Kalundu dairy farm.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              757 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                             August 31, 2007 Friday
                                 First Edition

Reform guide in black and white

BYLINE: Christopher Jay

SECTION: NEWS; Government Business; Pg. 80

LENGTH: 477 words


A South African consulting group operating in Australia is finding local
financial and technical expertise invaluable in its role helping South African
government agencies improve their administrative and business processes.

The IQ Business Group, headed by group chief executive officer Dirk Ackerman,
runs programs for black economic empowerment, an accelerated program of
affirmative action for South Africa's black majority population.

An example of an Australian role model is superannuation knowhow.

"We South Africans are very envious of what the Australian government provides
for its social landscape, one of the best environments for people in the world,"
Mr Ackerman said. "We want to use the Australian expertise to rethink the South
African retirement system."

A forthcoming issue for South Africa is pending transfers of farm ownership to
historically disadvantaged black groups.

"What we suggested to our Department of Agriculture is that instead of having
lots of inspectors for compliance in transfer of ownership, they should train
360 of their staff in basic project management and business skills pertinent to
agriculture," Mr Ackerman said.

"When land starts to be redistributed, they'll be ready. What we don't want is
what happened in Zimbabwe. If you fly over that country, you'll see the wrecks
of farm tractors which were used for local transport, for which they are not
suitable. Irrigation pipes were ripped out and sold for scrap."

A mass influx of starving refugees from Zimbabwe has strained South Africa's
Home Affairs Department, for which IQ Business Group has just done some work.

"We had to upgrade IT and redo process engineering, provide training for about
1500 staff, also hire additional staff," he said.

"We get refugees from as far afield as Sudan, Somalia, Sierra Leone, South
Africa being a very prosperous economy, with a 5 per cent growth rate, there's a
resources boom, a retail boom, a huge boom in construction and infrastructure."

Another issue is minimising graft in distribution of basic 50-60 square metre
houses to black citizens as a gift, at a rate of 50,000 to 60,000 units a month.
Complex central government controls seek to deter local municipalities from
diverting allocations to political mates.

The IQ Business Group also hopes to apply South African experience here.

"I'm very excited about our opportunities in Australia on anti-money
laundering," he said. "Your legislation is very similar to ours. The trick in
South Africa was to ensure processes were sorted out and staff were
appropriately trained. We saw many institutions spending huge amounts on fancy
consulting which came to nought."

KEY POINTS

· Consultants see benefits in applying Australian knowhow to black South African
townships.

· Superannuation can be a role model for South Africa.

· Lessons from controlling money laundering can be applied here.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2007 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              758 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                    NewsDay

                              May 2, 2015 Saturday

                               Mugabe's hate speech unhelpful - NewsDay Zimbabwe

LENGTH: 640  words


President Robert Mugabe is prone to serious gaffes, but this week he went too
far with his statements insinuating that Zimbabweans were to blame for the
deadly xenophobic violence in South Africa.

Mugabe went further to claim that Kalangas, mainly from Matabeleland South, were
notorious for petty crimes in the neighbouring country, a statement that tallies
with the stance of bigots who tried to justify the barbaric attacks against
foreigners.

The president said Kalangas were not educated hence their propensity to skip
borders to neighbouring countries. In the run-up to the 2013 elections, Mugabe
made similar disparaging statements at a rally in Matabeleland South where he
mocked Zimbabweans based in South Africa whom he said toiled in South Africa
only to return home with bicycles.

      He made it a point to single out men from Matabeleland South for ridicule.
        Mugabe also once labelled people of Mbare in Harare totemless after they
    rejected him in elections. During his visit to South Africa, the 91-year-old
   leader embarrassed his hosts when he was caught on camera declaring: "I don't
                                                       want to see a white man."

 At the height of the Gukurahundi massacres in Midlands and Matabeleland, Mugabe
said Zapu and the late Vice-President Joshua Nkomo were like a cobra in a house.
 He said the only way to get rid of the snake was to strike its head and destroy
  it. The statements were followed by a genocide that left over 20 000 civilians
        perceived to be Zapu supporters dead. Mugabe has uttered similar bigoted
    statements targeted at the white population and supporters of the MDC in its
                                                             various formations.

  These groups have suffered untold violence in the hands of Mugabe's supporters
      and there is no doubt as to who promotes such intolerance. Mugabe's latest
 statements directed at the Kalanga community were tribalistic and unhelpful for
       a country that is still struggling to find the right formula for national
                                                                 reconciliation.

    The group of people he lampooned in front of television cameras suffered the
      brunt of the Gukurahundi massacres. Some of them did not go far with their
    education as they could not obtain national identity documents because their
                                                 parents died during the mayhem.

      Others were born after their mothers were raped by the merciless soldiers.
  Matabeleland South has some of the least developed schools that regularly post
                                       zero pass rates in national examinations.

     The schools are ill-equipped and have no qualified teaches, yet the head of
  State finds it a laughing matter that most people from that region do not have
                                   enough education for them to get decent jobs.

   Apparently, Mugabe does not get the point that he is responsible for the mass
    migration of Zimbabweans to neighbouring countries where they have to endure
                                              abuse at the hands of their hosts.

      Botswana was in the news this week complaining about the influx of "cheap"
          labour from Zimbabwe and has even gone further to regulate against the
                         employment of the immigrants in the agriculture sector.

Zimbabwe's neighbours are affected by the influx of people who overstretch their
   social security system and cause tension in communities. Mugabe was trying to
    find a scapegoat by singling out the Kalangas. The president should learn to
take responsibility for the shortcomings of his rule for him to be able to steer
the country out of the multifaceted crisis that has dragged on for far too long.

  South Africa has already started clamping down on illegal immigrants after the
 criticism from African governments over its handling of the xenophobic attacks.

   Zimbabwe should expect a surge in deportations of its nationals and should be
  putting systems in place to handle them and ensure they don't risk their lives
again crossing crocodile-infested rivers to seek a better life in foreign lands.
   Mugabe should watch his tongue and stop being the divisive leader that he is.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1279


                             Copyright 2015 NewsDay
                 Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.Syndigate.info
                              All Rights Reserved


                              759 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                            November 1, 2011 Tuesday

Angola: Bie Emergency-Agriculture Support

LENGTH: 201  words


Country: Angola (View Country Profile)
Sector: Agriculture and Natural Resources
Type: Emergency Relief
Project Number: AGO044
The deterioration of the situation in Bie Province in December 1998 resulted in
a large influx of IDPs into
Kuito, with as many as 250,000 people crowding into camps. CARE%s emergency
relief project aims to increase food
security for displaced and vulnerable IDPs and others affected by the war by
providing basic food supplies. CARE
currently distributes monthly food rations to over 100,000 displaced persons and
former UNITA combatants in the Bie
Province. The ration includes maize, beans, vegetable oil and iodized salt. WFP
is responsible for the provision of
food, its transport and storage as far as Kuito, while CARE is responsible for
distribution to end users in the camps.


CARE works closely with the community leadership to maintain effective and
timely distributions. With the
resettlement of IDPs and former combatants, CARE is undertaking distributions at
extended centers located in
municipalities and communes around Bie Province. CARE and WFP have also
collaborated on food for work
activities to repair infrastructure such as bridges.

country :United States
Ltd.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2011 Tenders Info
                         Syndigate.info, Al bawaba.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              760 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          THE JOURNAL (Newcastle, UK)

                        June 17, 2005, Friday Edition 1

Defra reveals downturn in sales of agricultural land amid CAP reform

BYLINE: By The Journal

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 36

LENGTH: 231 words


   Figures released by Defra yesterday confirmed that there has been a marked
downturn in the sales of agricultural land.

By the third quarter of 2004, sales were only 191 for the quarter, down 62% from
the same period in 2003 and 83% from the last quarter of 1999.

The farmland market has seen an influx of non-farmer buyers on the back of the
housing market boom. Amenity demand [buying to support lifestyle] and interest
from those seeking alternative investments to the equity market has also been
strong. Since their low in 1993, farmland values have risen by 176%, which has
outpaced that of equities which have risen by only 75% largely due to the
technology market crash.

However, in the past year a marked drop in sales activity has occurred due to
the uncertainty created by reforms to the Common Agricultural Policy [CAP],
leading many farmers to hold rather than sell their land.

Defra figures also show a downturn in the average value of farmland in the third
quarter of 2004, with prices falling 1.4% below last year's levels based upon
the four quarter moving average published by Defra.

These figures have under reported the strength of the market into the latter
half of 2004. More timely statistics from the RICS survey of chartered surveyors
to the first quarter of 2005 show that average farmland values rose by 14% from
a year ago levels.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2005 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd


                              761 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                            Derby Evening Telegraph

                                  May 8, 2001

Rural reaction is 'to wait and see'

BYLINE: By Bob Saul, Rsaul@Derbytelegraph.Co.Uk

SECTION: Agriculture: FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE, Pg.11

LENGTH: 667 words


BUSINESS was booming in the Derbyshire countryside this weekend but business
owners are not convinced that the worst of the foot and mouth crisis is behind
them.

The Bank Holiday weekend and the improved weather, combined with more of the
countryside being opened up, brought an influx of people.

But, despite the turnaround, many traders found it difficult to say that the
crisis was over. Cautious optimism might best describe their mood.

Sally Hollingsworth, manageress of the Old Coach House Tearooms, Tissington,
said: "On Sunday, it was absolutely flat out and the village was absolutely
packed. We're thrilled."

Others reported a similar upturn in their fortunes.

Irene Redfern, owner of Highlands Caravan Park, Fenny Bentley, said: "We are
full and hoping it's turning the corner. We'll have to wait and see what next
weekend brings."

And Chris Allingham, of Bentley Brook Inn and Restaurant, Fenny Bentley, said:
"The weekend went tremendously. We were snowed under on Sunday and yesterday."

But Debbie King, of Ivy House Guest House, Newhaven, spoke for many traders when
she said that the Bank Holiday trade could give businesses false hope.

She said: "The Bank Holiday is not a good indicator. On the whole, April
bookings and inquiries have been down 30 per cent and I feel strongly that they
need to get more footpaths open."

Simon Spencer, of Spencers The Baker, Market Place, Ashbourne, agreed. "We've
had a bad six weeks. March was pretty dire," he said.

"It's picked up dramatically - we were rushed off our feet on Sunday - but I
don't know if it's just the Bank Holiday weekend."

Rose Gregory, of the General Stores, Hartington, was equally concerned.

She said: "It's been reasonable this weekend but not as brilliant as it could
be.

"The weather's been glorious and it may just be that and the Bank Holiday. We'll
see what happens after this."

Places with a specific attraction to offer seem to have fared better, suggesting
that it is still the businesses situated near to countryside paths and walkways
which are suffering most.

Steve Hart, harbour master at Sawley Marina, said: "We had a very busy day on
Sunday, with normal Bank Holiday weekend traffic.

"Being part of the boating industry, as soon as the sun shines we see an
increase in business."

Allan Calladine, of Midland Railway Centre, Ripley, said: "We had an
exceptionally busy weekend but we have a visiting vintage loco here, a one-off
event.

"It's difficult to say if foot and mouth is still affecting us. This was
certainly the busiest weekend so far this year and we're hoping it will
continue."

David Mullarkey, of the Devonshire Arms Hotel, Hartington, said: "It's looking a
little better. There were more people around on Sunday than since the start of
the crisis.

"But the weather's been quite good and that made a difference. Business has been
awful until now. We're running way behind last year."

DIGGING DEEP

MANY Derbyshire farmers are in difficulty because of the crisis. The Derby
Evening Telegraph has established the Dig Deep for Derbyshire Farmers fund,
administered by the Royal Agricultural Benevolent Institution.

%Farmers can apply by calling the helpline in confidence on 01865 727888 or any
NFU branch.

The charity will provide money for farmers in severe difficulties to buy food
and to pay urgent domestic bills.

We are asking individuals and businesses to donate to our fund, which now stands
at more than GBP 25,000.

You can do this at any Derbyshire Building Society branch or agency, quoting
account number 3308 511 06, which will add GBP 1 to each donation. Or you can
send a cheque to Farmers' Appeal, Derby Evening Telegraph, Meadow Road, Derby
DE1 2DW.

We have now joined forces with Derbyshire Community Foundation to help other
people in distress in the countryside.

Some people have been laid off work because of the economic effects of the
disease and many others are suffering hardship.

The joint campaign to help people throughout the rural community stands at GBP
56,000.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: BAKING HOT DAY: Spencers the Bakers in Market Place, Ashbourne, had a
busy day on Bank Holiday Monday.  01-4057-31

                     Copyright 2001 Derby Evening Telegraph


                              762 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                           October 9, 1997, Thursday

TACA rates give way to mounting pressures

BYLINE: BY TERRY BRENNAN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 717 words


The first major crack in the two-year, rock-solid rate front of the Trans-
Atlantic Conference Agreement has opened with TACA slashing refrigerated
grapefruit rates by about 19 percent.

TACA, the 16-member conference of carriers that set rates together in the North
Atlantic, cut its tariffs on the lucrative reefer cargo that moves from Florida
to Northern Europe from $2.15 a carton to $1.70, confirmed Tom Murphy, manager
of refrigerated services in Miami for Maersk Line, a TACA carrier.

Until the move late last month, the conference had held its ground on rates the
past two years despite the entry of three independent lines in the North
Atlantic earlier this year. The ranks of the independents grew just last week
when Hanjin Shipping Co. withdrew from TACA over pricing.

The rate action is particularly significant because TACA has been the only major
east-west conference to maintain its rates as overcapacity resulting from an
influx of large ships has ravaged prices in the trans-Pacific and Europe-Far
East trades.

TACA was even able to hold firm on rates when Evergreen Marine Corp. and Lykes
Lines slashed their lumber rates last summer to match those offered by the new
independents in the North Atlantic.

""Grapefruit to Northern Europe is traditionally a lucrative cargo, but it's
certainly not as lucrative as it used to be for us because of the price-
aggressive policies of some of the independents and the breakbulk carriers,''
Mr. Murphy said.

""We are trying at TACA to ward off the independents and also narrow the
standard per carton differential with breakbulk lines because it's becoming a
tougher market to Europe,'' he said.

AGGRESSIVE ON RATES

Evergreen and Ecuadorian Line were particularly aggressive on grapefruit rates
last year, and the entry of Green Charter, a Danish breakbulk carrier, into the
market this month is expected to increase the rate pressure, Mr. Murphy said.
All the container volumes of the red grapefruit move from the ports of Miami,
Jacksonville, Charleston, S.C., and Savannah. The breakbulk carriers operate
from Port Canaveral, Fla., to Flushing, in the Netherlands, he said.

TACA has signed two volume-related service contracts. The first is with DNE
International Sales of Fort Pierce, Fla., for a minimum of 1,500 40-foot
containers or their equivalent.

The Florida Citrus Growers, an association comprised of seven shippers, has
agreed to ship 1,000 FEUs, exporters said.

The conference also for the first time in several years slashed its minimum-
volume commitments to 1,000 FEUs for the September-April season. The minimum was
1,500 FEUs last year.

HANGING ON TO MARKET SHARE

""TACA is being very aggressive on pricing on the grapefruit this year because
they want to hang on to their market share against what will probably be some
pretty low rates because of all the competition this year,'' said Paul Genke,
director of sales and marketing for Packers of Indian River in Fort Pierce, Fla.
""That increased competition is making our cargo very price- sensitive this
year, and TACA is obviously responding to that.''

Packers of Indian River expects to divide its shipments equally between
container and breakbulk carriers this season through the ports of Miami and
Jacksonville to primarily Germany, the Netherlands and Britain, Mr. Genke said.

Some 9.5 million cartons of the red grapefruit are projected to move to Northern
Europe this year. Roughly 1,134 cartons fit into a standard FEU reefer, Mr.
Genke said.

TACA's port-to-port base tariffs to Europe held at $2 per carton last year, but
the conference lost market share as Ecuadorian, Evergreen, Lykes and China Ocean
Shipping Co. made market inroads.

VOLUME DOWN IN '96

Maersk Line and Sea-Land Service Inc., the dominant TACA carriers, lost market
share last year. Maersk's volume sagged 15 percent to 2,571 20-foot containers,
while Sea-Land's dipped by 8 percent to 2,068 TEUs, according to PIERS, the Port
Import/Export Reporting Service of The Journal of Commerce.  Ecuadorian's volume
increased 34 percent to 1,773 TEUs, while Evergreen's cargo soared by 839
percent to 798 TEUs from a smaller base. Lykes handled 484 TEUs and Cosco moved
104 TEUs when those independents entered the market last year, according to
PIERS.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic - FEELING THE SQUEEZE OF COMPETITION;
 GRAPH (not in the database): GRAPEFRUIT CARGO, breakbulk and containerized from
Florida ports, April 1995 to August 1997, in thousands of metric tons.;
 The Trans-Atlantic Conference Agreement is cutting rates on grapefruit from the
United States to Northern Europe. TACA says the seasonal market has been strong.
(Source: PIERS database, New York; The Journal of Commerce)

                    Copyright 1997 Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              763 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                              June 13, 2014 Friday

Overhaul facilities at airport, Chamber of Marathwada Industries and Agriculture
urges

SECTION: AURANGABAD

LENGTH: 332 words


AURANGABAD: The Chamber of Marathwada Industries and Agriculture (CMIA) in a
letter to the airport authority here strongly demanded that the authority
maintain international standard in the vicinity of the International Airport in
Aurangabad. "It is sad that despite repeated appeals, the airport authority has
not taken any action to improve conditions at the Aurangabad airport premises
and passengers have to face humiliation time and again," complained CMIA
secretary Ajeet Muley.

"The airport got the international status recently and with this the airport
will have immigration and customs facilities. It is important to streamline the
working system, since the airport will have influx of international tourists.
The car parking area needs urgent attention. The present callous attitude of
working will tarnish the image of the historical city and the country at large.
It will adversely impact our economy and future plans of development of the
region," stated the letter.

The letter stated that as one enters the airport premises, one is confronted
with barricades which lack luminous paint and are difficult to maneuver at
night. As one proceeds further to the departure lounge, digital clocks are
missing to help ascertain time. Later, persons sans uniform come and bully
visitors for exceeding parking time and demand money. Many a times there are no
trolleys to cart the luggage and one has to invariably wait. The staff lacks
proper training in dealing with customers.

The letter further stated that even before one parks the vehicle, three-four
people approach the moving vehicle, peep inside, flash parking tickets and ask
for money masking the driver's sight. "Due to this behaviour one almost dashes
against the barricade. The authorities are earnestly requested and advised to
take immediate steps to rectify the situation.

When TOI contacted the director of the International Airport, Aurangabad, D G
Salve, he refused to comment on the issue.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              764 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                            January 10, 2014 Friday

Sindh govt to mobilise resources; Mega development projects

BYLINE:  Our Staff Reporter

SECTION: Vol. XXVII No. 313

LENGTH: 397  words


Sindh Chief Minister Qaim Ali Shah has said Karachi is an important city of
Pakistan and his government has planned to mobilise its resources to implement
mega development projects to convert it into a global and most favourable City
of the world.

He said better provision of clean drinking water, efficient sewerage; sanitation
and mass transit system were the main areas for investment of development to
change the face of the City. He was talking to Rachid Benmessoud, country
director of the World Bank, who called on him here at the CM House on Thursday.

"Though Sindh government is trying its best and providing huge amount for the
development of Karachi. Since the population of Karachi is rapidly increasing
and crossed the 20 million due to influx from all over the country, the foreign
investment is required to achieve the goals," he added.

The CM appreciated the contribution and financial assistance being provided by
the World Bank for improvement in Education, Agriculture and Water sectors. He
said considerable improvement in the social development of the province would be
achieved with the investment of World Bank's financial assistance up to US$400
million in education sector and US$450 million in agriculture and water sectors.

Qaim also appreciated the financial assistance of US$66 million grant of the
World Bank for the management sector of education department under the global
partnership for education programme which is most probably would be implemented
in June 2014. He said Sindh government was providing huge amount to `maintain'
law and order in Karachi and trying its best to overcome this issue within the
shortest possible time. He said the federal government and provincial government
were on the same page so far regarding the development of any sector.

He said Karachi had good potential of investment which could be availed by the
foreign investors to whom Sindh government to provide all the facilities.

The Country Director of World Bank, Rachid Benmessaoud took keen interest in the
development of Karachi. He said urbanisation was a long term and most difficult
subject and it needs leadership, coordination among all the stakeholders to make
it a success. He expressed confidence in the leadership of Sindh chief minister
to change the face of Karachi and convert it into a modern, most favourable and
commercially viable City of the world.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              765 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Eureka Times Standard (California)

                             March 12, 2013 Tuesday

Farms deal with labor shortage

BYLINE: The Times-Standard

SECTION: LIFESTYLE

LENGTH: 510 words


SELMA -- California's $44 billion agricultural industry faces a worsening labor
shortage as farmworkers age, more return home to Mexico and fewer new migrants
arrive to replace them.

The state's farming workforce is aging and shrinking for several reasons,
including stricter immigration enforcement, an improving economy in Mexico and
the lack of interest in field work among the children of farmworkers, according
to the Sacramento Bee (http://bit.ly/ZC3Q0j).

"Basically, we're running out of low-skilled workers," said J. Edward Taylor, a
University of California, Davis, economist who has studied the migration of
farmworkers from Mexico. "The second generation doesn't do farm work. That's why
we've relied on a steady influx of newcomers. And the newcomers are in dwindling
supply."

More than 70 percent of state agricultural producers expect a worker shortage
starting this spring and worsening through the growing season, according to the
California Farm Bureau Federation.

Lawmakers and farm lobbyists are discussing remedies, including granting legal
status to more than 1 million undocumented farmworkers and expanding the number
of visas for agriculture.

"We have to try to find a system that is not going to cause a major disruption
to our industry," said Bryan Little, the farm bureau's director of labor
affairs.

Manuel Cunha Jr., president of the Nisei Farmers League, representing 1,100
farms and other agriculture outlets, said his group's workforce fell by 20 to 30
percent during last year's harvest season. By September, some farm crews were as
much as 60 percent short of the workers they needed.

Cunha blamed increased farm audits by federal immigration officials and the
increasing dangers of crossing the border from Mexico.

"Workers were leaving agriculture because they were fearful of the audits and
getting busted," Cunha said. "And then, when they went home, they realized it
wasn't worth it to return because of the drug traffickers and human
traffickers."

The declining number of farmworkers is prompting some growers to switch to crops
that require less labor.

Chandler Farms, about 40 miles southeast of Fresno, decided to cut back on
peaches and plums and use more land to grow almonds, which can be harvested by
machine.

"I don't know if it is going to get better for a while," said Bill Chandler, who
runs the family ranch in Selma with his son. "If you want peaches or plums, or
strawberries or lettuce or tomatoes, we need a program in which we can have
labor. I don't have the answers."

Arcadio Castro, a foreman at the Chandler ranch, said workers in his Mexican
hometown of Zacatecas can't afford to pay a "coyote" to smuggle them across the
border and prefer construction jobs in urban areas.

So Castro, 59, has depends on veteran laborers willing to do work many of their
children won't consider.

"You're not going to believe me, but the older workers are better," Castro said.
"They go slower, but they work all day long. The younger ones start complaining.
They say, 'Oh, it's so hot.' Then they climb up a ladder and start texting."

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Times - Standard
                              All Rights Reserved


                              766 of 997 DOCUMENTS



              Chinchilla News and Murilla Advertiser (Queensland)

                                 July 21, 2011

Investor's dream

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 442  words



HIGHLIGHT: Chinchilla named number one for investment


Chinchilla has been named as one of the top places in Australia for investors
according to "~Your Investment Property Magazine'.

As stated in last week's Chinchilla News, the magazine stated that Chinchilla
was tied as equal first in investment across the nation.

Citing existing infrastructure, proximity to the resource industry and the
strength of the agricultural industry following a wet summer as investment
drawcards, the magazine's independent study encouraged investors to consider the
local area to spend money.

New Chinchilla Community Commerce and Industry CEO Mark Fitzgerald said the
announcement showed the vitality of the town.

"I think it's an excellent thing," he said.

"It shows the area has excellent positive growth and sustainable positive
growth."

However, a lack of investment opportunities has threatened to take the title
away from Chinchilla almost as soon as it received it.

A slow development process and lack of housing opportunities has presented a
road block for out of town money.

Mr Fitzgerald said while the time delay could threaten investment he believed
the Western Downs Regional Council's plans were on the right track.

"I think it (development roadblocks) will be a problem," he said.

"But I think Council is trying to put the steps in place to streamline the
process.

"To get people investing we need to make the process simple and remove as many
potential roadblocks to investment."

Western Downs Regional Council councillor Ray Jamieson said there had been an
influx of investment in Chinchilla recently.

"It's definitely become one of the hot spots of the WDRC," he said.

"(Developments have) mostly been residential, there have been some industrial
but apart from Woolies and McDonald's there hasn't been too much commercial
development."

Cr Jamieson said while development applications took some time to be approved
there was no "one size fits all" policy.

"We're still meeting our application timelines...we'd like to do better, but
given particular circumstances in Chinchilla it's a bit more complicated.

"There are some storm mitigation requirements. It probably hasn't been
implemented in the past as well as we'd have liked."

Chinchilla has seen a major influx of development across the town including a
new shopping complex with a Woolworth's supermarket, a number of new housing
developments and an industrial estate.

However, the sailing is not as smooth as some developers would hope with the
proposal to develop a trade and services centre on the Warrego Highway falling
through.

Similarly the further development of the empty lot between the Great Western
Hotel and Rackemann's BP has been stalled for some time.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TCN


                    Copyright 2011 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              767 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Bowling Green Daily News (Kentucky)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune News Service

                            July 26, 2006 Wednesday

State cash influx of $120,000 arrives for building a new farmers market

BYLINE: Doug Waters, The Daily News, Bowling Green, Ky.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 615 words


Jul. 26--RUSSELLVILLE -- Gov. Ernie Fletcher visited Logan County on Tuesday to
issue hefty checks to the community, including one for $120,000 for the Logan
County Farmers Market.

The Logan County Agricultural Extension Foundation was approved for $70,000 in
local funds and $50,000 in state funds to construct a permanent facility at 29
Commerce Drive in Russellville for the farmers market, which has existed for
more than 20 years, according to the governor's office.

"I don't get a chance to get down here as frequently as I'd like," Fletcher told
a crowded room of citizens and farmers. "I'm here today to bring some resources
back."

Fifty percent of Kentucky's Master Settlement Agreement has been invested into
the Kentucky Agricultural Development Fund since the program's inception in
January 2001. Settlement money is being used for crop diversification projects,
like Logan's new market, according to the governor's office.

"How many of you folks still grow tobacco?" Fletcher asked, watching a few hands
raise. "Change is not easy, but we've got to be forward in our thinking."

Fletcher joked that he could be content as a vegetarian after surveying the
market's fresh green beans, corn and tomatoes.

"I've got cattle folks here, so I want you to know that's not going to happen,"
he added.

Fletcher then scribbled a $100,000 check for road-resurfacing projects in
Russellville.

"We're very grateful," Russellville Mayor Shirlee Yassney said, sporting a broad
smile.

"May I use your marker?" Logan County Judge-Executive John Guion asked Fletcher.

Fletcher declined Guion's request before writing a $500,000 check to Logan's
fiscal court to use at its discretion on road improvements. He also presented a
$17.7 million check to the court for biennium capital and six-year road projects
and cut another check for $15,000 for Adairville to use for road resurfacing.

Fletcher gave a rundown of Kentucky statistics and accomplishments since he took
office 2 1/2 years ago, such as a 10.5 percent increase in teacher salaries and
$24 million reinvested in the state retirement system from budget surpluses.

"We're not going to let the politics of destruction get in the way of moving our
state forward," he said, a reference to his indictment on misdemeanor charges of
allegedly awarding jobs to political supporters.

Fletcher was flanked by Guion, Yassney, Sen. Joey Pendleton, D-Hopkinsville,
Rep. Sheldon Baugh, R-Russellville, Logan County Fiscal Court members, and
others throughout the check presentations and a ribbon cutting ceremony at the
market's concrete pavilion.

"We're delighted he's out meeting the average citizen," said Charles Orange, the
commonwealth's attorney for Logan and Todd counties.

After the ribbon cutting, Fletcher posed for photos with farmers, such as Don
Horton, 77, who gave Fletcher a sampling of his elephant garlic.

"It's milder than the regular garlic," Horton said. "Just don't eat too much of
it because it does have gastric repercussions."

Others commented about the new spot for the market.

"It's nice to be on the concrete," said Wanda Grayson, who was selling
cucumbers, squash and tomatoes with her husband, Dan.

"I love it here," said Michael Thomason, who sells for Williams Farms Produce.
"It's helped business tremendously."

To see more of the Bowling Green Daily News, or to subscribe to the newspaper,
go to http://www.bgdailynews.com. Copyright (c) 2006, The Daily News, Bowling
Green, Ky. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060726-BW-FARMER-MKT-20060726

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BW


                    Copyright 2006 Bowling Green Daily News


                              768 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Herald (Harare)

                               September 25, 2015

Rollex to Engage More Farmers

BYLINE: Martin Kadzere

LENGTH: 473 words


Rollex Farm Fresh, a leading horticultural company, says it will bring more
farmers under its contract scheme to produce fresh produce mainly for the local
market, an official said.

This comes at a time when most local supermarkets are fully stocked with
imported fresh produce such as onions, grapes, peaches, frozen vegetables,
carrots, bananas, beans and peas.

Most of these products are being imported from South Africa, despite Zimbabwe
having suitable conditions to produce enough for the domestic market and surplus
for export.

Rollex chief executive Mr Edwin Moyo said his company was working on a financing
model to increase farmers under its contract scheme to competitively produce for
the local market.

"We would like to beef up our out grower scheme . . . to produce high value
crops so that we can produce enough for local supermarkets such as Pick 'n'
Pay," said Mr Moyo.

"This will help curb the influx of imports of fresh products from South Africa."

According to the Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency, the importation of fresh
produce saw the country spending about $4 million in the first three months of
the year.

Rollex is an agriculture division of Lonrho, also involved in packing of fresh
produce for retail chains including Tesco and Mark & Spencer in the United
Kingdom and South Africa's Spar and Pick 'n' Pay supermarkets. It is also
involved in logistics.

The company has more than 150 farmers under its contract scheme and also runs
its own farms.

While Mr Moyo could not be drawn into revealing facilities the company is
pursuing, he told local media last year that the external shareholders had
agreed to invest $16 million.

Zimbabwe's horticultural industry, has been on a rebound since 2010 following
successive years of recession, which started on the turn of the millennium.

Air cargo exports have been rising since 2012 mainly driven by vegetables and
flowers. And with the continued growth in exports, Zimbabwe, has started sea
freight shipments, Mr Moyo said.

Zimbabwe used to be one of the largest exporters of a wide range of
horticultural products in Africa, supplying overseas markets including Europe
and the Middle East.

For instance, citrus exports peaked in 2001 at 45 000 tonnes, being 60 percent
of fresh produce output. Zimbabwe also became a valuable exporter of cut
flowers, and by 2001, it was ranked as the second largest in Africa, behind
Kenya, second among African, Caribbean and Pacific exporters, and was the fifth
biggest exporter to the EU.

Zimbabwe has recorded increase in fresh produce exports to the European Union,
capitalising on restrictions imposed on Kenya by the regional block over the use
of banned chemicals.

Kenya is one of Africa's largest fresh produce exporters and enjoys about 10
percent of the EU market share. It earned about $1 billion from fresh produce
exports last year.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              769 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Globe (Worthington, Minnesota)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             June 16, 2015 Tuesday

Building partnerships -- one trip at a time

BYLINE: Julie Buntjer, The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1044 words


June 16--WORTHINGTON -- Seven years after a church group from southwest
Minnesota traveled to South Africa to teach members in the Ondini Circuit of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of South Africa about agriculture and develop
community gardens, the relationship between ELCSA and the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of America in Minnesota has continued to blossom.

Bishop Phembukuthula Buthelezi and Khayo Mpungose arrived in Minnesota late last
week after spending a week in Chicago and the ELCA headquarters. While in the
state, they attended the Watonwan Conference in St. James and the Southwest
Minnesota Synod Assembly in St. Peter before visiting Worthington on Monday.

The pair met with community leaders here to discuss a variety of issues,
including how Worthington has adjusted to an influx of immigrants with differing
languages and diverse cultures. They also came to extend an invitation to local
individuals -- particularly youths -- to visit their country and encourage their
people.

Buthelezi has served as bishop in the ELCSA since 2009, and will retire in 2017.
He said he made this trip to extend his gratitude to members of Minnesota's ELCA
for the partnerships that have been forged with ELCSA's conferences.

"I need to say thank you for many things these conferences have done for my
people and myself -- to encourage them not to stop some of the projects that are
going on," said Buthelezi. "This Shetek Conference has a unique contribution,
not only to the diocese, but to the African people at large (by teaching) the
best use of the land -- farming, agriculture."

Buthelezi said that while there is agricultural land available, farming is not
considered a respectable trade. Those opinions stem back to the days when the
Zulu people of South Africa were enslaved.

"We started to hate farming and agriculture," he explained, saying that many
young people fled the rural areas for larger cities and better jobs. "We crowd
the cities and we leave the land, yet we need the product from the land in all
these big cities."

Now, it is Buthelezi's hope that the young people of his country can learn to
appreciate agriculture and the ability to feed their people.

When members of the Shetek Conference came and worked side by side with the
people of the Ondini Circuit to break ground and plant seeds, Buthelezi said it
helped change attitudes.

"This is not only appreciated by the church, but even the leadership in the
country," he shared. "The government is happy that they're assisting us to make
use of the land that we have.

"The local people's thinking has changed in a positive way (as well). They can
do it -- especially if people from America can do it. If Americans do it one
way, the whole world will do it that way."

While Minnesota's Shetek Conference has helped South Africans with their
agricultural practices, other synods are assisting the ELCSA circuits on other
issues, including addressing health and wellness (HIV and AIDS).

The Rev. Mark Yackel-Juleen said there are 10 ELCA conferences in southwest
Minnesota and 10 circuits in the diocese in South Africa, and each was matched
based on commonalities. Because the Shetek conference is primarily rural -- it
is comprised of the six counties of far southwest Minnesota, and is also home to
Shalom Hill Farm -- it was matched with the Ondini Circuit in the Kwa Zulu-Natal
Province.

"Once the relationship was opened up to develop connections from conference to
circuit, we started to explore that," said Yakel-Juleen, who has since made five
trips to South Africa. Delegations from southwest Minnesota have traveled to
South Africa on four occasions, while South Africa has sent two delegations to
southwest Minnesota.

"We had this wonderful experience traveling through the Ondini Circuit, seeing
villages, where the church had land, worshiping with our brothers and sisters
there and doing an assessment of what might be possible," Yakel-Juleen said.
"Out of that has grown projects."

Now, with the bishop's invitation to the southwest Minnesota synod to return to
South Africa for a visit, discussion has already focused on possible projects.

Dale Holmes, chairman of the Shetek Partnership Committee, said a letter has
already been sent to the chair of the Ondini Council to inquire about what could
be done next.

"We need to be requested from our partners so we can determine the
qualifications of our partners, recruit and fundraise," said Holmes, who has
made three visits to South Africa through the partnership.

"One of the possible projects going forward is soybean processing," said
Yakel-Juleen, adding that on their last visit, they met with an Afrikaner who
developed a way to process soybeans into soy protein using bicycles and
wood-fired boilers.

"Sometimes our folks wonder, 'What do we have to offer?'" he said. "They're
excited to go because it's an adventure, but they wonder what they can
contribute. All of us can get down in the soil, hoe it and plant it.

"On our last visit we planted 3,000 cabbage plants. While we're doing that,
we're sharing -- we're telling stories, we're getting to know one another. These
projects related to the land actually help connect our people together."

Since South Africans have only known freedom since 1994, there is both a
struggle for liberation as well as a spirit of forgiveness that has grown from
years of oppression.

"They've found a way to forgive one another. It's an amazing story," said
Yakel-Juleen, adding that the bishop of the Southwest Minnesota Synod expressed
to leaders that they are learning about forgiveness through the partners in
South Africa in a very real way.

Mpungose said there are many things to see during a visit to South Africa, from
museums to the beach.

"South Africa has the most sophisticated economy of Africa -- we have the
largest port on the continent," he said. "Africa is the richest continent in the
whole world in terms of natural resources, yet it is the poorest,
economically-speaking."

Buthelezi and Mpungose have seven more ELCA conferences to visit in the state
this week before they prepare for their return trip to South Africa on Monday.

___ (c)2015 The Daily Globe (Worthington, Minn.) Visit The Daily Globe
(Worthington, Minn.) at www.dglobe.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150616-QG-Building-partnerships-one-trip-at-a-time-0616-20150616

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QG


                         Copyright 2015 The Daily Globe


                              770 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                  The Dominion Post (Wellington, New Zealand)

                            January 13, 2012 Friday

Skills shortage hits agricultural science

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 484 words


BRONWYN TORRIE

WHERE once New Zealand exported its agriculture talents to the world, now there
are not enough Kiwis to fill highly skilled jobs in the industry.

Five agricultural science occupations were added to the Labour Department's
long-term skills shortage list to enable easier entry for migrants who can fill
the gaps.

But industry veterans have warned that migrants could lack the required
knowledge of New Zealand's agriculture and that shortages could become acute.

AgResearch farm systems scientist Warren King said there needed to be greater
efforts to entice "bright young things" to extend their degrees in the field.

"We've now got quite a cohort of very senior agricultural scientists that are
not very far away from retiring and I wonder what is going to happen when they
start retiring en masse," he said.

Massey University director of agriculture Jacqueline Rowarth said the
agricultural skills shortage was a spin-off from decades of the industry being
undervalued.

Since the late 1980s, agriculture had been seen as a "sunset industry" and
blamed for polluting waterways, and "dirty dairying" practices put young people
off the agricultural career path.

Another reason for the shortage was a lack of students staying at university to
complete PhDs, which were required for most agricultural scientist positions, as
they could obtain well-paying jobs with a bachelor's degree, Professor Rowarth
said.

Adding occupations including agricultural scientist (farm systems scientist),
biotechnologist (genetics scientist) and environmental research scientist (water
quality analyst) signalled a long- term and global shortage in the workforce.

Professor Rowarth warned that some positions could not be filled by migrants as
they required hands-on knowledge of New Zealand's agriculture.

Meanwhile, several teaching positions have been dropped from the long-term and
immediate skills shortage lists, despite union representatives saying the
teacher shortage is still a problem for schools.

Post Primary Teachers' Association junior vice-president Doug Clark warned that
removing several teaching positions from the list was premature, as teacher
shortages were still an issue even after an influx of foreign teachers.

Secondary school and early childhood teaching, which were added to the long-term
skills shortage list in 2005, were dropped in the recent review.

Early childhood (Montessori) and primary school teaching were dropped from the
immediate skills shortage list after being added in 2007 and 2005 respectively.

New Zealand Education Institute national secretary Paul Goulter said it was not
surprising that primary teachers had been removed from the skills shortage list
as the number of job vacancies had been trending down. Economic uncertainty was
keeping teachers in positions and fewer graduates were heading overseas.

---------------

CAPTION:

Warren King: Senior scientists near retirement.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                              771 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                          Mansfield and Ashfield Chad

                            February 24, 2017 Friday

LETTER: Being part of the EU is a burden

LENGTH: 201  words


The letter from Dave Johnson shows the Remainers' persist in their mistaken
views.  Do they want continued mass immigration from Europe?  This was the issue
that led the majority to vote to leave the European Union.

The influx of three million people from Eastern Europe was the last straw, after
the largely uncontrolled immigration from the Indian subcontinent etc that
occurred since 1960.  I accept that many immigrants have made a worthwhile
contribution to this country, but the scale of immigration has changed the
nation out of all recognition.

The lack of control over people entering Britain from the EU has enabled 400
foreign killers to settle in this country.   The Common Fisheries policy enabled
French, Spanish and Belgian trawlers to overfish our waters so that many species
of fish are now in short supply.

The Common Agricultural Policy has meant a drain of cash from us to support
French farmers.

Most of our roads are patchwork quilts of potholes, but I have seen excellent
roads in Spain, Portugal and Ireland, all paid for by the EU of which we are the
second largest contributor.

Free of these burdens the UK or an independent England will thrive.

David Dabell

Allwood Close,

Mansfield

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NMAC


                       Copyright 2017 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              772 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                          September 29, 2011 Thursday
                                 METRO EDITION

An infestation of door-to-door vendors

BYLINE: ROCHELLE OLSON; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 331 words



HIGHLIGHT: They're telling St. Paul residents they have better solutions to ash
borer problem than the city and state.


St. Paul warned residents Wednesday about an influx of door-to-door contractors
who are telling residents they have better information and treatment than the
city and state for the emerald ash borer.

St. Paul Parks and Recreation and the Minnesota Department of Agriculture
confirmed Monday the invasive tree killer had been found in six trees near
Summit Avenue and Dale Street, three miles from previously confirmed infestation
sites. The latest confirmation has brought reports of new door-to-door vendors
reportedly claiming to be affiliated with the city.

The city warns that the for-profit door-to-door vendors are not authorized by
St. Paul or the state.

If contacted by a vendor, the city suggests residents ask for identification,
because all city forestry staff carry ID cards. If the vendor doesn't have
proper identification, the city suggests taking their name and calling the city.

"If the vendor does not identify themselves as working for the city, residents
can certainly make their own decision on the products they may be selling for
private use," parks spokesman Brad Meyer said in an e-mail to neighborhood
groups.

Although the spread of the borer wasn't unexpected, the St. Paul infestation had
previously been confirmed only in St. Anthony Park. All 100,000 ash trees in the
city are at risk of infestation and death from the insect, which feeds on a tree
and chokes off its nutrient supply.

Residents with questions about treatment for ash trees can visit
www.stpaul.gov/eab. Insecticide information is available at
www.emeraldashborer.info.

The city recommends all work done on private property be performed by a
certified arborist. The city's forestry hotline is 651-632-5129 or e-mail at
forestry@ci.stpaul.mn.us

The state is awaiting a shipment of Chinese wasps from Michigan and is expected
to release them near Summit Avenue as early as Friday. The wasps are a natural
predator to the borer in their native Asia.

Rochelle Olson - 651-925-5035 Twitter: @rochelleolson

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2011 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              773 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         The Daily News of Los Angeles

                            April 16, 2008 Wednesday
                                 VALLEY EDITION

PIERCE EVOLVED FROM VALLEY'S NEED FOR AGRICULTURAL WORKERS

BYLINE: By Connie Llanos Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 789 words


For John Turco, getting to his classes at Pierce College was an adventure.

Back then, roads running north to the Woodland Hills campus stopped at Ventura
Boulevard. So students like Turco had to make the rest of the trek on a farm
wagon or by horse.

``It was out in the middle of nowhere,'' said Turco, who at the time was an
aspiring farmer majoring in sheep husbandry.

But for Turco and others, the campus also was heaven-sent. ``It was absolutely
enchanting,'' he said.

The year was 1948, when the West Valley was still made up of little more than
farms, dairies and a few movie ranches, and Pierce College was established to
celebrate the area's agricultural community.

In the past six decades, a lot has changed. The area's farms have been replaced
by houses, condos and high-rises. And many majors at the college -- like swine
husbandry and crop science -- have been replaced by fields including graphic
design and computer science.

Today, college officials say the future of Pierce relies on its ability to meld
its past with its future.

``The farm is sacred to this community,'' said Robert Garber, president of
Pierce College. ``What we are focused on now is bringing modern agricultural and
animal sciences to the college.''

Pierce's agricultural focus has been at the heart of its existence since it was
founded by Dr. Clarence Pierce, then-president of the Los Angeles Board of
Education, on 427 acres nestled in Woodland Hills.

Pierce designed the agricultural college primarily to help train military
personnel that had come home from World War II and gone to college on the GI
Bill of Rights. The college would train them, and then they could find work on
farms across the Valley.

Back then, the college was an all-male campus, housed in a few quonset huts. It
wasn't until the 1950s that the college admitted its first women.

By the 1960s, industrial jobs began to open up in the Valley -- and with that
came majors at Pierce in the fields of aerospace, auto mechanics and mechanical
engineering.

A decade later, enrollment at Pierce had climbed to 20,000.

But the college also has endured hard times as the decades of growth came to a
halt by 1978. It was then that the state's voters passed Proposition 13, which
limited the ability of local school and college districts to tax residents and
instead forced colleges to charge for their classes.

The price hikes drove many students away and as the college's revenue shrank, so
did its funding for campus repairs and outreach efforts.

The problem also forced the college to drop several courses and programs, many
of them in agricultural fields -- including a popular springtime rodeo that was
frequented by celebrities like former President Ronald Reagan.

Rumors that the college wanted to convert some of its farmland into a golf
course also hurt the campus image.

``By 1999, the college had reached rock bottom,'' Garber said.

Still, things began to improve earlier this decade. The college's enrollment
numbers grew and two voter-approved bonds -- which gave Pierce $270 million for
new construction -- began to turn around the college's fate.

Now the college has several construction projects under way, including a
100,000-square-foot science building that will house life, animal and earth
sciences programs as well as chemistry courses.

The one pressing challenge the college still faces: the state budget.

``It's looking pretty dismal,'' Garber said. ``If they start cutting the budget,
they start raising fees, which causes a decrease in enrollment, and a decline in
per-student fees for the college, which leads to more cuts in courses and
offerings and, in turn, fewer students.''

Still, those who work or attend Pierce are focused on the campus's bright
future.

Steve McHargue, a professor of history and political science at Pierce, followed
in his dad's footsteps when he took a job at the college.

McHargue said he treasures the fact that he's been able to watch the campus
evolve.

``A community college develops with the community it serves. At first, this
community was predominantly agricultural, then industrial, now
technology-driven,'' he said.

McHargue said he is a strong advocate for expanding agricultural programs at the
college.

``We still have golf courses and gardens that need to be tended to, and so many
people in the Valley have horses and pets (that) we need to train people in
these fields,'' he said.

And there is one program, steeped in a centuries-old crop, for which McHargue is
delaying his retirement.

The college has planted grape vines on campus and McHargue said he won't leave
until he gets his first sip of Pierce College wine.

``If there is one thing I think we will never get rid of, it's the need for good
wine.''

connie.llanos@dailynews.com

818-713-3634

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  IN FOCUS: WOODLAND HILLS

GRAPHIC: 2 photos
 Photo: (1) Pierce College, circa 1960, had survived a postwar influx of GIs and
was evolving from a campus focused almost solely on agriculture to one that
began to ready students for careers in other, more technical fields. College
officials revel in the school's success but fear the damage that state budget
cuts might do to future attempts to attract new students. File photo (2)
Students sit in front of the Student Community Center at Pierce College in
Woodland Hills on Friday. Tina Burch/Staff Photographer

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 Digital First Media
                              All Rights Reserved


                              774 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                          February 27, 2008 Wednesday

A million eastern Europeans have come to Britain in past four years

BYLINE: Philip Johnston Home Affairs Editor

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 487 words


MORE than 800,000 eastern Europeans have registered to work in Britain since
their countries joined the European Union almost four years ago, official
figures showed yesterday.

However , the self-employed - such as plumbers and decorators - do not have to
register, so the overall number is almost certainly above one million.

In April 2004, Britain was the only major EU economy to open its doors to the
so-called A8 accession countries that were in the old Soviet bloc.

At the time, the Government dismissed warnings of a flood of migrants and
forecast that no more than 13,000 would come annually.

Now, local communities are under huge strain dealing with the impact of so many
arrivals, especially on schools, policing and transport.

The figures show that 82 per cent of the 796,000 A8 applicants are aged between
18 and 34 and that most are men.

Separate data shows that a further 30,570 from Bulgaria and Romania have been
granted work permits since their countries joined the EU last year.

The Home Office figures suggest that about half of the east Europeans say they
are coming for three months or less. However, there is no way of knowing how
many have returned home. Re-registration is on the increase - suggesting that
more are staying on, apparently contradicting recent reports that the tide has
turned.

Last year, the total number of A8 applicants was 207,000 - lower than in 2006
but about the same as in 2005.

Most registered workers have found jobs in administration, business and
management (39 per cent), hospitality and catering (19 per cent), agriculture
(10 per cent), manufacturing (7 per cent) and food processing (5 per cent).

David Frost, the director general of the British Chambers of Commerce, said:
"The comparative success of the UK economy in recent years has been largely due
to the influx of willing workers from eastern Europe.

"Employers up and down the country tell me that they take on migrant workers
because their work ethic is so much better than domestic workers.''

He added: "The vast majority of these jobs could have been filled by UK
residents but until the Government gets to grips with this country's severe
skills shortage and the increasing welfare dependency culture, businesses will
continue to employ migrant workers in large numbers.''

Even though other major economies have since opened their labour markets to A8
migrants, it has not led to any marked slowing of the number coming to Britain.

Many councils have complained that the Government has not given them enough
money to cope with the influx.

The Government has latterly conceded that the high numbers have brought
consequences for public services.

Liam Byrne the immigration minister, said: "That's why we are creating an
independent Migration Advisory Committee to look at how migration can sensibly
fill skills shortages and, alongside it, the Migration Impacts Forum to monitor
the wider social impacts of immigration.''

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              775 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Philippines Daily Inquirer

                           December 24, 2016 Saturday

DA tightens watch on agri importers

LENGTH: 368  words


Importers of agricultural commodities have until Dec. 31 to have their sanitary
and phytosanitary (SPS) papers evaluated, or else they would not be able to
bring in shipments anymore, according to the Department of Agriculture.

Agriculture Secretary Emmanuel F. Pinol said he had relieved the Bureaus of
Animal Industry (BAI) and Plant Industry (BPI) the authority to issue the SPS
papers, which serve as import permits.

Following his announcement on Nov. 22 that all import permits for farm products
have been canceled and would have to undergo re-issuance, the DA's Office of the
Secretary is directly processing importers' papers.

Back then, he said this was meant to weed out smugglers, particularly those who
bring in more than one shipment using the permit and those who bring in
commodities are than what are stated in the bills of lading.

Pinol said his office had already processed 12,000 SPS papers over the past
month, which means that 7,000 of about 12,000 such documents that the BAI and
the BPI issued during the Aquino administration.

'We now have a clearer picture of the situation,' Pinol said. 'Because of this
campaign, we were able to weed out the fake clearances used by unscrupulous
importers.'

When asked whether any trader or importer has been penalized, Pinol said there
was none.

He said the intention of the initiative was not to penalize anyone, but 'to get
a clearer picture of the system, make sure that the government is not
shortchanged, and that farmers are protected' from the influx of low-priced
imports.

On Dec. 1, the Meat Importers and Traders Association Inc. (Mita) called on the
DA to focus its anti-smuggling efforts on customs bonded warehouses instead of
importers themselves, mainly because the latter approach has yielded no results.

Mita president Jesus C. Cham said in a letter to Pinol that too much time spent
'looking over the shoulder' of legitimate importers was draining the dynamism
and resources of all stakeholders, including the DA itself.

Cham said the revalidation of SPS clearances and non-issuance of new Clearances
is wreaking havoc on meat importers and their clients-including meat processors,
hotels and restaurants, food service, retailers and consumers.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Philippines Daily Inquirer
                              All Rights Reserved


                              776 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                 Yorkshire Post

                             August 1, 2016 Monday

Six priorities for Yorkshire Day: Farming

LENGTH: 365  words


Farmers urgently need clarity from the new government.

Firstly, what it will do to manage the support that British farming receives
under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) when Britain leaves the EU as current
policy schemes run until 2020?

Farmers need to know they will be operating on a fair playing field with their
EU neighbours in terms of subsidy support.

Secondly, what are its priorities for a new British agricultural policy when
British farmers can no longer rely on the CAP?

Government needs to give farmers early signals that the future of food and
farming is a priority and that despite significant budget cuts the Department
for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has the power and will be given the
resources required to draw up one of the biggest national policies post-Brexit.

Longer term, British agriculture needs assurances over how Ministers plan to
secure migrant labour which is relied on for the horticulture sector and what
subsidies the sector can expect to receive and how weighted these will be on
meeting environmental criteria.

Answers are also needed on how the country will be protected from an influx of
cheap imported food that is not produced to the same standards of production or
welfare as British food.

A pressing uncertainty for farmers is whether they should apply for Countryside
Stewardship subsidies from Natural England - a product of the CAP.

Farmers want to know if they enter new agreements if the funding will be there
for the full five years of the scheme, not just until the point Britain leaves
Europe. The deadline for the scheme is September 30, but there is no clarity on
whether funding is available.

Farmers also want the Government to finally published its separate 25-year plans
for British food and farming and for the environment, both of which have been
repeatedly delayed, largely because of Brexit.

Read more...

An Open Letter to the Prime Minister, from The Yorkshire Post on Yorkshire Day

Six priorities for Yorkshire Day: Education

Six priorities for Yorkshire Day: Devolution

Six priorities for Yorkshire Day: Transport

Six priorities for Yorkshire Day: Energy

Six priorities for Yorkshire Day: Business

YP Comment for Yorkshire Day

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NLYP


                       Copyright 2016 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              777 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     MAY 18, 2005 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

When pigs ruled the roost;
Deptford was once less than redolent.

BYLINE: Edward Colimore INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

SECTION: WHERE WE LIVE-LIFE IN DEPTFORD AND WEST DEPTFORD; Pg. G13

LENGTH: 672 words


Guy Lee 3d can still picture a time when scores of pig farms covered Deptford.
He can rattle off the names of the owners and describe huge sleepers where
thousands of pigs were raised.

Today, many of those farms have been sold to housing developers or are under
contract as the once-thriving way of life gives way to change, said Lee,
Deptford's farm environmental inspector.

Only 12 pig farms remain of the 100 or more once dotting the landscape a
half-century ago. And just five of those are active the whole year.

"People moved in little by little," said Lee, 68, who inspects the remaining
farms once or twice a week. "All of a sudden, they'd notice the smell and start
complaining."

The influx of people and housing, along with more stringent and costly
sanitation requirements, forced many pig farmers to move or go out of business.

Driving down Delsea Drive and Tanyard Road in his white pickup truck, Lee points
out one former pig farm after another, some of them now under contract with
developers.

His feelings about it can be summed up by a bumper sticker on his back
windshield: "No Farms No Food."

"I've known farmers all my life," said Lee, a Franklin Township resident who has
also raised pigs. "The pig farms are just disappearing, and I may be out of a
job if it keeps up."

Lee stopped by the Stotsenburg pig farm, where he chatted with the owners, Harry
Stotsenburg Sr., 61, and his son, Harry Jr., 35, about their operation.

"We're trying to stay in this, but the times are changing," said the elder
Stotsenburg, a third-generation farmer who has 350 pigs on a 2.5-acre parcel.
"We'd like to buy another farm, maybe in Salem County, but the land is
expensive. They want $25,000 an acre."

Stotsenburg leaves for work at 3 a.m. in a refuse truck, picking up food waste
from commercial sites, such as restaurants, for his farm and another farm in
Burlington County. The waste is steamed before it is fed to the pigs.

"We were here before all the people came," said Stotsenburg, who cleans out the
pigpens after his morning truck runs.

Lee told Stotsenburg he was sometimes approached by real estate agents and
buyers, who want to find out how close the pig farms are to a land parcel or
house on the market. They're concerned about odor.

"There is no future in pig farming here, maybe not even in New Jersey," added
Harry Stotsenburg Jr., who has been running a landscaping business on the side
since 1989. "I'd like to keep [the farm] going, but you'll never get big enough
to make it worth it."

He said his farm would be considered a success by many people. "The first
generation buys the farm," he said. "The second generation holds it, and the
third usually sells it.

"Anything from the third generation on is a success. I'm the fourth generation,
so I guess we'd be considered a success."

Another Deptford pig farmer, Robert Shisler Sr., 63, who runs the business with
a son and daughter, said he did not like to see the pig farms disappear. The
Shislers have about 800 pigs and have branched out into trash-hauling to
landfills.

Pig farming "has been my life," Shisler said. "But my son will not be able to
finish it out because of all the changes. . . . People moved in. The
environmentalists got tough. And the pig farmers are going out of business."

Bill Lafferty, 86, a Deptford resident who was pig farming for about 60 years
before his retirement, said: "Everybody is breathing down your neck, and the pig
farmers can't stand the pressure."

Today, the only pig Lafferty has is a garden cutout in his front yard and some
figurines in his house.

The disappearance of the pig farms "is just a natural thing, I guess," said
Lafferty, a kind of elder statesman in the pig-farming community, who once ran a
farm with as many as 3,000 pigs. "But I miss it. I miss getting up in the
morning and going to work. I miss the pigs and loved taking care of the animals.
That was my thing."

Contact staff writer Edward Colimore at 856-779-3833 or
ecolimore@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
APRIL SAUL, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Harry Stotsenburg Sr., 61, owns one of the 12 remaining pig farms in Deptford.
His third-generation farm has 350 swine. At one time, there were more than 100
pig farms in the township.

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              778 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                    Prince George Citizen (British Columbia)

                            March 30, 2005 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Cattle funds 'Band-Aid' solution, ranchers say

BYLINE: Mark Nielsen, The Citizen; -- with files from Canadian Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 436  words


An influx of federal government support for ailing farmers is being welcomed by
local rancher Mark Grafton, but he says the real answer for beef producers is to
get the U.S. market opened to Canadian product once again.

"You hate to put it this way, but it is sort of a Band-Aid over an amputation,"
Grafton said. "And I don't want to sound ungrateful, because we appreciate the
help, it's just that things like this aren't going to be what makes us survive.
We've got to get our markets back."

Federal Agriculture Minister Andy Mitchell announced Tuesday $1 billion in
income support for Canadian farmers hard hit by low commodity prices and the
closing of the United States border to cattle.

The lion's share of the aid package, $480 million, will go to the stressed grain
and oilseed sector, which is facing a 25-year low in commodity prices. Another
$150 million of the multi-sector package will go to other field-crop producers.

Cattle ranchers who have been devastated by the U.S. border closure as a result
of the mad cow crisis will receive $300 million, while producers of other
ruminants, such as sheep and goats, will get $21 million.

B.C. Agriculture Minister John Van Dongen told reporters that B.C.'s share of
the total package should be about $35 million for grain farmers and ranchers
combined.

Mitchell also challenged the provinces to come up with $640 million to add to
Ottawa's $1 billion, in keeping with the traditional 60-40 federal-provincial
split for such aid.

But Van Dongen characterized Mitchell's announcement as a top-up from Ottawa to
deal with crises like mad cow and said B.C. has already contributed $41 million
over the last year and will not be providing further matching funds.

Alberta Agriculture Minister Doug Horner took the same position.

The funding will be delivered through the farm income payment program starting
in April, and producers who participated in last year's transitional industry
support program will automatically receive payments because Ottawa has the
necessary historical data required to calculate payments.

Earlier this month, Mitchell announced $50 million for a marketing campaign to
reclaim and expand markets for Canadian beef.

Grafton called that a step in the right direction, but added that $200 million
is closer to the figure needed to match the effort the U.S. is putting in to
reopening overseas markets for beef.

Grafton also noted that some U.S. packing plants have lashed out against moves
by protectionist American ranchers to keep the border closed because they need
Canadian cattle to keep their operations working.

-- with files from Canadian Press

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2005 Prince George Citizen
                              All Rights Reserved


                              779 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Sun (Yuma, Arizona)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 24, 2012 Saturday

Motorists, walkers urged to improve pedestrian safety

BYLINE: Joyce Lobeck, The Sun, Yuma, Ariz.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 491 words


Nov. 24--A recent series of accidents involving vehicles and pedestrians, plus
the beginning of the busy winter visitor season and the seasonal agriculture
worker influx, create a potentially volatile mixture, say city officials.

The last week of October saw a three-day span in which three accidents occurred
between vehicles and pedestrians, including one fatality.

To prevent more such tragedies, the Yuma Police Department asks residents and
visitors to take action to improve safety for pedestrians -- and the motorists
who encounter them.

YPD and the city of Yuma are cooperatively distributing a series of reminders of
tips, best practices and laws pertaining to pedestrian safety. Residents are
asked to review them, practice them and pass them on (nicely!) to friends,
family members and members of groups with whom they associate.

The subject also came up during the Yuma City Council retreat Thursday, with
council members relating horror stories of encountering pedestrians at night
walking along streets wearing dark clothing.

"We are asking all residents to sharpen their awareness of pedestrian rules and
safe practices," said Yuma Police Chief John Lekan. "Walkers taking that extra
step to go to the next traffic signal, motorists keeping a keen eye out to
what's happening on the sidewalks and cross streets next to them -- a little
more attention all the way around can prevent these crashes from happening."

Following these tips can help prevent these unfortunate incidents.

Whenever you're walking:

--Cross the street at a designated crosswalk or an intersection. Avoid crossing
the street mid-block.

--Be careful at intersections, where drivers may fail to yield the right of way
to pedestrians while turning onto another street.

--Increase your visibility at night by carrying a flashlight and wear
light-colored or reflective clothing.

--It's safest to walk on a sidewalk. If you must walk in the street, walk facing
traffic.

--Drivers are more distracted than ever, so try to make eye contact with drivers
before you step into the road.

--Avoid using headphones or anything that may limit your ability to hear.

Whenever you're driving:

--You can encounter pedestrians anytime and anywhere, even in places where they
are not supposed to be.

--Pedestrians can be very hard to see, especially at night. You must keep a
lookout and slow down if you can't see clearly.

--When entering a crosswalk area, drive slowly and be prepared to stop.

--Stop for pedestrians who are in a crosswalk even if it is not marked. Stop
well back so that drivers in the other lanes can also see the pedestrian in time
to stop.

--Do not overtake and pass other vehicles stopped for pedestrians.

Joyce Lobeck can be reached at jlobeck@yumasun.com or 539-6853. Find her on
Facebook at www.facebook.com/YSJoyceLobeck or on Twitter at @YSJoyceLobeck.

___ (c)2012 The Sun (Yuma, Ariz.) Visit The Sun (Yuma, Ariz.) at www.yumasun.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20121124-YZ-Motorists-walkers-urged-to-improve-pedestrian-safety-1124-20121124

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YZ


                             Copyright 2012 The Sun


                              780 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                                 June 24, 1997

Call to ensure sufficient supply of fish

SECTION: National; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 222 words

DATELINE: Kuala Lumpur


KUALA LUMPUR, Mon. - The Fisheries Development Authority, the Fisheries
Department and the private sector must plan strategies to ensure
sufficient supply for local consumption.

Strategies must also be conceived to ensure there's enough fish for
export.

"There will be a greater demand for fish as its consumption increases,"
Agriculture Minister Datuk Amar Dr Sulaiman Daud said today.

He said the growth in population, influx of foreign workers and the fact
that the majority of the people prefer to eat fish would result in greater
demand.

Speaking before presenting excellent service awards to 55 employees of
the Fisheries Development Authority (LKIM) at the City Hall auditorium, Dr
Sulaiman said equal emphasis should be given to fishing sectors like
inshore, offshore, deepsea fishing and fish processing.

The Ministry, he said, encourages joint ventures between fishermen and
those involved in the marketing and the processing of fish products.

On services provided by LKIM, Dr Sulaiman said the authority must
continue to enjoy the trust and confidence of the fisheries industry.

"We must not make empty promises," he said. "The fishermen and others
dealing with us will lose their trust and confidence in us if we do."

Dr Sulaiman said there must be trust and a cordial relationship.


LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

            Copyright 1997 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad


                              781 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                      South China Morning Post (Hong Kong)

                                October 14, 1994

New vice-premier chosen

BYLINE: By WILLY WO-LAP LAM

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 642 words


THE Chinese leadership has decided to appoint the party boss of Shandong
province, Jiang Chunyun, as vice-premier in charge of agriculture.

Chinese sources said yesterday the promotion would be endorsed at the plenary
session of the National People's Congress next March.

The sources said the Communist Party leadership was also considering appointing
the former party boss of Shanghai, Wu Bangguo, as another vice-premier. The
sources said their appointments as vice-premiers would strengthen the hand of
President Jiang Zemin, a patron of the two rising stars.

Both Mr Jiang Chunyun, 64, and Mr Wu, 53, who are Politburo members, were
inducted into the secretariat of the party Central Committee last month.

Mr Jiang is seen as a logical candidate for the agriculture portfolio because of
Shandong's success in striking a balance between industrial and agrarian
development.

The rich coastal province has been repeatedly praised by Mr Jiang for
maintaining high yields in grain and other staples and for conserving arable
land in spite of its fast economic development.

Reflecting the growing influence of conservative party elders such as Chen Yun,
the leadership has returned to the old slogan of ''taking grain as the key
link'' of the economy.

''Since the early 1990s there has been no vice-premier with specific
responsibility for agriculture,'' a source said. ''Jiang's accession to the
agriculture portfolio is a sign of his expanding political clout.''

The source said, however, that the liberal wing of the party had viewed Mr
Jiang's fast-track promotion with dismay because of his reputation for bending
with the political wind.

For the past three years, Mr Jiang has linked his fate with relatively
conservative politicians such as President Jiang.

In private speeches, the heavyweight Shandong politician, who has a bachelor's
degree in Chinese literature from a correspondence course, has railed against
''bourgeois liberalisation'' and the influx of ''decadent'' Western ideas.

Sources in Shandong said in order to curry favour with Beijing, Mr Jiang had
agreed to make ''excessively large'' financial and other contributions to
central coffers.

This had in turn alienated him from those Shandong cadres who wanted more funds
for local development.

Mr Jiang has also incurred the ire of Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji for apparently
failing to observe a tight money policy.

The Shandong sources said on a recent visit to the provincial capital of Jinan,
Mr Zhu indirectly criticised the party boss for approving long-term loans for a
few conglomerates with whom he was reportedly on good terms.

The Vice-Premier also demanded that the corporations return the loans to the
People's Bank of China before the end of this year.

It is believed that Mr Zhu gets on better with the governor, Zhao Zhihao, who is
likely to take over Mr Jiang's position as provincial party secretary.

Party sources said President Jiang, the putative head of the Shanghai Faction,
was lobbying for the promotion of Mr Wu as vice-premier.

If he assumes the portfolio, the former Shanghai party secretary will likely be
put in charge of industry and economic development with special responsibility
for Shanghai and the Yangtze River estuary.

Political analysts said, however, that Mr Wu's promotion might encounter
opposition from regional leaders who feared the ascendancy of the Shanghai
Faction.

The analysts said since there are already four vice-premiers, the addition of
two more such senior positions might go against the principle of bureaucratic
streamlining.

However, they said the party's top priority was to strengthen the ''leadership
collective'' by putting more heavyweight politicians at the centre.

The party secretariat has also been boosted both in terms of personnel and
powers.


LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                  Copyright 1994 South China Morning Post Ltd.


                              782 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                      South China Morning Post (Hong Kong)

                                October 14, 1994

New vice-premier chosen

BYLINE: By WILLY WO-LAP LAM

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 642 words


THE Chinese leadership has decided to appoint the party boss of Shandong
province, Jiang Chunyun, as vice-premier in charge of agriculture.

Chinese sources said yesterday the promotion would be endorsed at the plenary
session of the National People's Congress next March.

The sources said the Communist Party leadership was also considering appointing
the former party boss of Shanghai, Wu Bangguo, as another vice-premier. The
sources said their appointments as vice-premiers would strengthen the hand of
President Jiang Zemin, a patron of the two rising stars.

Both Mr Jiang Chunyun, 64, and Mr Wu, 53, who are Politburo members, were
inducted into the secretariat of the party Central Committee last month.

Mr Jiang is seen as a logical candidate for the agriculture portfolio because of
Shandong's success in striking a balance between industrial and agrarian
development.

The rich coastal province has been repeatedly praised by Mr Jiang for
maintaining high yields in grain and other staples and for conserving arable
land in spite of its fast economic development.

Reflecting the growing influence of conservative party elders such as Chen Yun,
the leadership has returned to the old slogan of ''taking grain as the key
link'' of the economy.

''Since the early 1990s there has been no vice-premier with specific
responsibility for agriculture,'' a source said. ''Jiang's accession to the
agriculture portfolio is a sign of his expanding political clout.''

The source said, however, that the liberal wing of the party had viewed Mr
Jiang's fast-track promotion with dismay because of his reputation for bending
with the political wind.

For the past three years, Mr Jiang has linked his fate with relatively
conservative politicians such as President Jiang.

In private speeches, the heavyweight Shandong politician, who has a bachelor's
degree in Chinese literature from a correspondence course, has railed against
''bourgeois liberalisation'' and the influx of ''decadent'' Western ideas.

Sources in Shandong said in order to curry favour with Beijing, Mr Jiang had
agreed to make ''excessively large'' financial and other contributions to
central coffers.

This had in turn alienated him from those Shandong cadres who wanted more funds
for local development.

Mr Jiang has also incurred the ire of Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji for apparently
failing to observe a tight money policy.

The Shandong sources said on a recent visit to the provincial capital of Jinan,
Mr Zhu indirectly criticised the party boss for approving long-term loans for a
few conglomerates with whom he was reportedly on good terms.

The Vice-Premier also demanded that the corporations return the loans to the
People's Bank of China before the end of this year.

It is believed that Mr Zhu gets on better with the governor, Zhao Zhihao, who is
likely to take over Mr Jiang's position as provincial party secretary.

Party sources said President Jiang, the putative head of the Shanghai Faction,
was lobbying for the promotion of Mr Wu as vice-premier.

If he assumes the portfolio, the former Shanghai party secretary will likely be
put in charge of industry and economic development with special responsibility
for Shanghai and the Yangtze River estuary.

Political analysts said, however, that Mr Wu's promotion might encounter
opposition from regional leaders who feared the ascendancy of the Shanghai
Faction.

The analysts said since there are already four vice-premiers, the addition of
two more such senior positions might go against the principle of bureaucratic
streamlining.

However, they said the party's top priority was to strengthen the ''leadership
collective'' by putting more heavyweight politicians at the centre.

The party secretariat has also been boosted both in terms of personnel and
powers.


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                  Copyright 1994 South China Morning Post Ltd.


                              783 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          PNG Post-Courier (Australia)

                           September 20, 2013 Friday
                                   1 Edition

DAL is lost, needs urgent direction

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 317 words


THE article written in relaton to the delay of salaries for Department of
Agriculture and Livestock casuals clearly shows of the kind of leadership
currently running the operation of the department.

They cannot blame the Department of Finance for the non-release of funds, rather
they should accept the blame as we hear funds have been coming in for salaries
but were diverted to other activities such as the continuous overseas travels as
the influx of casuals remain uncontrolled.

History shows that the department never experienced such problems which is
causing all the upheavals.

We read that that the worst blow-up in the budget was caused last year and that
is why the Department of Finance is reluctant to release funds. Can the Chief
Secretary and DPM Secretary investigate this problem as what is been currently
given and printed in the media is not accurate and that the real issue of why
casuals are not paid is more than just Finance but in the recruitment of cronies
and wantoks which is blowing up the recurrent budget.

In actual fact, we see that the department is not implementing the government's
year of implementation policy, rather all its recurrent funds are being diverted
to pay for unbudgeted casuals and consultants that is becoming the norm of the
department.

We the concerned citizens also want to know what is happening to the court's
decision on the Secretary's position as we hear that so much is going towards
the payment of lawyers involved in the acting secretary's challenging of the the
NEC decision to revoke his appointment.

He should have just accepted the NEC's decision in being turned down for the top
post because they do not have trust in his leadership anymore, let alone the
simple farmers of the industry.

If NEC didn't trust him to take the role and had opted to remove him, then let
it be so.

Look at the Department, it is lost and needs direction.

Concerned farmer

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PTC


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              784 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The Daily Yomiuri

                           February 14, 1994, Monday

Shanghai curbs labor influx

BYLINE: Juichiro Wakayama; Yomiuri Shimbun Correspondent

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 494 words

DATELINE: SHANGHAI


In an effort to curb the influx of workers from the countryside,
Shanghai--China's largest industrial city--has passed a law requiring companies
and organizations to obtain government permission before hiring non-Shanghai
residents.

But farmers trying to earn extra cash for the Chinese New Year had continued to
flock to the city, adding to the approximately 1.5 million workers from the
hinterlands already working there.

Even before job seekers from the countryside started flooding into Shanghai,
nearly chaotic congestion plagued the city, which has a population of about 13
million.

With construction of a financial and trade center in the city, Shanghai is
experiencing an economic boom. In an eastern district of the city, more than 10
major buildings are under construction.

And the boom is drawing migrant workers into the city--Shanghai Station Square
is packed with over 10,000 workers who have arrived from farming areas to find
jobs.

Tian Showyin, a 26-year-old farmer from Anhuei Province, was one of them. He
said he can earn about 20 yuan (240 yen) for working an eight-hour day at a
construction site. This is the third time he has come to Shanghai to earn extra
money since last new year, said Tian, who left his wife and child behind in his
hometown.

"I am planning to make a total of 3,000 yuan this year. I like to achieve my
goal as soon as possible and go home. This is much more profitable than growing
rice or wheat," Tian said.

Indeed it is. While per capita income in Shanghai has reached about 7,000 yuan a
year, per capita income in one farming village in Szuchuan Province, where
farmers frustrated with heavy taxes rioted last year, was barely over 400 yuan.
Such disparities in income have caused an increasing number of farmers to look
for jobs in affluent towns.

Moreover, with the modernization of agriculture, about 110 million people--over
10 percent of the population--have become surplus workers.

These workers have become a vital source of labor in city construction projects,
but they also have started posing a threat to the stability of city life.

In Shanghai, there has been a surge in the number of crimes committed by
non-Shanghai residents. Last year about 26,000 people were sent back to their
hometowns for violating laws.

From January through August last year, the number of serious crimes such as
murders or robberies committed by outsiders increased by 88 percent from the
previous year.

Shanghai's new law will make it easier for the government to control workers
from outside the city. But at the same time the city will be able to continue
taking advantage of the influx of workers in its accelerating development.

Some analysts predict, however, that the law will not effectively remedy the
basic problem. At the root of the problem lies the growing disparity in income
between workers in affluent coastal cities and those in impoverished
hinterlands, they pointed out.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 1994 The Daily Yomiuri


                              785 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                      Saint Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                     November 21, 2003 Friday CITY EDITION

SUGARBEET FARMERS TO GET FEDERAL AID

BYLINE: LEE EGERSTROM, Pioneer Press

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 350 words


About half of a special $48 million federal disaster program for sugarbeet
producers is being mailed to Minnesota farmers this week to cover losses from
flooded fields and early frost damage to beets during the 2001 and 2002 growing
seasons.

Payments totaling $23.6 million will be sent to Minnesota farmers to fill income
voids left after payments of crop insurance settlements, and cannot exceed the
expected value of a normal crop, the U.S. Department of Agriculture said.

Perry Aasness, executive director of the Red River Valley Sugarbeet Growers
Association, said farmers in northwest Minnesota had fields wash out from late
June rains in 2002 while farmers in west-central Minnesota had damage to beets
from early freezing temperatures in fall of 2001.

The problem with frost damage was especially harmful to members of the Southern
Minnesota Beet Sugar Cooperative at Renville. Insurance companies resisted
paying for crop losses because the co-op harvested the crop before discovering
the magnitude of the frost damage.

Farmers could elect either of the two years to qualify for the disaster aid, but
had to prove they had suffered a 35 percent or greater crop loss to be eligible
for the program, USDA said.

Jim Meisenheimer, spokesman for the USDA's Farm Service Agency in St. Paul, said
farmers in 30 Minnesota counties are receiving checks. The largest payments,
totaling nearly $4.5 million, are being sent to farmers in Marshall County in
the Red River Valley.

Other counties that will see an influx of disaster payments include Norman ($3.8
million), Kittson ($3.4 million), Polk ($2.6 million), Clay ($1.7 million) and
Wilkin ($1.1 million) in northwest Minnesota, and Renville ($1.8 million) and
Chippewa ($1.6 million) in west-central Minnesota.

Congress had approved $60 million for the sugar disaster program. The $48
million resulted from farmers filing and being declared eligible during a period
between Sept. 15 and Oct. 31.

Lee Egerstrom can be reached at legerstrom@pioneerpress.com or 651-228-5437.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                     Copyright 2003 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              786 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                            October 21, 2014 Tuesday

Fast-tracking Myanmar's reform

BYLINE: Stephen P. Groff

SECTION: Comment; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 845 words


OVER just three years, Myanmar has introduced ambitious reforms that have put it
on track to become a modern economy. Against a backdrop of ongoing political
challenges, it remains an extraordinary and hopeful moment. But bigger
challenges lie ahead. To avoid backtracking - and realise its full potential -
Myanmar needs to accelerate reform momentum.

Further reforms must focus on providing more people with better chances to grasp
economic opportunities - and soon. Undue delays risk losing the momentum that is
central to successful reform. The key challenge on this front is job creation.
Proper jobs and learning opportunities, especially for youth, are critical, not
just for sustained growth, development, and social stability, but also for the
public support needed to drive reform forward. Growth is imperative for a
country with per capita income of about USD900 (RM2,945) - making it one of the
poorest countries in Asia, along with Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Nepal.
Myanmar's growth remains narrowly based, driven by exports of natural resources,
mostly gas and mining products, construction and tourism.

Time is of the essence for Myanmar. Its window of opportunity is narrowing
rapidly.

Market forces unleashed by reform are already presenting challenges. Faster
growth and an influx of foreign investment are fuelling inflation, jeopardising
macroeconomic stability.

With the financial market still underdeveloped, large capital flows and
increased private sector investment put strong upward pressure on prices of real
estate and services. This could strengthen the currency, which would reduce
export competitiveness. Meanwhile, rising property and service prices could
depress foreign investment in other productive sectors, such as manufacturing.

Galvanising reform is essential to build the institutional and market capacity
to manage these forces.

FIRST, priority should be to exploit clear opportunities for targeted investment
in agricultural infrastructure, institutions and innovation to spur rapid
productivity growth. This will immediately benefit those who depend on
agriculture for income and food security, and also contribute to high and
inclusive growth. After all, agriculture accounts for 30 per cent of Myanmar's
gross domestic product and more than 50 per cent of employment. With relatively
abundant land, water and labour, coupled with proximity to the world's fastest
growing markets for food, Myanmar has comparative advantages in this area.

SECOND, there is great scope for Myanmar to implement policies to improve its
business environment. Much progress has been made on removing barriers to
business and promoting an investment-friendly climate, but much more needs to be
done. The latest World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report ranks
Myanmar 139th out of 148 countries in the Global Competitiveness Index and 141st
in infrastructure.

Those rankings must improve if Myanmar's reform programme is to meet
expectations. Quality infrastructure is a crucial element of better business
conditions and will help to unlock the economy's potential. Myanmar's
infrastructure gaps are massive.

A study by the Asian Development Bank puts investment needs for simply meeting
increasing electricity demand at between USD15 billion and USD30 billion through
to 2030. The government also needs to coordinate and calibrate its policies to
provide systemic support in the shape of an improved regulatory environment,
more investment in physical and social infrastructure, a stronger banking sector
and deeper financial markets.

THIRDLY, a pivotal task for Myanmar is the development of a dynamic private
sector to generate adequate employment and sustainable growth. This requires
longer-term commitment to skills development and investment in human capital.

After decades of under-investment in education and training, raising the
educational standards, qualifications, and skills of the labour force - across
the entire country - is a huge but unavoidable challenge.

Near-term policy measures should focus on upgrading skills and vocational
training with targeted financial assistance. But it will take more than money.
The education system requires comprehensive reforms at all levels if it is to
provide the skilled graduates that Myanmar's more open and sophisticated economy
will require as the country moves up regional and global value chains.

FINALLY, Myanmar needs strong institutions to safely navigate its return to the
global economy. Incomplete institutional frameworks, hamstrung by weak human
resource capacity, are arguably Myanmar's biggest hurdle. Basic legal,
regulatory and institutional frameworks are being put in place. But new
institutions need capable human resources to do their job properly. Strong
institutions are about systems and people as much as new regulations and laws.

If designed carefully and managed soundly, reforms across these fronts will
generate better human, social, and physical capital. Myanmar has made a strong
start. It needs to build swiftly on that start to ensure long-term success.

( END )

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2014 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
                              All Rights Reserved


                              787 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Press (Christchurch, New Zealand)

                             June 23, 2015 Tuesday

Lincoln women breaking up uni boys' club

BYLINE: Jody O'Callaghan

SECTION: NEWS; NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 426 words


Pareraukura Gilmartin-Kura was stumped by farming terms like "grazing" when she
started studying agriculture at the country's only land-based university.

The 18-year-old has joined the growing female cohort on Lincoln University's
campus that now outnumbers males for the first time in its history.

A 10 per cent increase from last year has resulted in females making up 51 per
cent of the 3500 full- time student population so far this year.

Gilmartin-Kura, a first-year Bachelor of Agriculture and Commerce student, said
she had never been on a farm before coming to the university near Christchurch
but always envied friends that grew up with the space, animals and scenery that
farms offered.

She found her agriculture papers challenging due to assumptions she knew common
farming terms like "grazing" stock and "pugging", where cattle trampled grass
into mud.

But she discovered online glossary tools, embraced Red Band gumboots and
Swanndri coats, and was aiming for a career in rural banking.

Gilmartin-Kura thought agriculture could benefit from an influx of women since
she read animals like goats were shown to produce more milk in response to a
"more feminine and gentle touch".

She was surprised there were now more female students, since many of her papers
still felt male- dominated.

"I guess it just depends on which class it is."

Lincoln's deputy vice- chancellor international and business development, Jeremy
Baker, said the increase in female students applied to all subjects and
represented the general population.

"I think it's just that I guess the sectors that we're working in are getting
back in to balance with the rest of the population, which I think is fantastic,"
Baker said.

Lincoln University Students' Association president Kahlia Fryer had seen a
definite gender shift on campus. All seven of its elected executive board are
female students.

Two years ago, they were lucky to have just two female board members.

She believed marketing had ramped up to show that agriculture was not just about
"all the hardy, practical work".

For example, she was interested in human resources and people management in the
industry.

SchoolsLinc programme manager Fiona Scott, who promotes the university to
schools, said there was more publicity for girls to notice and relate to and
more female science teachers encouraging girls to try areas they might not have
considered.

--------------------

CAPTION:

Pareraukura Gilmartin-Kara, 18, has joined a growing number of female students
at Canterbury's Lincoln University.

Picture: JOHN KIRK-ANDERSON/FAIRFAX NZ

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                              788 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                      IBNS

                       April 10, 2015 Friday 6:30 AM EST

UN launches animal vaccination campaign along Syria-Lebanon border

BYLINE: India Blooms News Service

LENGTH: 350  words


New York, Apr 10 (IBNS): An emergency vaccination campaign along the
Syria-Lebanon border is underway in order to protect the region's livestock from
preventable infections, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) announced on Thursday amid growing concerns over the spread of high impact
transboundary animal diseases.

Triggered by an influx of 1.5 million refugees fleeing the conflict in
neighbouring Syria and bringing with them legions of unvaccinated goats, cattle,
sheep and other animals, FAO is now targeting all animals in the Syria-Lebanon
border area with vaccinations. The UN agency has warned that as many as 70,000
cows and around 900,000 sheep and goats could be exposed to transboundary
disease if left untreated. According to a farmer in Lebanons eastern Bekaa
Valley, in fact, animal fever has already established a foothold, killing off
livestock and impacting the incomes of herders and pastoralists. FAO estimates
that almost 60 percent of livestock farmers in Lebanon depend on dairy animals
as their main source of income. The idea is to reduce the risk of disease, and
avoid drops in the productivity of the national herd, Maurice Saade, FAO
Representative in Lebanon, said in a press release. The UN agency further warned
that an outbreak of disease among Lebanons livestock could potentially have a
devastating impact on the countrys natural resources and food production
systems, particularly as up to 25 per cent of the countrys active population is
employed in agriculture. Several animal diseases are highly contagious and can
spread extremely rapidly, causing high mortality and morbidity in animals and
resulting in serious socio-economic and public health consequences, the FAO
continued. The three most prevalent diseases already detected in Lebanon include
lumpy skin disease, foot-and-mouth disease and the peste des petits ruminants,
otherwise known as goat plague a highly contagious disease characterized by
fever, mouth sores, diarrhoea, rapid weight loss, pneumonia and a high death
rate in a short period of time. Photo: FAO/Kai Wiedenhoefer

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


            Copyright 2015 India Blooms., distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              789 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin)

                           August 12, 2015 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITION

OFFER YOUNG FARMERS A BREAK ON STUDENT LOANS

BYLINE:  by MARGARET KROME

SECTION: THE CAP TIMES; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 510 words


In my professional life, I fear I'm becoming the stereotype of a beaming
middle-aged lady. Recently I attended the summer meeting of the National
Sustainable Agriculture Coalition, which has an incomparable record of fostering
federal policies to support environmental, economic, and social sustainability
in agriculture. It started with a sort of Old Home Day, as a few dozen early
leaders gathered over food and conversation to remember our formative years. We
joked and reminisced as we reviewed our accomplishments as well as challenges
yet to conquer.

Then suddenly, the energy changed. The official meetings began, and as always,
we churned through a whirlwind of agendas, strategy development sessions, and
more meetings. Happily, unlike several years ago, when we all knew each other,
there were many new and younger advocates, jumping in with both feet and
offering strategy ideas and commitments to action.

Our community has become smarter about how to nurture these strong new leaders,
from creating internships and entry-level policy positions to welcoming children
at meetings.

The babies at last week's meeting made all the middle-aged ladies beam even
more.

Unfortunately, the bigger world of agriculture hasn't yet conquered its
formidable transition challenges. The average age of U.S. farmers is over 58
years, with almost six times the number of farmers over 65 as under 35. We are
only a few years from a calamitous drop in farmer numbers, and 63 percent of
farmland will be subject to changes in ownership. Land will likely be
consolidated into larger farms, with less crop and livestock diversity and
therefore less flexibility to adjust to challenges from markets, disease, and
especially climate change.

Our already-brittle food system is poised to become dangerously vulnerable.

This problem has been obvious for years, and many groups, including my own, have
worked to address it. In 2010, Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack urged
Congress and the nation to set a goal of creating 100,000 new farmers. And
indeed, the last decade has seen a modest influx of new farmers, but
unfortunately, many of those startups were short-lived. There are many reasons
for this, including beginning farmers' challenges in accessing credit and
affordable farmland.

But one reason stands out above others.

The National Young Farmers Coalition's survey of 700 young farmers found that a
formidable obstacle is student loan debt.

Their average respondent carried $35,000 in student loan debt, and 30 percent
chose to delay or not enter farming because of it.

The nation already has a program to encourage public service in needed careers,
such as nursing, medicine and public interest law; after making loan payments
for a decade, the balance of a student's federal loan debt is forgiven if they
are enrolled in the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program. Given the crucial
public service that farmers provide ? feeding and clothing us, protecting our
water supply, and creating rural and urban jobs ? including farmers in this
program seems obviously prudent.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Margaret Krome of Madison writes a semimonthly column for The Capital
Times.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2015 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              790 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                           January 1, 2014 Wednesday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

British firms seek 60,000 Romanians to fill jobs gap;
British firms seek 60,000 Romanians to fill Jobs gap

BYLINE: David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,4

LENGTH: 664 words


British companies are recruiting thousands of Romanian workers to plug gaps in
the highly skilled jobs market and fill posts spurned by Britons.

As border restrictions are lifted today, UK employers are advertising 4,896
posts on the main Romanian jobs website, ranging from care home workers to taxi
drivers and hotel staff. More than 62,000 jobs were advertised in Romania in
2013, up from nearly 42,000 two years earlier.

Employers looking to fill jobs with new blood from the former Communist country
include Hilton Hotels and the health service. The first recruitment fair in
Romania for NHS specialist nurses was held by the University Hospital of South
Manchester Trust in Bucharest last month.

Strict limits on the number of migrants from Romania and Bulgaria who can settle
in Britain are lifted today.

Ministers are under pressure not to allow a repeat of the mass migration of
Poles that occurred after the EU was expanded in 2004.

Fears that public services could be overwhelmed by arrivals from the two Eastern
European nations have led David Cameron to introduce measures to deter
immigrants, such as a threemonth wait before they can claim benefits. However,
László Andor, the European Commissioner for Employment, said that Britain was
unlikely to experience a large influx because three million Bulgarians and
Romanians had already settled in other EU countries.

According to the Romanian jobs website Tjobs.ro, which hosts more than 200
recruitment agencies that find workers for British employers, demand was
greatest for jobs in the hospitality and catering sector, followed by medical
services, with 1,471 Romanian nurses registered to work in Britain between April
2010 and March 2013 under an exemption to the previous restrictions.

The next most sought-after fields were cruise ships, restaurants and catering,
agriculture, construction, engineering, childcare and elderly care.

The figures appear to back comments made to The Times last month by Mariana
Campeanu, the Romanian Employment Minister, who warned that generous UK benefits
meant that British people refused to do low-paid jobs, leaving employers to seek
recruits from abroad.

At the same time as rising demand from British employers, Tjobs has recorded a
steady drop in the number of Romanians who are seeking to travel to the UK.
There were 144,617 candidates for the jobs advertised in 2011, 96,867 candidates
in 2012 and 62,618 candidates this year.

"Most of the Romanians [who travel to the UK] choose to leave the country for
economic reasons and according to our statistics more than 80 per cent are
planning to work abroad for a few years, save money and came back to buy a house
and maybe start a small business," Raluca Stefanescu, of Tjobs, said.

Ms Stefanescu added that fears of a big influx were misplaced because many of
the Romanians who wanted to come to the UK were already there.

She forecast that the number of Romanian migrants to the UK would fall in the
future, although she admitted that demand remained huge in the British
healthcare sector.

Valentin Porubin-Lazurca, managing director of VPL Healthcare in Bucharest, one
of the recruitment agencies that finds nurses, doctors and pharmacists for the
UK, organised the NHS trust recruitment fair on December 16. "Of course we
depend on demand for healthcare professionals," he said. "More and more nurses
are about to retire in the UK and they will have to recruit from overseas just
to cover the replacement rate. At the same time there are too few future
graduates in the UK.

"The NHS needs one nurse for every eight beds so it is not rocket science that
there will definitely be a need for highly skilled immigrants."

Romanian nurses will become more attractive to British employers from today
because they will no longer have to wait up to four months for their work permit
to be approved, Mr Porubin-Lazurca said. Nurses earn at least twice as much in
the UK as they do in Romania, while doctors earn only (EURO)300 a month in
Romania.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2014 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              791 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                           December 8, 2011 Thursday

Cabinet panel to solve potato glut crisis

BYLINE: Pramod Panwar

SECTION: RAJKOT

LENGTH: 298 words


PALANPUR: The state government has formed a committee of four cabinet ministers
to sort out the potato mess in Deesa, where a glut is forcing farmers and cold
storage owners to dump the tuber in river Banas.

According to BJP president, Banskantha, Dr K S Mogra, finance minister Vajubhai
Vala, panchayat minister Narottam Patel, water supply and irrigation minister
Nitin Patel and agriculture minister Dileep Sanghani will look into the problem.

A delegation of farmers had called on principal secretary of agriculture R K
Tripathi, urging the state government to solve the problem of potato glut which
has put the potato growers as well as the storage owners in a critical
situation.

"Potatoes of other states, particularly from Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, are sold
in Gujarat at very low prices, while we have even this day 20 lakh bags (each
bag containing 50 kg) causing us a loss of Rs 300 crore, which we had borrowed
from banks. Every month we have been paying lakhs of rupees as interest,"
president of the Potato Cold Storage Owners' Association Ganpat Kuchhwah said.

On the other hand, secretary of Potato Grower's Assosciation Babu Mali lamented,
"We are not in the position to get back our produce from the storages because
each bag requires Rs 50 as a rent. Thus, for one kg of potato, we have to pay a
rupee to cold storage owner and equal amount for the freight charges, brokerage
and labour charges. Hence, one kg potato costs us more than Rs 4."

"We have requested the state government to ban immediately on influx of potatoes
from other states and stressed on the need for transporting and selling Gujarati
potatoes to the states like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh where the
tuber's cost is on high, up to 6-7 Rs/kg," Kuchhwah added.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              792 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Donnybrook Bridgetown Mail

                               February 13, 2015

Japanese students learn about agriculture

BYLINE: TESS LEEDHAM

SECTION: COMMUNITY

LENGTH: 174  words


AN influx of overseas students enjoyed an educational holiday in the South West
recently.

The Singapore-based Waseda Shibuya Senior High School is exclusively for
Japanese students and last week saw a total of 109 students visiting the area to
learn more about agriculture.

The Year 11 students were accommodated locally on farms and rural properties
within a 100km radius, from Mandurah through to Margaret River and Bridgetown.

Some of the highlights of the week included visits to rotary dairies at milking
time, visiting the dolphins in Bunbury, enjoying the Busselton Jetty displays
and feeding and posing for photographs with kangaroos.

Scenic tours to fruit growing areas proved popular with the students, who had
the opportunity of witnessing fruit growing on trees ' instead of bagged up
varieties in the supermarkets.

Accompanying school teachers also enjoyed many of the experiences offered in the
South West. They applauded the programme, suggesting it made an excellent
holiday break as well as a cultural experience for their students.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2015 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              793 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 5, 1983 Saturday

Greece   EEC effect assailed

BYLINE: GAM

LENGTH: 119 words


Membership in the European Economic Community has had an adverse effect on
 Greece's economy, says Greek National Economy Minister Gerassimos Arsenis.

He pointed to an influx of community products and large increases in the  price
of consumer necessities as key problems. Greece will have been a  full member
for two years on Jan. 1.

On the positive side, Mr. Arsenis listed the money Greece receives
 through the Common Agricultural Policy and the opening of the EEC market
 to Greek products. But entry has had a negative effect on the balance of
 external payments, introduced serious competition from community products
 and increased the price of essentials to levels higher than the
 international average, he said.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1983 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              794 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              June 29, 2008 Sunday

Five South Asian nations, Burma, Thailand to hold food talks

LENGTH: 627 words


Text of report headlined "BIMSTEC economic ministers to talk food security:
Dhaka meet expected to bolster regional cooperation" published by Bangladeshi
newspaper New Age website on 29 June

[by Khawaza Main Uddin and Raheed Ejaz]

Seven countries of the Bay of Bengal Rim, including Bangladesh, are likely to
work out a common agenda for agriculture development to ensure food security,
though much-trumpeted regional cooperation initiatives proved hollow over the
decade.

In the ministerial meeting of the BIMSTEC [Bay of Bengal Initiative for
Multisectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation] in Dhaka on 9 July, they are
set to share their experiences, especially difficulties, in poverty alleviation
and attaining the UN Millennium Development Goals in all the seven countries,
said highly placed sources in the government.

The meeting of the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multisectoral Technical and
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), setting poverty alleviation as the theme, is
being held in the backdrop of global price hikes of food and energy, leading to
an increase in the number of poor people in many countries.

"Agriculture and food security will get prominence in the first-ever meeting on
such an issue apart from climate change and its impact on the poor," a high
official of the foreign ministry told New Age.

The meeting is set to devise a guideline in that regard in view of changing
scenario.

"A formal and institutional mechanism may need to be developed for strengthening
the networking system among the member countries," read the draft agenda of the
meeting.

The draft stipulates that the member countries of the group are required to
describe the strategies being followed with a view to ensure national and
household food security. The meeting is expected to highlight importance of
agriculture development to reduce influx of population from rural to urban areas
by creating rural employment.

Asked about the slow progress of BIMSTEC since its initiation in 1998, an
official, who was involved in the process earlier, pointed out that potentials
of the Bay of Bengal grouping could not be exploited due to "lukewarm responses"
from the member states, each assigned for particular sectors.

"The member countries have achieved substantially the goals of cooperation in
trade matters as they showed interest in and contributed enthusiastically to the
issue," the official argued.

However, the BIMSTEC countries would now share successful practices in achieving
the global development goals in local context, particularly in reducing poverty
by emphasising health and education as two critical areas. A common development
agenda may be identified in the meeting.

Climate change is also likely to feature prominently at the discussion of the
economic ministers of the BIMSTEC that groups Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka,
Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar [Burma] and Thailand.

"Can the member states come to a common agenda for caring the environment with
particular reference to cross boundary environmental issues, management of
natural calamities and early warning system?" the draft agenda said with a
question mark.

Also, successes and difficulties in micro-finance programmes will be discussed
with a view to taking a common agenda for all the members. Role of female-headed
households in economic development may also be highlighted in the meeting.

Finance and planning adviser A.B. Mirza Azizul Islam, is expected to represent
Bangladesh at the meet.

At the senior officials' meeting to be held on 8 July, the planning secretary
would be assigned to present Bangladesh's country position, which is jointly
being prepared by the Planning Commission and the Foreign Ministry, said
officials concerned.

Source: New Age website, Dhaka, in English 29 Jun 08

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2008 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              795 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     BBC Monitoring South Asia - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              June 29, 2008 Sunday

Five South Asian nations, Burma, Thailand to hold food talks

LENGTH: 627 words


Text of report headlined "BIMSTEC economic ministers to talk food security:
Dhaka meet expected to bolster regional cooperation" published by Bangladeshi
newspaper New Age website on 29 June

[by Khawaza Main Uddin and Raheed Ejaz]

Seven countries of the Bay of Bengal Rim, including Bangladesh, are likely to
work out a common agenda for agriculture development to ensure food security,
though much-trumpeted regional cooperation initiatives proved hollow over the
decade.

In the ministerial meeting of the BIMSTEC [Bay of Bengal Initiative for
Multisectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation] in Dhaka on 9 July, they are
set to share their experiences, especially difficulties, in poverty alleviation
and attaining the UN Millennium Development Goals in all the seven countries,
said highly placed sources in the government.

The meeting of the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multisectoral Technical and
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), setting poverty alleviation as the theme, is
being held in the backdrop of global price hikes of food and energy, leading to
an increase in the number of poor people in many countries.

"Agriculture and food security will get prominence in the first-ever meeting on
such an issue apart from climate change and its impact on the poor," a high
official of the foreign ministry told New Age.

The meeting is set to devise a guideline in that regard in view of changing
scenario.

"A formal and institutional mechanism may need to be developed for strengthening
the networking system among the member countries," read the draft agenda of the
meeting.

The draft stipulates that the member countries of the group are required to
describe the strategies being followed with a view to ensure national and
household food security. The meeting is expected to highlight importance of
agriculture development to reduce influx of population from rural to urban areas
by creating rural employment.

Asked about the slow progress of BIMSTEC since its initiation in 1998, an
official, who was involved in the process earlier, pointed out that potentials
of the Bay of Bengal grouping could not be exploited due to "lukewarm responses"
from the member states, each assigned for particular sectors.

"The member countries have achieved substantially the goals of cooperation in
trade matters as they showed interest in and contributed enthusiastically to the
issue," the official argued.

However, the BIMSTEC countries would now share successful practices in achieving
the global development goals in local context, particularly in reducing poverty
by emphasising health and education as two critical areas. A common development
agenda may be identified in the meeting.

Climate change is also likely to feature prominently at the discussion of the
economic ministers of the BIMSTEC that groups Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka,
Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar [Burma] and Thailand.

"Can the member states come to a common agenda for caring the environment with
particular reference to cross boundary environmental issues, management of
natural calamities and early warning system?" the draft agenda said with a
question mark.

Also, successes and difficulties in micro-finance programmes will be discussed
with a view to taking a common agenda for all the members. Role of female-headed
households in economic development may also be highlighted in the meeting.

Finance and planning adviser A.B. Mirza Azizul Islam, is expected to represent
Bangladesh at the meet.

At the senior officials' meeting to be held on 8 July, the planning secretary
would be assigned to present Bangladesh's country position, which is jointly
being prepared by the Planning Commission and the Foreign Ministry, said
officials concerned.

Source: New Age website, Dhaka, in English 29 Jun 08

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2008 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              796 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                            June 25, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Lucrative tax break ruled out for B.C. medical pot grow ops

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 200 words


Medical-marijuana producers setting up shop in B.C. won't be able to claim a
lucrative property-tax break designed for farms and other agricultural
operations, the B.C. government said on Tuesday.

Mayors in B.C. have been warning for months that commercial grow ops could get
out of paying nearly 90 per cent of their property taxes if they're lumped
together with farms, even if they're operating on expensive industrial land. The
province's agriculture minister, Norm Letnick, said medical-marijuana facilities
are complex industrial operations - and that's how they'll be taxed.

"Local governments are concerned - and fairly so - that there might be some
extra costs associated with these facilities," Letnick said in an interview.
"We're talking about a federally regulated narcotic, so it's different than
growing mushrooms or cherries or tomatoes in a greenhouse."

The debate over how to tax medicalmarijuana operations is happening as
governments across Canada figure out how to deal with an expected influx of such
facilities.

Health Canada has approved 13 producers, including five in B.C., though many
more are expected to join them.

Health Canada is currently reviewing hundreds of applications.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 The Vancouver Province
                              All Rights Reserved


                              797 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                             Mehr News Agency (MNA)

                            October 16, 2016 Sunday

Iran, Côte d'Ivoire drug fight necessary

LENGTH: 206 words


TEHRAN, Oct. 16 (MNA) - Iran's Javad Zarif has called for Iran- Côte d'Ivoire
cooperation to fight international drug cartels along with improved relations in
international organizations.

Zarif and his counterpart from Côte d'Ivoire Abdallah Albert Toikeusse Mabri met
on Sunday. Mr. Mabri is in Iran by an official invitation of the Foreign
Ministry. Zarif said that diverse fields as science and technology and
agriculture along with fighting against terrorism and drug cartels provided both
countries to review level of relations; "the West African country would engage
more actively in efforts waged by Iran in curbing the influx of drugs from
Middle East to Africa and the rest of the world," Zarif added.

Mr. Mabri for his part congratulated Iran for its success in clinching a nuclear
deal with the 5+1 as an achievement for the Islamic world as well; "Iran is a
great regional power especially in economics and in its influence exercised in
the region; we hope to establish a joint commission by the first quarter of 2017
in Abidjan; Iran would be a great partner for us in energy and banking, with
human rights, drug fights, agriculture, and science and technology in queue for
improvements," he concluded his brief address.

SH/3797248

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 399


                        Copyright 2016 Mehr News Agency
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.


                              798 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                               May 6, 2016 Friday

Mangoes still pricey for aam aadmi in May

SECTION: GOA

LENGTH: 275 words


Panaji: Lusting after the delectable 'King of Fruits', Goa's 'aam aadmi' usually
looks forward to the month of May, it being a time when the influx of mangoes in
the market is at its highest, thus resulting in lowered prices. With the onset
of the month of May and a sea of yellow mangoes surging in the local markets, a
price-drop in mangoes seems like a far dream for locals waiting to bite into the
fleshy fruit."We're regular consumers of mangoes and look forward to its arrival
each year," said Swati Rane, "It is a yearly thing for mancurad mangoes to sell
at exorbitant rates, but, usually by April-end they come down to 500 or below.
But, even in the first week of May there is not much of a drop in prices," she
said.

People's favourite mancurad mangoes are currently going at 500 to 700 a dozen in
the local market, while small mancurad mangoes is going at 300 to 400 per dozen.
From selling at 'burn a hole in pocket' price of 4,000 a dozen in January, the
prices of Mancurad had fallen to 2,500 per dozen in April. Despite the 400-700
window, there are not many takers for the fruit, yet. "Business remains bleak
for us, but we cannot afford to loosen the rates," said fruit vendor Rahim
Bepari. "When supply is low, how can we be liberal with the prices?"Of the total
mango crop, only 60-70% is available in the local markets, said an official from
the department of agriculture. The rest have been affected due to climatic
conditions.Also, the short winter season this year was not intense enough to
permit proper flowering of the fruit trees thus affecting the overall mango
production in the state.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              799 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Trust (Abuja)

                               November 09, 2014

Bauchi 2015 - Tuggar Meets Fulani Group

BYLINE: Ahmed Mohammed

LENGTH: 228 words

DATELINE: Bauchi


The umbrella organisation of Fulani groups in Bauchi State, Miyetti Allah,
Samairu and Kautal Hore has met with Bauchi's guber aspirant under the All
Progressive Congress (APC) Yusuf Maitama Tuggar.

The meeting was to deliberate on ways to foster peaceful co-existence and check
communal violence among the numerous ethnic groups of the state. Leaders of the
organisation decried the loss of grazing lands and influx of refugees to the
state from neighbouring states faced with conflict such as Borno, Yobe, Adamawa
and Plateau states, which they insist is taking a toll on the meager resources
and utilities available.

In response to the issues raised, especially as it concerns grazing lands and
water for cattle, Tuggar highlighted on strategies and approach to tackling the
water problem such as provision of dams across the state. He noted that the
Tuggar Organisation (TgCO) provided 56 industrial boreholes while partnering the
private sector between year 2007 and 2011.

He said the idea is to maintain and build on existing infrastructure and to end
the reliance on rain-fed agriculture. Tuggar added that as a legislator, he
ensured adequate funding and supervision for the Udubo Federal Grazing Reserve
in Bauchi State.

The fora afforded the TgCO the opportunity to explain aspects of its programme
on agriculture, job creation, education and healthcare among others.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              800 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Arusha Times (Arusha)

                                 July 28, 2012

Fake Seeds Dominate Local Market

LENGTH: 434 words


Stakeholders in the seed industry say there are many fake seeds being sold to
farmers and have called on the relevant authorities to put a stop to the
practice.

"It is true fake seeds is a big problem in Tanzania.Farmers have been cheated
and cannot differentiate between the genuine ones and fake products", lamented
Mr. Dave Clements, managing director of Seedco Tanzania Limited.

He said his company, a new entrant to the seed industry in Tanzania, has
released five varieties of maize and sorghum seeds already doing well with the
farmers, but was still worried by the influx of fake seeds.

He told reporters after a visit to the demonstration farms in Monduli district
that some unscrupulous traders and agents often manipulated the labels of
registered seed producers and sell them to farmers.

Seedco, a firm with origin in Zimbabwe, entered the seed industry in 2010 and
currently has two seed processing plants in Arusha and Mbeya where the hybrid
maize and sorghum seeds are processed and packed.

The third plant will be set up in Mwanza next year for the Lake Zone regions."
We entered the Tanzania market to produce through contract farmers, process,
pack and market the seeds for the local market", he said.

His remarks were echoed by the Monduli district agricultural and livestock
development officer Mr. Ridhiwani Kombo who attributed the problem to the
liberalisation of the seed industry.

"We are having agents who are not honest. We are urging farmers to buy

seeds only from authorized agents", he said at a demonstration farm in Monduli
which has been supplied with hybrid maize seeds.

Seedco company marketing manager of the firm Mr. Arnold Mselle told agro
dealers, farmers and journalists at the site on Thursday that there are many
fake seeds with his firm's labels selling in Arusha and other areas.

"We have received a lot of complaints", he said and urged the maize growers to
buy only genuine seeds, fertilizers and other agricultural inputs from
authorized dealers.

According to him, the company has developed hybrid seeds for maize for different
agro-ecological zones, including the highlands, middle altitudes and lowlands.
They are high yielding, early maturing and resistant to diseases.

They can yield between 20 to 30 bags of maize per acre.

Mr. Clements said Seedco has invested more than $ 2 million in Tanzania in the
last two years and will inject between $ 5m to $ 10m in the next two years in
the seed production.

During the period it has created a base of 300 agro dealers amid plans to reach
out between 4,000 to 6,000 registered dealers of agricultural input dealers in
Tanzania.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              801 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      May 24, 1991, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Do you mind paying more for peanuts to protect the USA's farmers?

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 351 words


Ron Stephens, 35
Salesman
Greensboro, N.C.

If we can avoid the influx of lower-priced imports by paying a few cents extra
for peanuts and peanut butter, we should. I don't mind paying a little extra,
given the fact that it means support for our farmers. They need our support.
There is an agricultural crisis in the United States.

Judy Edwards, 54
Self-employed
Duncan, Okla.

I support our farmers. America's trade with other countries is getting out of
control. It seems as though we import more than we export. I know many families
who grow peanuts, and I eat lots of peanuts. When these imports come in, they
are offered to us at lower prices, and the local farmers are affected.

James Blanton, 42
Company executive
Chicago, Ill.
The price of peanuts and peanut butter is already too high. We have to change
the system that puts us at the mercy of a few farmers who monopolize the market.
We also have to check the imbalance in our trade system. We need to stop
supporting countries that won't allow us to equally compete with them.

Julia Child
Author/chef
Cambridge, Mass.

I don't keep peanut butter around the house because I love it. I eat it right
out of the jar. I also love it in those wonderful Thai sauces, roasted, and in
ice cream. Protectionism is a very touchy subject. I haven't thought through all
of it. I know there have been many complaints about the Japanese.

Mark E. Little, 35
Technician
Fontana, Calif.
I don't hear a lot of people screaming over the high cost of peanuts and peanut
butter. I would like to see free and equal trade for everyone, but that's not
going to happen. I worry about other things that are more crucial to our
survival. I love salted peanuts in the shell. That's it, in a nutshell.

Janice Wilson, 46
Clerk
Renner, S.D.

When you go to the grocery, it seems as though everything is imported from
somewhere. The kiwi fruit comes from New Zealand, and the celery from somewhere
else. I don't like it, but there's not much I can do. I guess we'll be seeing
much more of that. That's what free enterprise is all about.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS; b/w (6)

TYPE: Debate; Voices

                      Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.


                              802 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        Townsville Bulletin (Australia)

                           October 27, 2016 Thursday
                               Townsville Edition

Vegan diet better for you and the world

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 156  words


SOY milk came out my nose when I read Debra Gibson's letter ("Anti-meat case
flawed" TB, October 25). The dairy industry funded - and spent a ton to get
media coverage of - the only study ever to try to scare people away from soy
milk, which is better for your skin, your digestion, and cows than the other
white stuff.

As the Worldwatch Institute points out, the benefit to the environment is also
firmly on the side of a vegan diet, something that - gulp - is hard for people
in the animal agriculture business to swallow.

As for poor countries, I can assure Ms Gibson - from first-hand experience,
having grown up in Asia and now having offices there - it is the influx of
animal products that is adding diabetes, heart disease, and cancer to poor
people's health woes and that nutrition is better achieved with a natural diet
of pulses, grains, vegetables, nuts, and fruit.

INGRID E. NEWKIRK, Founder, PETA Australia,Washington, DC, USA.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: Townsville Bulletin


                   Copyright 2016 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              803 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                  Korea Times

                            February 4, 2008 Monday

Agricultural Deficit Tops $10 Billion

LENGTH: 263 words


By Han Sang-hee

Staff Reporter

The nation's agricultural trade deficit surged to an all time high of $10.9
billion last year due to a sharp rise in global agricultural product prices.

According to the Korea Agro-Fisheries Trade Corporation Monday, the deficit
represents a 25.7 percent increase from $8.6 billion in 2006. South Korea
imported a total of $13.3 billion while exports stood at $2.4 billion last year.
The agricultural trade deficit was roughly equivalent to the country's memory
chip trade surplus the same year.

The corporation said that South Korea recorded the largest deficit in
agriculture with the United States with $2.9 billion, up 29.7 percent from 2006.
China came next with $2.2 billion, a whopping 45.1 percent jump, followed by
Australia with $1.5 billion and Brazil with $700 million.

The annual agriculture deficit has been hitting a new high year after year.

Imports of farm products amounted to $3 billion, up 17.7 percent, while fruit
imports posted a rise of 19.5 percent at $800 million. Feed imports also jumped
33.8 percent to $400 million.

Imports of vegetables such as Chinese cabbage, the main ingredient of kimchi,
grew 15.5 percent to $570 million. According to the corporation, the nation's
deficit in the kimchi trade hit a record high of $35 million last year due to
the massive influx of kimchi made in China.

Despite health concern about U.S. meat and bone fragments, oversea meat and pork
imports reached $1.3 billion and $9 billion, up 18 and 16.2 percent,
respectively. Wine imports surged from $88 million in 2006 to $150 million last
year.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2008 The Korea Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              804 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                  Korea Times

                            November 1, 1999, Monday

Gov't Should Quarantine Farm Products Consumed by USFK'

LENGTH: 521 words


   The quarantine inspection into farm products consumed by U.S. Forces here
have flared again as a hot issue between Korea and the United States amid the
probability that blights and harmful insects carried by the farm products would
affect local agriculture.

The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry has insisted on the revision of the
Agreement on the Article 4 of the Mutual Defense Treaty between Korea and the
United States Regarding Facilities and Areas and the Status of U.S. Armed Forces
in Korea (SOFA) to get the quarantine inspection right but has been rejected
every time, an official said.

The ministry has called for another revision, sending a proposal to the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Trade to include the issue in the upcoming talks on the
overall revision of the SOFA. The talks are scheduled to be held Nov. 9 at the
SOFA joint committee meeting at the U.S. Forces headquarters in Yongsan.

An agriculture ministry official said yesterday that farm products brought in by
the U.S. Forces in Korea should be subject to quarantine inspection by Korea,
based on the spirit of the animal and plant inspection pact of the World Trade
Organization (WTO).

He claimed that the specific situation involving in U.S. Forces here should not
be beyond the international norm.

Yoo Byung-rin, director of the ministry's trade cooperation division, said,
Korean farm products are exposed to the danger of foreign blights and harmful
insects involving farm products consumed by U.S. Forces here. Quarantine
inspection is the second national defense.'''Korea has banned imports of
American mainland's fruits such as apples, pears, apricots and almonds for fear
of codlin moth, as well as potatoes, cabbages and other Hawaiian fruits and
vegetables for similar fears. But a considerable volume of the farm products
have been brought in by the U.S. Forces without local quarantine inspection, he
said.

He claimed that there is no confirmation that harmful insects and blights have
come from farm products brought in by the U.S. Forces in Korea. But pine needle
flies and other harmful insects, whose inflow channels are not confined, have
damaged farm products greatly, he explained.

The National Plant Quarantine Office has installed nets in some 40 posts around
U.S. military units in Pyongtaek, Osan and Uijongbu to check possible influxes
of foreign harmful insects on regular basis.

The U.S. Forces in Korea have taken a step back from their stance, saying that
they would inform the Korean authorities of the outcome of a quarantine
inspection, but it has never been realized, he said.

Korea legislated the law on the plant quarantine inspection in 1961. But Korea
failed to insert a clause on the quarantine inspection in the SOFA which was
signed in 1966 by the two governments.

The U.S. military authorities claim that they could not allow Korea's quarantine
inspection as the farm produce is not brought in for commercial purpose.

The upcoming SOFA talks will also deal with judiciary rights on crimes of
American soldiers here and the environmental pollution by U.S. Forces units.


LOAD-DATE: November 08, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                          Copyright 1999 Hankook Ilbo


                              805 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                           February 23, 2017 Thursday
                           Internet & Print Editions

Kyogle allows workers' dongas

BYLINE: Jamie Brown

LENGTH: 267 words


Blueberry pickers in the upper Clarence at Tabulam will benefit most from new
planning laws adopted by Kyogle Council that will encourage temporary on-farm
accommodation.

The notion of offering hired hands a place to sleep is not new in agriculture
but modern legalities tend to shun the Aussie donga.

Next year's blueberry harvest at Mountain Blue's 260ha farm on the Upper
Clarence near Tabulam is expected to employ more than 1000 people.

The influx will transform the township's economy with nearby Drake and Bonalbo
to gain.

Kyogle Mayor Danielle Mulholland said: "Supporting rural businesses by ensuring
a range of appropriate worker accommodation options are available is a key,
practical way the Council can bolster and create jobs for the region.

"Council anticipates the amendment will encourage the development of more labour
intensive agricultural ventures and better support existing operations."

Neighbouring Clarence Valley Council environment, planning and community
director, Des Schroder, said the Valley was fortunate in that most of the
blueberry crops and processing facilities were close to urban centres like
Grafton.

"Because they're close to towns we don't think there are going to be too many
problems providing accommodation for pickers and process workers," he said.

"We are actively encouraging workers to stay in or close to towns so they can
add to the economies there and our cultural diversity.

"We're also aware of a few proposals to set up backpacker accommodation in
Grafton.

"We haven't seen those come through as development applications yet, but expect
we will sometime soon."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              806 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                           February 23, 2017 Thursday
                           Print & Internet Editions

Kyogle allows workers' dongas

BYLINE: Jamie Brown

SECTION: RURAL; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 267 words


Blueberry pickers in the upper Clarence at Tabulam will benefit most from new
planning laws adopted by Kyogle Council that will encourage temporary on-farm
accommodation.

The notion of offering hired hands a place to sleep is not new in agriculture
but modern legalities tend to shun the Aussie donga.

Next year's blueberry harvest at Mountain Blue's 260ha farm on the Upper
Clarence near Tabulam is expected to employ more than 1000 people.

The influx will transform the township's economy with nearby Drake and Bonalbo
to gain.

Kyogle Mayor Danielle Mulholland said: "Supporting rural businesses by ensuring
a range of appropriate worker accommodation options are available is a key,
practical way the Council can bolster and create jobs for the region.

"Council anticipates the amendment will encourage the development of more labour
intensive agricultural ventures and better support existing operations."

Neighbouring Clarence Valley Council environment, planning and community
director, Des Schroder, said the Valley was fortunate in that most of the
blueberry crops and processing facilities were close to urban centres like
Grafton.

"Because they're close to towns we don't think there are going to be too many
problems providing accommodation for pickers and process workers," he said.

"We are actively encouraging workers to stay in or close to towns so they can
add to the economies there and our cultural diversity.

"We're also aware of a few proposals to set up backpacker accommodation in
Grafton.

"We haven't seen those come through as development applications yet, but expect
we will sometime soon."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              807 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                           February 23, 2017 Thursday
                           Print & Internet Editions

Kyogle allows workers' dongas

BYLINE: Jamie Brown

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 267 words


Blueberry pickers in the upper Clarence at Tabulam will benefit most from new
planning laws adopted by Kyogle Council that will encourage temporary on-farm
accommodation.

The notion of offering hired hands a place to sleep is not new in agriculture
but modern legalities tend to shun the Aussie donga.

Next year's blueberry harvest at Mountain Blue's 260ha farm on the Upper
Clarence near Tabulam is expected to employ more than 1000 people.

The influx will transform the township's economy with nearby Drake and Bonalbo
to gain.

Kyogle Mayor Danielle Mulholland said: "Supporting rural businesses by ensuring
a range of appropriate worker accommodation options are available is a key,
practical way the Council can bolster and create jobs for the region.

"Council anticipates the amendment will encourage the development of more labour
intensive agricultural ventures and better support existing operations."

Neighbouring Clarence Valley Council environment, planning and community
director, Des Schroder, said the Valley was fortunate in that most of the
blueberry crops and processing facilities were close to urban centres like
Grafton.

"Because they're close to towns we don't think there are going to be too many
problems providing accommodation for pickers and process workers," he said.

"We are actively encouraging workers to stay in or close to towns so they can
add to the economies there and our cultural diversity.

"We're also aware of a few proposals to set up backpacker accommodation in
Grafton.

"We haven't seen those come through as development applications yet, but expect
we will sometime soon."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              808 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                           February 23, 2017 Thursday
                           Print & Internet Editions

Kyogle allows workers' dongas

BYLINE: Jamie Brown

SECTION: CLASSIFIEDS

LENGTH: 267 words


Blueberry pickers in the upper Clarence at Tabulam will benefit most from new
planning laws adopted by Kyogle Council that will encourage temporary on-farm
accommodation.

The notion of offering hired hands a place to sleep is not new in agriculture
but modern legalities tend to shun the Aussie donga.

Next year's blueberry harvest at Mountain Blue's 260ha farm on the Upper
Clarence near Tabulam is expected to employ more than 1000 people.

The influx will transform the township's economy with nearby Drake and Bonalbo
to gain.

Kyogle Mayor Danielle Mulholland said: "Supporting rural businesses by ensuring
a range of appropriate worker accommodation options are available is a key,
practical way the Council can bolster and create jobs for the region.

"Council anticipates the amendment will encourage the development of more labour
intensive agricultural ventures and better support existing operations."

Neighbouring Clarence Valley Council environment, planning and community
director, Des Schroder, said the Valley was fortunate in that most of the
blueberry crops and processing facilities were close to urban centres like
Grafton.

"Because they're close to towns we don't think there are going to be too many
problems providing accommodation for pickers and process workers," he said.

"We are actively encouraging workers to stay in or close to towns so they can
add to the economies there and our cultural diversity.

"We're also aware of a few proposals to set up backpacker accommodation in
Grafton.

"We haven't seen those come through as development applications yet, but expect
we will sometime soon."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              809 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Assam Tribune (India)

                            October 15, 2012 Monday

Cabinet clears white paper on influx

LENGTH: 193 words

DATELINE: GUWAHATI


GUWAHATI, Oct. 15 -- The State Cabinet today cleared the white paper prepared by
the Government on the issue of infiltration by foreigners into the state and the
measures taken to deal with the problem. The white paper will be made public
soon.

The State Cabinet cleared a proposal for declaring tea as the state drink. The
Chief Minister had made an announcement in this regard earlier and the clearance
by the Cabinet paved the way for giving the status to tea.

Government spokesman and Agriculture Minister Nilamani Sen Deka told The Assam
Tribune that the State Cabinet, in a meeting chaired by Chief Minister Tarun
Gogoi, also took several other important decisions and decided to adopt a new
land policy for the state.

In view of the diesel price hike, the Cabinet decided to increase the hike of
fare of public transport by 25 percent. The Cabinet also decided to set up a
Biotech park in the land owned by the STATFED at Amingaon on the outskirts of
the city. Published by HT Syndication with permission from Assam Tribune. For
any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 Assam Tribune (P) Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              810 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Business Daily (Nairobi)

                           August 17, 2011 Wednesday

Political Goodwill Can Help Stabilise Prices [opinion]

LENGTH: 395  words


Without a doubt, the high cost of food, particularly in the Horn of Africa, is
one of the factors behind the debilitating hunger that has become the daily
reality, especially for poor families. Although high food prices may be good
news for farmers, it is bad news for the millions of people in dry regions and
low-income urban areas as it creates the conditions that lead to popular
unrests.

In the Horn, it has also led to the death of 29,000 children under the age of
five, according to UN statistics, besides sparking the migration of thousands of
families fleeing from famine in Somalia. Many of these refugees have ended up in
Kenyan camps where the conditions of living continue to deteriorate due to the
uncontrolled influx of hungry families.

Of course, Kenyans have not been spared either by the drought, which is
responsible for low harvests which have in turn led to a scarcity of basic foods
like maize, the scarcity of which is partly responsible for the rising prices.
Already, four million - about ten per cent of the population - is at risk of
starvation in the dry regions.

Many of these people are hungry largely because they cannot afford to buy food
which, in poor households, accounts for a significant chunk of family budgets.

One of the ways that the government can help to stabilise prices - and reduce
shortages in hard hit areas - would be by creating systems for moving farm
produce from high supply areas to low supply regions. This will ensure that
market forces will stabilise prices of basic goods, especially vegetables and
grains.

The other, of course, is to support irrigation in dry regions. It is ironical
that a week after it was reported that prolonged drought had caused death in
some parts of Turkana, the region suffered heavy rains which led to the death of
at least five people. This contradiction is start for it implies that the region
could harness the water it gets from heavy rains to be used during the dry
spells.

But the system to make this a reality lies squarely with public institutions,
including the Water and Irrigation Development and North and Arid Areas
Development ministries. Storing this water will not only ensure survival of
livestock, but also encourage supplementary farming, which can go a long way in
reducing the cost of food in these areas. The question is: Where is the
political goodwill to make this work?

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              811 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                             August 24, 1998 Monday
                                  Late Edition

Murray River lure for sport enthusiasts

BYLINE: D.M. WALKER

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 337 words


The increase in sports tourism has allowed Echuca and Moama to branch into
package holiday deals capitalising on the leisure travel industry.

The tourism manager at Echuca Moama and district tourism, Ms Maureen Bennett,
said Echuca was working to entice golfers, waterskiers and even basketballers to
man-made courses and recent managed events in the region.

The influx of visitors kept about 10 per cent of the region's population
employed in tourism and hospitality, second only to the agriculture sector.

She said Echuca was also trying to enter the corporate convention market and
position itself on Victoria's food and winery circuit.

Echuca is also marketing overseas, drawing German tourists from its appearance
on German television's version of Getaway about five months ago. The program's
compere spent three days in the town and on the Murray in paddle steamers.

The steamers are a vital key to attracting tourists to Echuca. A study conducted
in April found general historical interest and the boats drew 27 per cent of
visitors to the region, and a further 31 per cent of the respondents said
leisure and relaxation brought them to the Murray River centre. Once there, more
than 60 per cent of the tourists rode on a paddle steamer.

On average they stayed in the Echuca-Moama region for about four nights,
accounting for the average 85 per cent occupancy rate in Echuca's hotels and
motels. But one-third of visitors to the region were day-trippers.

Paddle steamers could also have brought almost half of the tourists to the
region who were large family groups, and the 27 per cent who were couples with
children. About 30 per cent were aged under 14, while only six per cent were
between 14 and 24.

About 12 per cent of tourists came from overseas, and more than half from
Melbourne. Other country areas provided about one fifth of all Echuca's
visitors.

Echuca and Moama were not as dependent on tourists from Asia as Victoria's other
tourist attractions. The Asian economic downturn was not expected to harm the
area.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Hero, the current restoration project. Picture: JOHN
WOUDSTRA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 1998 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              812 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                           February 3, 2016 Wednesday

Are robots taking over the farm? In Japan, they are.;
The world's first farm to be almost completely run by robots will start to
produce next year.

BYLINE: Lonnie Shekhtman Staff

SECTION: Technology

LENGTH: 796 words


A Japanese firm said on Monday it will soon open what may be the most futuristic
farm yet: operated by robots, with their human assistants donning lab coats
instead of overalls, and vegetables growing vertically on ceiling-high metal
shelves instead of horizontally over bucolic fields.

Spread, a cutting-edge food producer based in Kyoto, says its roughly one-acre
indoor farm will start operating in 2017, producing 30,000 heads of
pesticide-free lettuce a day initially. By using efficient lighting and
watering, and shrinking the number of human employees, Spread will significantly
reduce its costs, at least by half on labor.

The only job carried out by human farmers will be planting the seeds. All other
tasks - from re-planting young seedlings to watering, trimming, and harvesting
crops - are to be managed by machines.

While this new farm might be the most advanced representation of the high-tech
shift in the global agriculture industry, it certainly isn't the first. Farms
worldwide have been turning to technology from drones to satellites to increase
yields and replace workers as farmers struggle to feed a ballooning global
population with a declining number of farmworkers.

"Around the world, we're facing increases in population and more and more
environmental issues for farming," Shinji Inada, president of Spread, told CNN.

"As a company, we feel we need some new agricultural systems in order to survive
and ensure the future for the next generation."

Statistics show that the next generation is not that interested in farming.
Japan is facing labor shortages in agriculture and many other industries, and is
expected to increasingly fill the open positions with robots. In 2011, the
average age of a Japanese farmer was 65.9, according to the Guardian.

The US is in a similar situation. According to Stratfor Global Intelligence, an
Austin, Texas-based analyst firm, the number of farmworkers in the US workforce
decreased throughout the last century as per capita income increased. This is
reflected in the 2012 US Census of Agriculture, which reported that the number
of farmers declined between the 2007 and 2012 census by 4.3 percent, with a
majority of farmers now between 55 and 64 years old.

An influx of undocumented and inexpensive Mexican laborers to the United States
was what saved the agricultural sector from a labor crisis in the 20th century,
Stratfor says. But immigration policy could soon render that unfeasible and
cause labor costs to rise, and ultimately more robots to take over.

"Big data and smart technologies will play an increasingly important role in
improving agricultural production in the United States over the course of the
next 10 years," predicted the firm in a 2015 report.

Though farmers are not going to be completely replaced by robots in the
immediate future, they already are and will continue to rely heavily on the
smart machines to produce more with less.

"Driverless tractors, drones that monitor soil quality, automated irrigation and
even robotic bees to pollinate crops are all tools that farmers will have at
their disposal as they seek to profit in a future of higher demand and fewer
resources," says Stratfor.

Since the 1990s, US dairy farmers have been using robots to milk cows. Genetic
engineering has produced plants that can withstand powerful, chemical weed
killers. Many industrial farms in the middle of the country use computers to
operate farm machinery, employ automated seed planting technologies, and guide
planting and harvesting decisions with information beamed down from satellites.

These trends may make Spread's mechanical farm seem less exotic. The one due to
open this year will be the company's second (and more automated) facility, with
the first already producing a harvest of 21,000 heads of lettuce that are
delivered daily to supermarkets and restaurants across the country.

"In the beginning people reacted to our product as something unnatural -
machine-like - but by continuing to sell in the supermarkets people started to
realize slowly that the taste was good and there were health benefits, so we
slowly gained customers," Mr. Ianada told CNN.

"The turning point was the incident in 2011 at the Fukushima nuclear facility.
After what happened there, people became more aware of the importance of safe
food and it kind of turned the tables for us," he said.

CNN notes a few additional benefits of vertically grown vegetables. For one,
they don't require pesticides. The indoor factory is also clean, unsusceptible
to weather and environmental conditions, and can be more easily monitored for
disease.

"It is more reminiscent of a microchip factory than a farm, but the payoff is
that each head of lettuce is so clean that consumers could eat it straight out
of the bag," writes CNN.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2016 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                              813 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            South China Morning Post

                              July 29, 2012 Sunday

Against odds, city harks back to agrarian roots

BYLINE: Jennifer Ngo

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 04

LENGTH: 324 words


Before the British came, much of what is now Hong Kong relied on fishing and
famring. While the hilltop and steep hillsides of its 200-plus islands were not
suitable for growing crops, there were salt pans, rice fields, some cultivation
of vegetables and animal husbandry.

It was enough, at least, to feed what was then a relatively small population.

When the British took control of Hong Kong Island in 1842,  the vast majority of
locals were dependent on fishing. But the interest of the early British
colonists was in the trade potential of the deep, sheltered waters of Victoria
Harbour.

While there were attempts to introduce agriculture - not least the growing of
opium, the drug Britain went to war with China to sell - the growing population
turned its attention to trade and industry.

The agricultural heartland of the New Territories became part of the British
colony in 1899, but the influx of mainland immigrants continued, and the
emphasis switched towards trading and, later, manufacturing.

From the 1960s onwards, large swathes of farmland made way for new towns as the
population blossomed.

Just 6 per cent of modern Hong Kong is made up of arable land and farming has
always been less profitable than manufacturing, but recent years have shown
signs of a comeback for the sector as farmers turn to premium crops and flowers
rather than the traditional staple, rice.

Organic farming was introduced in 1988, with the government launching an
Accredited Farm Scheme in 1994 to protect consumers against farms using too many
pesticides.

While the city continues to import the vast majority of its food - about 95 per
cent according to the Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Department - the
government is offering incentives for farming at home, including pest control
and soil management help.

Just 2.7 per cent of the local work force is employed in agriculture. Most farms
are small, producing flowers, vegetables and some pigs and poultry.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 South China Morning Post Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              814 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            September 9, 2005 Friday
                                 Final Edition

R-CALF escalates court challenge

BYLINE: Bloomberg

SECTION: CALGARZ BUSINESS; Pg. E6

LENGTH: 282  words


A Montana ranchers group has asked a federal appeals court to review a July
ruling that lifted a ban on Canadian cattle imports after the U.S. said the
animals posed a minimal threat of spreading mad cow disease.

The Ranchers-Cattlemen Action Legal Fund, or R-CALF, said Thursday it has asked
for a hearing before a larger group of judges from the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of
Appeals.

On July 14, a three-judge panel of the court lifted an injunction that blocked a
U.S. Department of Agriculture plan to allow cattle from Canada, which has had
four cases of mad cow disease, to be sold in the U.S.

"A rehearing is appropriate because the panel's decision to reverse
long-standing protections against" bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE,
"was made without any definitive scientific evidence," Bill Bullard, chief
executive of Billings, Mont.-based R-CALF, said in a statement. The ruling also
"overlooks or misstates a number of important points of law and facts."

Analysts have said Tyson Foods Inc., Cargill Inc. and other large U.S. meat
packers stand to benefit from the influx of cattle from Canada, which the U.S.
banned in May 2003 when mad cow disease was found in Alberta.

The ban created a cattle shortage in the U.S. that forced the major beef packers
to reduce operations. The U.S. normally gets about five per cent of animals for
slaughter from Canada.

Canada began shipping cattle under 30 months of age to the U.S. on July 18.

Scientists say cattle that young have little chance of developing the disease.

Mad cow disease is a brain-wasting livestock ailment with a rare human variant.
The disease has been blamed for 150 deaths in the U.K., where it was first
reported in the 1980s.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              815 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)

                            June 27, 2012, Wednesday

W.Va. remains highly forested;
Federal study details state's woodland health

BYLINE: RIVARD, DAILY MAIL CAPITOL REPORTER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P1C

LENGTH: 796 words


Amid a timber industry crash, the trees just keep on growing.

A new study of West Virginia forests shows the state remains one of the most
forested in the country. It's also home to a good mix of hardwoods waiting to be
cut down if there's a rebound in the housing market.

"Your forest land is fully stocked," state Division of Forestry Director Randy
Dye told a legislative committee Tuesday.

Dye presented lawmakers with a comprehensive federal study of the state's
forests, the first of its kind in a decade.

Dye said the study proved wrong those who said an influx of wood processing
plants in the 1990s would lead to another clear-cutting of West Virginia's land.

"It was feared that that was the start of a liquidating of West Virginia's
forest, but, as you can see, they have continued to grow, even with that large
harvest," Dye said. "Yes, the forest products industry is down today, but even
after that large harvest with those new facilities it continues to grow."

Instead of deforestation, the state has more timber stock than anytime since at
least 1949, according to the new study by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
The state now has about 88 billion board feet of sawtimber-size trees.

But the whole industry is down across the country, something Dye blamed on
bankers and bank regulators who helped cause a recession and the collapse of the
housing market. Houses, of course, require wood.

West Virginia's forestry sector is clearly hurting. In 2001, 3,357 workers
worked at state sawmills. In 2010, just 1,910 worked in the mills.

"It looks like there's only one way, and that's up," said David Caldwell, the
associate editor of the Hardwood Market Report, a weekly hardwood lumber pricing
guide published in Memphis.

That said, about 47 percent of the eastern United States' hardwood is exported,
meaning slowdowns in Europe and China could further weaken the American timber
business.

"There's never any absolute certainty it couldn't get worse," Caldwell said in a
telephone interview.

Gov. Earl Ray Tomblin signed a bill earlier this year to continue to exempt the
timber industry from a severance tax.

Because of the law, "the timber industry will save approximately $1.3 million
annually at a time when the industry is still fighting for survival," Tomblin,
who is usually sanguine about the state's economy, said in early March.

Right now, West Virginia has 12 million acres of forest, which is 78 percent of
the state. The state is the third most forested in the country behind Maine and
New Hampshire.

According to the survey, about 60 percent of the state's forest land is owned by
families, 27 percent is owned by businesses, the federal government owns 10
percent and the state owns 3 percent.

The largest single forest owner in the state is Massachusetts-based Forestland
Group. The firm owns more forested land than even the federal government.

If and when the housing market rebounds, Dye said West Virginia could feel it a
bit later than other states because timber from here is predominantly hardwood
and is typically used for floors, furniture and cabinets - things that go into
houses after they are built. Houses themselves are made of softwood.

Caldwell noted that over the past decade or so consumers began to prefer lighter
hardwoods to dark woods like oak. If that trend continues, West Virginia, with
its large oak stocks, may not fully benefit from a market rebound.

The state's timber industry could benefit from a shift away from fossil fuels.
First, some renewable energy companies are looking to burn biomass - like trees
- instead of oil and coal.

Delegate Bill Hartman, D-Randolph, said one company was looking to set up shop
in his area to produce wood pellets to ship to Europe. The pellets are believed
to be a relatively low-pollution fuel source for home heating.

Dye said he'd heard about that company, as well as another that is building a
plant in Virginia but near the border.

"In the last two years, we have had numerous inquiries relating to biomass,
pellet energy production, fuel production - I've lost count, a lot of people
looking, but I don't believe anything until I see them putting steel in the
ground," Dye said.

Second, if there are new, comprehensive federal climate change regulations,
forest owners could get money for their living trees, which absorb greenhouse
gases and help offset the predicted effects of climate change.

"Forest landowners are not financially compensated for contributions their trees
make in absorbing carbon dioxide and storing carbon," the federal survey said.
"However, this may change if recent proposals to pay landowners for storing
carbon in their forests become a widespread reality."

Contact writer Ry Rivard at ry. rivard@dailymail.com or 304-348-1796. Follow him
at www.twitter. com/ryrivard.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 Charleston Newspapers


                              816 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                           Manila Times (Philippines)

                           October 22, 2008 Wednesday

Filipino firms seek greater state intervention

BYLINE: By Ben Arnold O. De Vera, Researcher

LENGTH: 374 words


FILIPINO businesses are seeking greater state intervention in the economy as the
global meltdown threatened to claim a growing number of domestic industries.

In its draft 34th Philippine Business Conference Resolutions, a copy of which
was furnished reporters, members of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and
Industry (PCCI) have proposed a stronger hand with regard to controlling prices
and the use of land, expediting reforms in the energy sector and public
infrastructure build-up, as well as greater leeway in the matter of taxation.

The tone of the document reflects the global shift to greater state intervention
amid the volatility in financial markets.

In the agriculture sector, the group wants the government to permanently ban the
conversion of farmland into non-agriculture use to shield the country from high
food prices worldwide. PCCI also called for cuts in tariffs on farm inputs and
greater government promotion of locally made products abroad. To protect
Filipinos from the influx of substandard and hazardous items, the group sought
tighter quality and sanitary and phytosanitary requirements, as well as forging
bilateral quarantine agreements with trading partners.

In the energy sector, PCCI wants the government to declare petroleum as a
strategic commodity thereby expediting the issuance of clearances and permits
required under the Indigenous People's Resource Act and expedite the
privatization of state-owned power plants to facilitate the shift to an
open-access regime.

On the matter of public infrastructure, the group called for a permanent
50-centavo charge on text messaging, development of the Batangas-Clark-Subic
corridor to decongest Metro Manila's ports, cut shipping costs, expand air
access, and expedite the expansion of the country's mass transit system. The
chamber also urged requiring contracts to tap homegrown talents and resources.

In terms of taxation, it wants government to delete a provision in the Tax
Amnesty Law requiring the publication of the names of taxpayers availing of the
amnesty, as well as relaxing rules on the frequency of tax payments.

The PCCI is set to present today its proposals to President Arroyo, who will
speak during the concluding rites of the three-day conference.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2008 News Bites Pty Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                               Global News Bites


                              817 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                             May 31, 2000 Wednesday
                                  Late Edition

Industry divides as milk shake-up starts to go sour

BYLINE: Cathy Bolt and Sam Strutt

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 385 words


The dairy industry is facing worsening division over the impending national
deregulation of farm-gate milk prices just one month before the new arrangements
come into force.

More than 1,000 farmers marched on Queensland's Parliament House yesterday,
rejecting the $1.8 billion deregulation package negotiated by the industry body,
the Australian Dairy Industry Council, with Federal and State governments.

A similar rally is being held today by the maverick Australian Milk Producers
Association in Sydney, where deregulation legislation is also before Parliament.

But the AMPA's chances of pursuing its alternative restructuring proposal are
fast evaporating, with the NSW and Queensland governments yesterday rejecting
its plan on the basis of legal advice it was unconstitutional.

The AMPA is calling for the present system to be retained but for State milk
quotas to be opened up to interstate farmers a move it argues would satisfy
Section 92 of the Constitution which guarantees free trade between the States.

The NSW Minister for Agriculture, Mr Richard Amery, said all avenues had been
explored to try to protect NSW farmers from an influx of cheap milk but legal
advice was there was no way it could get around Section 92.

He renewed his call for the Federal Government to use its power to institute a
national floor price, a suggestion already ruled out by his federal counterpart,
Mr Warren Truss.

Existing farm-gate price controls deliver farmers around 50Â¢ a litre or more
for milk used for drinking compared with around half that for milk used for
processed dairy products, where prices already are deregulated.

All State governments have reluctantly agreed to deregulate on July 1 in the
face of a unilateral decision to do so by Victoria and to trigger a $1.8 billion
adjustment package negotiated by the ADIC with the Federal Government.

But resentment towards deregulation has accelerated as the extent of the drop-in
prices likely to be paid to farmers has become clearer.

Listed dairy processor National Foods has been an aggressive pacesetter,
offering Victorian farmers 28Â¢-29Â¢ a litre for fresh milk, around 29Â¢ a litre
in Taree in NSW and 35Â¢ in Queensland. Dairy Farmers and Pauls have indicated
they will pay more but have committed to do so only for the first three months
of deregulation.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illus: Farmers fear their prices for milk will fall sharply with
deregulation. Photo: JESSICA SHAPIRO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2000 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              818 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                           January 11, 1992, Saturday

Letter: Rural development is necessary to save the countryside from ruin

BYLINE: From Mr CHRIS DAY

SECTION: EDITORIAL PAGE; Page 13

LENGTH: 229 words


Sir: In your leading article on the changing countryside (''A new view from
Oxford'', 8 January), you say that there is ''no problem of rural
depopulation''. True. The problem is the loss of rural tradition and culture.

The typical Hampshire village of Crondall, with a population of 3,500, is now
full of commuters, boasts a Rolls-Royce garage and pseudo locals only familiar
with London's West End, whose children disappear to public school. What's rural
about these people in such a village?

The locals who have interacted with the countryside for many years do not mind
it changing. As you comment:

The rural landscape is overwhelmingly man-made and has been shaped over the
centuries by agriculture.

What infuriates people who live in the country is that the Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP) is effectively encouraging short-term profiteering, and the
countryside cannot keep up. One moment, uproot hedges and trees; the next, plant
them back again. Typically, CAP policy has produced not a landscape shaped over
the centuries, but a sterile wilderness in only a few years.

With the influx of city folk, combined with the CAP, most of our rural areas
already resemble Hyde Park. Why should conservationists worry about John Major's
plans for rural development? He can hardly wreck something that's already
broken.

Yours faithfully,

CHRIS DAY

Oxford

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1992 Independent Print Ltd


                              819 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Wollondilly Advertiser

                            March 1, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Print Edition

A second public high school in...

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 403 words


A second public high school in the shire that focuses on agriculture is a
no-brainer for Wollondilly Council.

Mayor Judith Hannan and all other councillors have asked the council to lobby
the state government and opposition to bring Hurlstone Agricultural High School
to the shire.

"Considering our strategic vision relates to tourism and agriculture, [the move]
would be a great win for Hurlstone and Wollondilly - we would be a great match
together," Cr Hannan said.

"We have plenty of land and the state government were going to find land to put
a big jail here, so to find land for a high school should be no problem."

The school, currently located at Glenfield, will be moved to the Western Sydney
University's Hawkesbury campus in 2020.

The school's farm land at Glenfield will be sold off and developed for housing.

Macquarie Fields MP Anoulack Chathivong wants the school to remain at Glenfield.

"I appreciate the council's sentiment but the school's rightful home is at
Glenfield where it forms parts of the local community," he said.

Mr Chathivong would not entertain the idea of Hurlstone relocating, not even to
Wollondilly, even though the school could potentially remain within Macarthur -
the birthplace of Australian agriculture.

Acting mayor Robert Khan said Wollondilly was a perfect fit for the high school
because of the shire's rural charm. It's home to the Elizabeth Macarthur
Agricultural Institute and is in close proximity to the University of Sydney's
Veterinary Science campus in Camden.

"We are the obvious choice as we are a semi-rural area, part of the state's food
bowl and also part of the bigger picture that supports agriculture in the Sydney
basin," Cr Khan said.

"The focus of the council is to encourage education and research in agriculture
."

He said there were several benefits to choosing Wollondilly as the new home for
the school.

"Firstly it would fulfill the need for another high school in Wollondilly which
we have been lobbying present and past state governments about for many years,"
Cr Khan said.

"Besides the employment benefits, it would increase and improve on the current
options of tertiary education in the Macarthur region and would promote and
encourage our current young people to choose a career in agriculture, remain in
the area and follow on in their family farms.

"The influx of students along with current development would necessitate
upgrades of our public transport."

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              820 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Campbelltown-Macarthur Advertiser

                           February 28, 2017 Tuesday
                                Internet Edition

Wollondilly Council wants Hurlstone Agricultural High School to call the shire
home

BYLINE: Ashleigh Tullis

LENGTH: 402 words


A second public high school in the shire that focuses on agriculture is a
no-brainer for Wollondilly Council.

Mayor Judith Hannan and all councillors have asked the council to lobby the
state government and opposition to bring Hurlstone Agricultural High School to
the shire.

"Considering our strategic vision relates to tourism and agriculture, [the move]
would be a great win for Hurlstone and Wollondilly shire - we would be a great
match together," Cr Hannan said.

"We have plenty of land and the state government were going to find land to put
a big jail here so to find land for a high school should be no problem."

The school, currently located at Glenfield, will be moved to the Western Sydney
University's Hawkesbury campus in 2020.

The school's farm land at Glenfield will be sold off and developed for housing.

Macquarie Fields MP Anoulack Chathivong wants the school to remain at Glenfield.

"I appreciate the council's sentiment but the school's rightful home is at
Glenfield where it forms parts of the local community," he said.

Mr Chathivong would not entertain the idea of Hurlstone relocating, not even to
Wollondilly, even though the school could potentially remain within Macarthur -
the birthplace of Australian agriculture.

Acting mayor Robert Khan said Wollondilly was a perfect fit for the high school
because of the shire's rural charm. It's home to the Elizabeth Macarthur
Agricultural Institute and is in close proximity to the University of Sydney's
Veterinary Science campus in Camden.

"We are the obvious choice as we are a semi-rural area, part of the state's food
bowl and also part of the bigger picture that supports agriculture in the Sydney
basin," Cr Khan said.

"The focus of the council is to encourage education and research in agriculture
."

He said there were several benefits to choosing Wollondilly as the new home for
the school.

"Firstly it would fulfill the need for another high school in Wollondilly which
we have been lobbying present and past state governments for many years," Cr
Khan said.

"Besides the employment benefits, it would increase and improve on the current
options of tertiary education in the Macarthur region and would promote and
encourage our current young people to choose a career in agriculture, remain in
the area and follow on in their family farms.

"The influx of students along with current development would necessitate upgrade
of our public transport."

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              821 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Camden-Narellan Advertiser

                           February 28, 2017 Tuesday
                                Internet Edition

Wollondilly Council wants Hurlstone Agricultural High School to call the shire
home

BYLINE: Ashleigh Tullis

LENGTH: 402 words


A second public high school in the shire that focuses on agriculture is a
no-brainer for Wollondilly Council.

Mayor Judith Hannan and all councillors have asked the council to lobby the
state government and opposition to bring Hurlstone Agricultural High School to
the shire.

"Considering our strategic vision relates to tourism and agriculture, [the move]
would be a great win for Hurlstone and Wollondilly shire - we would be a great
match together," Cr Hannan said.

"We have plenty of land and the state government were going to find land to put
a big jail here so to find land for a high school should be no problem."

The school, currently located at Glenfield, will be moved to the Western Sydney
University's Hawkesbury campus in 2020.

The school's farm land at Glenfield will be sold off and developed for housing.

Macquarie Fields MP Anoulack Chathivong wants the school to remain at Glenfield.

"I appreciate the council's sentiment but the school's rightful home is at
Glenfield where it forms parts of the local community," he said.

Mr Chathivong would not entertain the idea of Hurlstone relocating, not even to
Wollondilly, even though the school could potentially remain within Macarthur -
the birthplace of Australian agriculture.

Acting mayor Robert Khan said Wollondilly was a perfect fit for the high school
because of the shire's rural charm. It's home to the Elizabeth Macarthur
Agricultural Institute and is in close proximity to the University of Sydney's
Veterinary Science campus in Camden.

"We are the obvious choice as we are a semi-rural area, part of the state's food
bowl and also part of the bigger picture that supports agriculture in the Sydney
basin," Cr Khan said.

"The focus of the council is to encourage education and research in agriculture
."

He said there were several benefits to choosing Wollondilly as the new home for
the school.

"Firstly it would fulfill the need for another high school in Wollondilly which
we have been lobbying present and past state governments for many years," Cr
Khan said.

"Besides the employment benefits, it would increase and improve on the current
options of tertiary education in the Macarthur region and would promote and
encourage our current young people to choose a career in agriculture, remain in
the area and follow on in their family farms.

"The influx of students along with current development would necessitate upgrade
of our public transport."

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              822 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Wollondilly Advertiser

                           February 28, 2017 Tuesday
                                Internet Edition

Wollondilly Council wants Hurlstone Agricultural High School to call the shire
home

BYLINE: Ashleigh Tullis

LENGTH: 402 words


A second public high school in the shire that focuses on agriculture is a
no-brainer for Wollondilly Council.

Mayor Judith Hannan and all councillors have asked the council to lobby the
state government and opposition to bring Hurlstone Agricultural High School to
the shire.

"Considering our strategic vision relates to tourism and agriculture, [the move]
would be a great win for Hurlstone and Wollondilly shire - we would be a great
match together," Cr Hannan said.

"We have plenty of land and the state government were going to find land to put
a big jail here so to find land for a high school should be no problem."

The school, currently located at Glenfield, will be moved to the Western Sydney
University's Hawkesbury campus in 2020.

The school's farm land at Glenfield will be sold off and developed for housing.

Macquarie Fields MP Anoulack Chathivong wants the school to remain at Glenfield.

"I appreciate the council's sentiment but the school's rightful home is at
Glenfield where it forms parts of the local community," he said.

Mr Chathivong would not entertain the idea of Hurlstone relocating, not even to
Wollondilly, even though the school could potentially remain within Macarthur -
the birthplace of Australian agriculture.

Acting mayor Robert Khan said Wollondilly was a perfect fit for the high school
because of the shire's rural charm. It's home to the Elizabeth Macarthur
Agricultural Institute and is in close proximity to the University of Sydney's
Veterinary Science campus in Camden.

"We are the obvious choice as we are a semi-rural area, part of the state's food
bowl and also part of the bigger picture that supports agriculture in the Sydney
basin," Cr Khan said.

"The focus of the council is to encourage education and research in agriculture
."

He said there were several benefits to choosing Wollondilly as the new home for
the school.

"Firstly it would fulfill the need for another high school in Wollondilly which
we have been lobbying present and past state governments for many years," Cr
Khan said.

"Besides the employment benefits, it would increase and improve on the current
options of tertiary education in the Macarthur region and would promote and
encourage our current young people to choose a career in agriculture, remain in
the area and follow on in their family farms.

"The influx of students along with current development would necessitate upgrade
of our public transport."

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              823 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (Nigeria)

                             August 8, 2016 Monday

Agric'll revamp the economy -NGE

BYLINE: Uche Atuma

LENGTH: 478 words


By Sunday Ani Nigerian Guild of Editor has identified government's over-reliance
on oil and gas as

By Sunday Ani

Nigerian Guild of Editor has identified government's over-reliance on oil and
gas as the revenue base of the country as major reason for the economic problem
currently facing the country.


It stated that there was an urgent need for government to diversify the economy,
specifically, in the area of agriculture, which it noted, would create
employment for the army of unemployed youths, and usher in prosperity for the
country and its peoples.
This was contained in a 13-point-communique issued yesterday at the end of the
12th All Nigeria Editors' Conference, (ANEC) 2016, in Port Harcourt, Rivers
State.
The four-day conference, with the theme, 'Economic diversification: Agriculture
as option for a prosperous Nigeria,' was chaired by the former governor of Ogun
State, Akinrogun Olusegun Osoba and declared open by the governor of Rivers
State, Nyesom Ezenwo Wike.
The Guild stated that agriculture had suffered serious neglect as a result of
negative mindset, reliance on outdated methods and gross underfunding, adding
that government must urgently evolve or strengthen policies that would protect
local farmers against the influx of foreign agricultural products and encourage
local production for food sufficiency and processing of raw materials for
export.
It also stressed that the formation of more Farmers' Co-operative societies
should be encouraged while those already in existence should be strengthened to
improve on their productivity.
While stressing that the skills needed for agricultural production and
processing should be placed above mere certification for the sake of it, the
Guild tasked government to quickly recapitalize and make more functional, the
Bank of Agriculture and other institutions relevant to the agricultural
programmes of the country.
It also advised state governments to collaborate in the areas of agricultural
production and processing, concentrating on the areas where they have
comparative advantage.
While noting that the media has a major role to play in efforts to redirect the
consciousness of Nigerians, especially the youth towards embracing modern,
technology-driven agriculture, it lamented the decline in the quality of
journalism practice and non-adherence to the ethics of the profession and called
on editors to make efforts to redress the situation in their different
organisations.
The Guild also ratified Mrs Funke Egbemode as its new president following a
motion moved by Malam Sani Adamu, a member of the Standing Committee and
seconded by Angela Agoawike, Fellow of the Guild of Editors.

The Guild equally commended the government and people of Rivers state for the
level of security and infrastructural development, steps taken to promote
agriculture in the state as well as their hospitality.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1228


                   Copyright 2016 The Sun Publishing Limited
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              824 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Vallejo Times Herald (California)

                          September 15, 2007 Saturday

Dixon rains Medflies

BYLINE: By DANNY BERNARDINI/The Reporter, Vacaville

SECTION: LOCAL

LENGTH: 427 words


Medfly larvae have been found for the first time since the infestation was
discovered this week in Dixon, and county agriculture officials confirmed Friday
that an 11th mature fly had been found.

The discovery of the larvae, on Thursday, is proof some of the Mediterranean
Fruit Flies found in Dixon on Monday have reproduced and may continue to do so,
according to officials.

Because larvae were found, state and federal agriculture agents will start
stripping fruit from plants within 100 meters of where they were found on
Washington Street, according to Jerry Howard, Solano County Agriculture
Commissioner.

"It's nice to get that process started as soon as possible," Howard said.

The finding of larvae was expected and will now help concentrate the eradication
effort, according to Kevin Hoffman, primary state entomologist with the
California Department of Food and Agriculture.

DNA tests are being done on collected flies to compare to known species from
different parts of the world. Agents also are interviewing residents in the area
about any recent trips they've made or visitors they have hosted and will
compare those results with the flies in an attempt to track down the origin of
the infestation.


Timeline Monday - Medflies first found in DixonTuesday, Wednesday - traps set
and checkedThursday - rogue Medfly found outside perimeterFriday - larvae
found, sterile males released

Howard said a quarantine on local agriculture likely would be put in place, but
must wait until no more flies are found in order to approximate a boundary.

Steps toward a quarantine were triggered after the county found more than two
flies in a trap. Some of the restrictions include tarping trucks that transport
crops and properly disposing of the remnants from processing facilities. Howard
said some shipping companies already have entered into agreements with the state
and federal agencies.

To further help combat the infestation, 1.5 million sterile male flies were
released Friday over a 12-square-mile area in Dixon by state food and
agriculture officials. The goal is to have the sterile males mate with females
flies who die after laying their infertile eggs.

Another 1.5 million sterile flies will be released Monday and the process likely
will continue for months, Howard said.

Hoffman said the public wouldn't notice the influx of the male Medflies in the
area because the flies will land in fruit trees and wait to be selected for
mating by a female.

"People never see them," he said. "People say 'You're dropping flies? We never
see them.' It's very unintrusive."

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ron Allured, an employee with the Solano County Department of
Agriculture inspects a Jackson insect trap looking for Mediterranean Fruit
Flies. (The Reporter, Vacaville file photo)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2007 The Times-Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              825 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                              July 3, 2011 Sunday

'No agri land for non-Goans'

BYLINE: Murari Shetye

SECTION: GOA

LENGTH: 425 words


PANAJI: The Goa law commission has decided to propose a ban on sale of
agricultural land to non-Goans in a bid to boost farming activities in the
state. The commission plans to submit a report to the government on the same.

The law commission chairman, advocate Ramakant Khalap said that this will be
kept open for public debate and suggestions, before submission. The commission,
in a meeting held on Friday, also decided to propose farming estates and
protection to agriculture land holders if they were ready to cultivate their
land through contract farming.

The report will be submitted to the state government soon. Other recommendations
likely to figure in the report include conservation of sweet water resources and
allowing the farmer to get into an agreement with the sponsors to cultivate
their farms.

The entire area available for agriculture in Goa is around 1,44,000 hectares,
out of which 12,000 hectares are fallow land, while 35,000 hectares are
cultivated only during monsoons. The remaining areas are not known to be arable.

Speaking to TOI, Khalap said that farmers can come together to form farming
estates and form corporative societies, companies or associations, under which
they can cultivate on their own crops or enter into contract with sponsors to
cultivate the land.

"The whole idea is to make Goa green, save Goan land for the Goans and put the
land to best economic and ecological use," said law commission member advocate
Mario Pinto Almeida.

Khalap added that under this proposal, farmers or land holders shall be
permitted to cultivate the land through a farming contract and this contract
will not be in favour of the contractor, nor any right, title or interest,
whatsoever, except for cultivation for the specified period of the contract.

"This will give a guarantee to farmers and land holders that they shall not lose
their land and will be protected as tenants" said advocate Cleofate Almeida
Coutinho, another law commission member.

The law commission has also strongly proposed a ban on the sale of agriculture
land for non-agricultural uses. Such provisions exist in other states of the
country, said Khalap.

He defined an agriculturist buying the land as one who has a specific
agricultural development plan approved by the agriculture department or who
resides in the specific radius of the property, whose sole source of income
depends on agriculture.

"As far as possible we are trying to prevent the influx of non-Goans trying to
buy agricultural property in Goa," added Coutinho.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              826 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               Leicester Mercury

                                 March 6, 2001

The taxing question of aid for farms

SECTION: Features: General, Pg.13

LENGTH: 171 words


The Minister of Agriculture, Nick Brown has suggested that in future the farming
industry should take out insurance against any further disaster that might
affect it, saving taxpayers footing the bill.

At present, to quote Government figures, it is costing every one in the county
GBP 35 a year to finance the costs of the influx of refugees, immigrants, or
those seeking political asylum, so why the objection to compensating farmers out
of taxes?

The farmers are only just recovering from the beef disaster.

Whenever there is a disaster in the world the British always dig deep to help
those who have suffered. Perhaps the time has arrived for the British to collect
for our own, especially now as Mr Brown seems loath to compensate farmers,
although his leader has suggested all will be done for them, including
compensation.

Sympathy should also be expended upon those who have lost their crops through
the waterlogged fields.

I am no farmer, I'm a townie, born and bred in Leicester.

G Wainwright, Oadby

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

                        Copyright 2001 Leicester Mercury


                              827 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                        September 28, 1993, CITY EDITION

100,000 expected for ploughing event

BYLINE: By SEAN MAC CONNELL, Agriculture Correspondent

SECTION: HOME NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 476 words


MORE THAN 100,000 people are expected to attend this year's National Ploughing
Championships, which will be held on the farm of Pat and Kathleen Nugent at
Clerihan, Clonmel, Co Tipperary, during the next three days.

Accommodation in the area is already booked out and, according to the
organisers, visitors to the event are booked into guesthouses and hotels up to
30 miles away from the south Tipperary site.

A temporary village, with 500 trade stands, displaying farm machinery and
equipment worth more than £50 million, is already in place for the official
opening later today by the Minister of State for - Agriculture, Mr Liam Hyland.

Tomorrow, the Minister of State with responsibility for food Mr Brian O'Shea,
will visit the site, and on Thursday Mr Walsh, the Minister for Agriculture,
Food and Forestry, will pay an official visit.

Forestry and forestry products will play a special part at this year's
championships, and over 20 firms, including Coillte, will be attempting to
persuade farmers to look at forestry as an alternative enterprise in this era of
a reformed Common Agricultural Policy.

The farm-machinery retailers are hoping that this year will see an upturn in
their fortunes as there has been a dramatic fall in the sale of machinery over
the past few years.

Nearly half the Nugent farm of 300 acres has been set aside for the main purpose
of the event, ploughing, and the national championship will be decided on
Thursday. Competitors from all over Ireland, Britain, Wales and Scotland will be
taking part, and nearly 20 ploughwomen will be taking part in a special
competition.

Special traffic arrangements will be implemented for the championships, to cope
with the expected huge influx of vehicles.

. Cork/Kerry traffic will travel north on the N8 to Cahir and continue on this
road to Outrath Cross, where traffic will be directed to the site. Cars must
park in Block C.

. Dublin motorists will travel south on the N8 to Cashel, where they will turn
left on the T49 towards Clonmel until Ballynattin Cross Upper, where they will
be diverted to the site and parking Block B.

. Kilkenny traffic will go to Fethard, take the Clonmel road and turn right at
Garrinch for Cashel Road via Clerihan and Darcy's Cross. They will use Block A.

. Waterford traffic will travel the N24 to Clonmel, where it will be diverted at
Monamehill Cross to the Cashel road and continue via Cleriham and Darcy's Cross.
Such visitors must park in Block A.

. Traffic from the west will travel through Tipperary town and Golden and will
turn right for New Inn, where they will be directed to the site. Cars must be
parked ill Block C.

. West Waterford and Dungarvan traffic will be diverted via Clonmel on to the
N24 towards Cahir. It will be diverted at Barne to Poulmucka to the site.
Parking in Block D.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1993 The Irish Times


                              828 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The Monitor (Kampala)

                          September 21, 2011 Wednesday

Inflation Forces Kasese Farmers to Raise Prices

BYLINE: Lominda Afedraru

LENGTH: 402  words


Inflation is not only affecting at consumers but farmers as well. Farmers in
Kasese district, growing various food items at Mubuku irrigation scheme and
elsewhere, have been forced to increase prices of their produce by Shs200 from
an already agreed price as a result of a price influx in the country.

Mr Frank Twinamatsiko, the chairperson of Basajjakweyamba Cooperative Society -
Mubuku Irrigation Scheme Ltd, said farmers are unhappy about the price
increases.

Recently, at the Open Forum for Agricultural Biotechnology in Kasese, Mr
Twinamatsiko said his management entered into an agreement to sell farmers'
produce such as maize and rice to seed companies at Shs1,000 per kilogramme but
now sold them at Shs1,200 and Shs1,300 per kilogramme respectively.

One of the biggest buyers of these products is Fica Seed Company, which
according to Mr Twinamatsiko, purchases products worth Shs800m in one season.

The cooperative society conducts regular meetings with the farmers to determine
the price of their produce. The the challenge is that the society does not enter
into an agreement with seed companies to sell these products in cash.

Mr Twinamasiko said the cooperative society sold the last bunch of food items to
Fica seed company during the last harvesting season worth Shs300m but Shs20m
remains unpaid.

The society is not blaming the seed companies but the entire economic system.
Much as the farmers are embracing hybrid seeds produced by researchers including
the drought-tolerant maize that is being tested at Mubuku Irrigation Scheme,
they have urged the government to give them subsidies on farm inputs.

Kasese district agricultural officer, Ms Thereza Munyazikwiye said much as
Kasese is considered to be dry, it is good at producing perennial crops that
depend of natural rain.

She said the district aims at increasing irrigation schemes that will enabled
adequate crop production leading to reduced prices of food items.

Dr Joseph Kikafunda while presenting a paper on the status of the Water
Efficient Maize for Africa (Wema), said such research initiatives are good
because they can help solve the problem of the price influx in food items as
well as that of pests and diseases that are affecting quality production of
these crops.

He urged farmers to focus on improved storage facilities for their produce to
avoid destruction of food items that may lead to lower sales instead of reaping
enough income.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              829 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 Inverell Times

                                August 11, 2014

Bindaree applies for more 457 workers

BYLINE: Mich??le Jedlicka

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 505  words


BINDAREE Beef has submitted a request to the federal government for additional
openings to 457 visa holders to meet their growing production demands.

The decision is in line with the terms of reference of the Agriculture
Competitiveness White Paper, announced in December of 2013 by agriculture
minister Barnaby Joyce.

Mr Joyce said the goal of the paper was to generate jobs, impact farm gate
returns, investment and economic growth in one of Australia's key export
industries.

John Clements is Bindaree's development manager. He said 200 additional jobs had
opened within Bindaree in the past two years, and though the preference was to
fill those positions with Australian employees, there was a deficit of local
interest.

'Bindaree is committed to employing Australians as a first preference, and as
the company expands, we're finding we can't get all those jobs filled with
Australians,' Mr Clements said.

'So we use the 457 visa, but the presence and the company policy is we'll
back-fill those jobs with Australians as (they) come forward.'

Mr Clements said production lines needed to be fully staffed, and if they were
unable to source local employees for those positions, they would have to look
elsewhere.

He added that expansion was firmly in the company plans and foresight was needed
to meet the expected needs of the influx of employees and their families.

'The state government and the local government need to co-operate to take into
account the growth. Bindaree plans on continuing to grow and we don't want to
put pressure on the town.'

Though the focus is on seeking workers from outside the region, local job
service providers were quick to assure the local unemployed that there was
always work available at Bindaree.

Simone Bartman is manager of the Inverell branch of Jobs Australia. She said the
agency was heavily involved in recruiting for Bindaree Beef.

'Jobs Australia Enterprises Ltd has ongoing open vacancies listed for Bindaree
Beef. These vacancies are open and advertised on the Australia Jobsearch
Website, in our office and our front windows and we welcome anyone who is
interested in working at Bindaree to visit or phone our office and complete an
application form to apply for these opportunities,' Ms Bartman said.

'Bindaree consider all applications in line with opportunities available in the
plant. So if people are interested in working at Bindaree Beef and applying for
positions then they only need to come into Jobs Australia Enterprises or call us
and we will be more than happy to assist you to complete an application form to
apply for these opportunities.'

Sharon Kiernan is Inverell Site Manager for local job service provider Best
Employment. She agreed with the Jobs Australia stance on Bindaree job
opportunities.

'Best Employment will continue to work with Bindaree Beef to provide local
applicants to assist them with their business needs. We would encourage any
local job seekers who are looking for work to call into Best and fill out a
Bindaree Beef application for work,' Ms Kiernan said.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              830 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          Brentwood News (California)

                     November 24, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

'FARMER-FRIENDLY' HOUSING IS NEEDED

BYLINE: Donald G. Gordon Jr.

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 503 words


The availability of affordable housing (or lack thereof) presents a widespread
and growing concern to many Californians. While this is a relatively recent
phenomenon driven by our state's burgeoning population growth and red-hot
economy, California farmers have been struggling with the problem for decades.
In agriculture, the issue of affordable housing has revolved around meeting the
housing needs of its migrant and seasonal workforce.

Like most other employers, farmers are under no obligation to supply housing to
their employees. Unlike most other employers, however, a large percentage of
agriculture's workforce (an estimated population of 1.35 million workers and
their families) is transient, limited to a few short months of employment and
engaged in physically demanding jobs. Housing shortages are problematic for the
farmer who wants to attract and keep good, experienced workers. Such shortages
also impact many rural communities that must manage large influxes of farmworker
families during harvest.

In the not too distant past, it was not uncommon for farmers to maintain housing
on their property for their seasonal workforce. However, burdensome and costly
local building code requirements, liability exposure and expensive maintenance
responsibilities gradually made this type of temporary housing prohibitive for
most farmers. Since 1955, the supply of employer-owned housing in agriculture
has declined by 90 percent.

Political leaders in California and Washington, D.C., have recognized the need
for farmworker housing. Thus, millions of dollars in federal and state
assistance are currently being invested in various housing programs and
projects. In California, for example, there is the Farmworker Housing Grant
Program (FWHG), which is administered by the Department of Housing and Community
Development (DHCD).

By the end of this year, DHCD will release more than $30 million in additional
funds for a variety of projects, including demonstration programs that link
housing and health services, as well as the repair or replacement of unsafe
housing.

Unfortunately, like many government programs, the FWHG is not "farmer friendly."
Individual farmers have a hard time using the program because the application
process is very complicated and full of legal hurdles.

However, FWHG can maximize its effectiveness by encouraging partnerships between
farmers and nonprofit organizations. For instance, farmers have the land that is
needed for farmworker housing. They can donate their land or make it available
under a long-term lease. Nonprofit organizations can serve as the grant
applicants and use their resources to deal with legal documentation and
application paperwork.

These partnerships, coupled with a government commitment to support the creation
of more farmworker housing, will hopefully result in a greater supply of
affordable housing supply for California farmworkers.

Donald G. Gordon Jr. is president of the Agricultural Council of California.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2000 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              831 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          Brentwood News (California)

                     November 24, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

'FARMER-FRIENDLY' HOUSING IS NEEDED

BYLINE: Donald G. Gordon Jr.

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 503 words


The availability of affordable housing (or lack thereof) presents a widespread
and growing concern to many Californians. While this is a relatively recent
phenomenon driven by our state's burgeoning population growth and red-hot
economy, California farmers have been struggling with the problem for decades.
In agriculture, the issue of affordable housing has revolved around meeting the
housing needs of its migrant and seasonal workforce.

Like most other employers, farmers are under no obligation to supply housing to
their employees. Unlike most other employers, however, a large percentage of
agriculture's workforce (an estimated population of 1.35 million workers and
their families) is transient, limited to a few short months of employment and
engaged in physically demanding jobs. Housing shortages are problematic for the
farmer who wants to attract and keep good, experienced workers. Such shortages
also impact many rural communities that must manage large influxes of farmworker
families during harvest.

In the not too distant past, it was not uncommon for farmers to maintain housing
on their property for their seasonal workforce. However, burdensome and costly
local building code requirements, liability exposure and expensive maintenance
responsibilities gradually made this type of temporary housing prohibitive for
most farmers. Since 1955, the supply of employer-owned housing in agriculture
has declined by 90 percent.

Political leaders in California and Washington, D.C., have recognized the need
for farmworker housing. Thus, millions of dollars in federal and state
assistance are currently being invested in various housing programs and
projects. In California, for example, there is the Farmworker Housing Grant
Program (FWHG), which is administered by the Department of Housing and Community
Development (DHCD).

By the end of this year, DHCD will release more than $30 million in additional
funds for a variety of projects, including demonstration programs that link
housing and health services, as well as the repair or replacement of unsafe
housing.

Unfortunately, like many government programs, the FWHG is not "farmer friendly."
Individual farmers have a hard time using the program because the application
process is very complicated and full of legal hurdles.

However, FWHG can maximize its effectiveness by encouraging partnerships between
farmers and nonprofit organizations. For instance, farmers have the land that is
needed for farmworker housing. They can donate their land or make it available
under a long-term lease. Nonprofit organizations can serve as the grant
applicants and use their resources to deal with legal documentation and
application paperwork.

These partnerships, coupled with a government commitment to support the creation
of more farmworker housing, will hopefully result in a greater supply of
affordable housing supply for California farmworkers.

Donald G. Gordon Jr. is president of the Agricultural Council of California.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2000 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              832 of 997 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                            January 10, 2005 Monday
                                National Edition

U.S. producers seek Asian trade of beef before imports from Canada

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; World Digest; Pg. FP13

LENGTH: 291  words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE, N.C.


CHARLOTTE, N.C. - The Bush administration must restore U.S. beef exports to
Japan and South Korea before it opens the border to Canadian cattle, the U.S.
National Cattlemen's Beef Association said, shifting away from calling on the
United States to set a good example on beef trade for countries dealing with mad
cow disease. Under a U.S. Agriculture Department plan, the shipments of young
Canadian cattle would begin by March 7.

The United States closed the border after the discovery of mad cow disease in
Canada in May, 2003, just as U.S. beef importers cut off purchases when the
first U.S. case was found a year ago. "The administration has got to jump on
exporting possibilities. We've got to see some action here," Jay Truitt, the
NCBA's executive director of legislative affairs, said yesterday. With this
statement, NCBA has allied itself with farm activists in wanting to protect U.S.
ranchers and feedlot operators from financial losses that could result from an
influx of cattle but static demand. USDA estimates up to two million Canadian
cattle a year could be sent to U.S. slaughter. Canada reported its second case
of mad cow disease in native cattle a week ago. The discovery turned up the
volume of dissent toward restoring U.S.-Canada cattle trade. NCBA will send a
letter to Ann Veneman, U.S. Agriculture Secretary, this week to seek
clarification about the impact on cattle prices, the likely size of cattle
shipments, the effectiveness of Canada's mad-cow safeguards and the prevalence
of the fatal bovine disease in Canadian herds. It also will send a trade team to
Canada during the week of Jan. 17 with similar questions. The team will report
to the NCBA annual meeting on Feb. 2-5, when the body discusses policy issues.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Black & White Photo: Cattle.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2005 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              833 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          Brockville Recorder & Times

                           October 22, 2016 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Farms see assessment jump; Land value increases seen on regional farms as
agriculture lands reviewed by MPAC

BYLINE: Darcy Cheek, The Recorder And Times

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 603  words


Farmland owners in Leeds and Grenville will be feeling varying degrees of an
extra taxation burden following the receipt of assessment notices from the
Municipal Property Assessment Corporation (MPAC).

Eastern Ontario leads a provincewide trend of land value increases not entirely
unwarranted or unexpected, some producers say, with the next fouryear cycle of
assessments levied for the 2017-2020 taxation years.

Is some instances, in the eastern quarter of Grenville County, assessment
increases exceed the provincial 16 per cent per year average by more than
double. One mid-county pocket of Grenville increased by 36 per cent, while
values to the southeast of Leeds County remained close to the provincial mark.

"It's good new and its bad news, I guess" said Adrian Wynands, who more or less
wears three hats when dealing with agriculture issues as a producer, president
of the Grenville Federation of Agriculture and councillor for Augusta Township.

"Bad news is you could pay a little bit more in municipal taxes, but the good
news is land is worth more."

Wynands said his own farmland assessment increased somewhere in the
neighbourhood of 40 per cent, and he wasn't surprised the area or the province
as a whole had substantial increases.

"Farmland as far as I'm concerned has really been undervalued," he said. "And
it's still lower, say, than Dundas County.

Edwardsburgh-Cardinal mayor Pat Sayeau said the township office, as of Friday
morning, had not received an influx of calls from ratepayers complaining about
increased assessments, although he did expect the issue might heat up a bit as
farmers

begin to review the notices.

MPAC mailed out about 220,000 notices on Oct. 11.

"MPAC kind of signalled, six or eight months ago, that farm assessment would be
up in recognition of the fact that the farming industry in some areas or pockets
of Ontario are doing quite well, especially those in cash crops."

Ben Lefort, a senior researcher for the Ontario Federation of Agriculture,
stated much the same thing, outlining three areas that impacted MPAC in its
review of values from 2012 to 2016.

"A lot of it has to do with the supply of land," said Lefort, noting some
regions where high land sales prices have influenced regional values. "There is
a limited amount."

Lefort also said there were two crucial years in the beginning of this
assessment cycle when agriculture commodity prices were high, and interest rates
have remained low so it has been easier to find capital for more farmland
purchases.

Lefort anticipates there will likely be more feedback about assessments when
municipalities

formulate their budgets for 2017, and suspected local agriculture federations
would be gearing the "push back" a little. What might really impact farm
increases will hinge on how residential and commercial taxation figures into the
budget equation, Lefort said.

"That could push more of the taxation burden onto farmers," said Lefort.

Spencerville-area dairy farmer Doug Cleary of Clearydale Farms said he had not
looked at his assessment notice yet, but didn't expect any great surprises.

"Farmland prices have gone up," he said, noting recent sales of farmland in the
Cardinal area and much higher land values further east around Winchester and
Chesterville.

"I think that's starting to trickle out to other regions that haven't been
affected as much yet. Guys can't buy down there so there going in this direction
now."

Farmer do have an opportunity to appeal their assessments by filing a Request
for Reconsideration (RfR) with MPAC. The deadline is February 8, 2017.
!@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Sun Media Corporation. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Brockville Recorder & Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              834 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                             March 21, 2014 Friday

Sustainable Land Management For Mitigating Land Degradation And Increasing
Agricultural Production

LENGTH: 574  words


Project Number: GHA/SGP/OP5/Y3/STAR/LD/07/04/021
Country: Ghana
Area Of Work: Land Degradation
Operational Phase: Phase 5
Grant Amount: US$ 25,100.00
Co-Financing Cash: US$ 6,500.00
Start Date: 7/2013
End Date: 12/2014
Status: Currently under execution
Project Description: Sustainable Land Management For Mitigating Land Degradation
And Increasing Agricultural Production And Reducing Poverty In The Dorimon
Traditional Area.


The lands in the Dorimon traditional area are being degraded at an alarming
rate. The degradation is caused by unsustainable farming practices, wild fires,
felling of trees for use as fuel wood and for making charcoal and overgrazing by
cattle. The issue of overgrazing by cattle and more particularly the influx of
cattle brought in by Fulani herdsmen from nearby Burkina Faso has also
compounded the problem of overgrazing making it difficult for the soils in the
area to regenerate so as to regain its lost nutrients. The situation has
resulted in flooding and erosion of farm lands during the rainy season, thereby
silting water bodies and making the soil infertile. This has adversely affected
crop production and as a result of this many homes are poor and face food
insecurity and malnutrition. Added to this, many of the young men and women
migrate to the South or to the areas where  galamsey  (illegal mining) is being
practiced. Most often than not some of these immigrants return home with
incurable diseases such as HIV AIDS. These unfortunate situations caused by land
degradation increase the vulnerability of these poor communities, fracturing
their sources of income and undermining their livelihoods as a people.
Further to this, these communities, time and again, adopt unsustainable
income-generation activities which are characterized by inaccessible markets,
lack of organizational skills and capital. Hence, a holistic intervention is
required, in which sustainable land management practice is combined with a
mechanism that sustains and increases livelihood opportunities for the
communities in the Dorimon traditional area.
Project Intervention
In order to reverse or reduce the problem the following interventions have been
proposed by the project:
2. Enhance the capacity of farmers to adopt sustainable land management
3. Improve soil fertility and undertake soil erosion control measures and
establish windbreaks, buffer and filter strips
4. Introduce woodlot and fodder banks
5. Establish agro forestry and restore degraded areas

6. Promote and support women with alternative livelihood businesses
Rationale of the Project
One of the greatest challenges facing humanity is environmental degradation,
including deforestation, desertification, pollution, and climate change    an
issue of increasing concern for the /SGPGEF. The impact of environmental
disasters can be devastating on the social, economic, and environmental systems
of a country or region as well as the global ecosystem. The people hardest hi
Project completion date : 2014-12-31 12:00:00
Major organization : SGP THE GEF SMALL GRANTS PROGRAMME

Address : P.O. Box 1423
Accra, Greater Accra, 233-302
Attn:  Mr. George Ortsin

Country :Ghana
Financier : Global Environment Facility (GEF),
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),

Financier address : United Nations Development Programme
One United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017
Tel: +1 (212) 906-5000
Call: +1 (212) 963-1234
Ltd.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2014 Tenders Info
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              835 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                           February 25, 2010 Thursday

Bangladesh: Experts for job creation outside Dhaka

LENGTH: 290  words

DATELINE: Dhaka


Dhaka, Feb. 25 -- Experts at a seminar in the city yesterday urged the
government to create job opportunities in non- agriculture sectors on a large
scale at the district and upazila levels to check the influx of people into
Dhaka city.According to our correspondent, they also suggested administrative
decentralization and making the cities and towns outside Dhaka self-sufficient
to this end.University Grants Commission (UGC) chairman Prof Nazrul Islam
attended as the chief guest the inaugural session of the two-day seminar on 'The
State: Key Drivers and Scenarios of Urban Informality' at the Council Building
of Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET).BUET Department of
Urban and Regional Planning organised the seminar in collaboration with a German
technical university.Presided over by Urban and Regional Planning Department
chief Prof Dr Sarwar Jahan, the seminar was also addressed by BUET
vice-chancellor Dr AMM Safiullah, among others.Prof Nazrul said more than eight
million people are living in Dhaka city at present.This number should not be
allowed to increase further, he added.He opined that the population of Dhaka
needs to be dropped to six million to keep it livable in future.Dr Sarwar said
the activities of the people working in informal sectors in Dhaka would have to
be integrated with the mainstream of economy.

If those people are not given due importance, poverty will increase in the city,
he added.He suggested giving licences to the rickshawpullers and extending
credit facilities to all working in informal sectors. Published by HT
Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For more information on news
feed please contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              836 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                THE KOREA HERALD

                             March 22, 2002, Friday

Gov't, businesses differ on agro-market opening; Agriculture minister snubs KCCI
chief's call for speedier FTA with Chile

BYLINE: By Yoo Cheong-mo Staff reporter

LENGTH: 522 words



A top agricultural policymaker yesterday turned down local business-interest
groups' calls for the Korean government to give up its protectionist policies
for local farmers, dimming the outlook for the early formation of a free trade
agreement with Chile and Japan.

Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Kim Dong-tae said that the government will
try to fully represent the interests of local farmers in its FTA talks with
Chile, Japan and other foreign countries.

"Domestic farmers are already mired in miserable circumstances. A full-fledged
market opening and a massive influx of cheap foreign agricultural and fruit
products in the wake of FTA deals with Chile would completely destroy much of
the local farming industry," Minister Kim said. "Local business circles are
required to hold direct talks with farmers to get a clearer picture of their
dismal circumstances," he said in a meeting with reporters at his office.

Minister Kim's remarks followed a joint statement from local business
organizations, which attacked protectionist policies for local farmers as the
biggest culprit behind the drawn-out free trade talks with Chile and insisted
that the nation decisively give up its uncompetitive agricultural sector for the
sake of boosting industrial exports.

"From the perspective of long-term benefits to locally made industrial goods,
the Korean government should be ready to abandon its protectionist policies for
agriculture," said the report, signed by the Korea Chamber of Commerce and
Industry, the Federation of Korean Industries and the Korea International Trade
Association. "Korea may degenerate into the ranks of third-class countries in
five to 10 years, if it continues to stick to its protectionist agricultural
policies."

Earlier on Monday, KCCI president Park Yong-sung told reporters that FTA talks
with Chile, launched in December 1999, have remained bogged down by the
opposition from local grape, pear and apple farmers fearful of market opening
shocks. "We will be a laughing stock if Seoul moves to abandon an FTA with
Chile, due to pressure from local farmers," Park said, calling for a nationwide
forum to discuss the controversial issue.

Revealing that Park personally visited the agriculture ministry last week,
Minister Kim said that unlike the KCCI chief's argument, local farmers of apple,
pear and grape could possibly be decimated by huge price gaps with Chilean
imports, though the locally produced fruits are fresher. "KCCI, FKI and other
business-organ leaders should listen to complaints from local farmers more
carefully," the minister said.

Domestic business circles are stepping up calls for speedier moves to form a
free trade agreement with major global economies, warning that continued
isolation from the global trend would be very costly and result in economic
degeneration. In the report jointly compiled with the state-run Korea Institute
for International Economic Policy, the business organizations also said that
Korea's exclusion from the world's FTA map is projected to cut into the nation's
annual exports by $34.4 billion.

(cmyoo@koreaherald.co.kr)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

Copyright 2002 The Korea Herald


                              837 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           Grimsby Evening Telegraph

                                 March 24, 2001

Foot and mouth 'not welcome' in county

BYLINE: By

SECTION: News:Business:Agriculture/Fish/Food, Pg.2

LENGTH: 379 words


LINCOLNSHIRE is so far free from foot and mouth disease and officials aim to
keep it that way with a raft of preventative measures.

New signs have been erected on all roads entering the county advising visitors
how to keep it a disease free county.

Lincolnshire police are carrying out roadside checks to try and catch illegal
hare-coursers with lurchers. Advice leaflets were issued to garages. Officials
are making any breach of footpath restrictions a high priority.

Plans to have disinfectant mats and pools on every road into Lincolnshire were
abandoned because of the traffic jams it would cause.

Trading standards officer, Peter Heafield said: "What we've got is a situation
where the county, at the moment, is disease free.

"We are trying to keep it that way and responding to concerns of the farming
community regarding the large influx of tourists that's about to take place."

Meanwhile, although some Lincolnshire school trips have been cancelled, some
aregoing ahead as planned.

At Lacey Gardens Junior School, in Louth, up to 45 Year Six pupils head to
Normandy, in France, next week with a party of staff.

Deputy headteacher Geoff Baker said the outbreak in France had eased, but the
prospects for the trip would continue to be monitored, in liaison with French
authorities.

The only restriction is to pupils' pack-ups to prevent any infection entering
France.

King Edward VI Grammar School pupils in Louth, who are members of the Combined
Cadet Force, had their trip to Grantham Barracks called off because of the
restriction that only Army personnel were allowed on site.

A spokesman for Cordeaux School, Louth, said the planned trip to Stratford in
May would go ahead, but some football matches were in jeopardy, more so due to
weather conditions than preventing the spread of foot and mouth.

At Monks Dyke Technology College, a students' trip to Crufts was abandoned due
to the event being postponed, but they plan to attend on the rescheduled date.

The college's mini-farm is cordoned off and visitors must disinfect before
entering and leaving the site. At Kidgate Primary School, Louth, the itinerary
for a trip to Norfolk in May has been altered to avoid orienteering close to
farms with livestock.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

                    Copyright 2001 Grimsby Evening Telegraph


                              838 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            January 10, 2014 Friday

Pakistan: Qaim appreciates WB assistance for development of Karachi

LENGTH: 390  words

DATELINE: KARACHI


KARACHI, Jan. 10 -- Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah

has said that Karachi is very important port city of Pakistan

and the government has planned to mobilize its resources to implement

mega development projects to convert it into a most favourable city

of the World.

He said that better provision of clean drinking water, efficient

sewerage, sanitation and mass transit system were the main areas for

investment to change the face of the city.

This he said while talking to Rachid Benmessoud, Country

Director of the World Bank (WB), who called on him at CM House here on

Thursday.

He said that though Sindh Government is trying its best and

investing huge amount for the development of the city, but as

the city population is rapidly increasing and has crossed

20 million due to influx from all over the country and other countries

of the world, foreign investment is required to achieve the goals.

The Chief Minister appreciated contribution and financial

assistance being provided by World Bank for improvement in

Education, Agriculture and Water sectors.

He said that by investment of World Bank Financial Assistance

upto $400 million in Education Sector, $450 million in Agriculture

and Water Sector considerable improvement in the social development

of the province is to be achieved.

He also appreciated the financial assistance of $66 million grant

of the World Bank for the management sector of education department

under the global partnership for education programme most probably be

implemented in June 2014.

However, the Chief Minister invited the attention of the WB for

further assistgance in development projects of Karachi.

He said that Sindh Government was investing huge amount to

maintain law and order in Karachi and trying its best to overcome

this issue within shortest possible time.

The Country Director of World Bank Rachid Benmessaoud, took keen

interest in the development of Karachi. He said that urbanization is

long term and most difficult subject and it needs leadership,

and coordination among all stakeholders to make it a success.

He also expressed satisfaction over the uplift work being carried

out in the metropolis with the WB funding

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              839 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Islamabad Dateline

                             March 3, 2012 Saturday

Biotech crops answer to economic development

BYLINE:  IRFAN HAIDER

SECTION: Vol. II No. 97

LENGTH: 411  words


International Services for the acquisition of Agri-biotech Applications experts
Friday said farmers can achieve food security and economic development by using
biotech crops.

Addressing an international workshop on 'International Perspective about the
Future of Biotech Crops' International Biotechnology experts Dr. Mariechel J.
Navarro and Rhodora R. Aldemita stressed that the development of agriculture
sector is important for the food, social and economic security of developing
countries while the options of using biotech crops can create a useful impact on
farmers' life and for their country.

ISAAA's biotech expert Rhodora R. Aldemita told the participants that due to
mega influx in human population use of new technology has become the need of the
hour and only technological development can prevent the world especially
developing countries from food insecurity.

She said that 29 countries are using biotech crops and getting sustainable
growth in their agriculture sector while Brazil was the most successful
developing country using biotech crops where 83 per cent of soya and 65 percent
of maize are being produced through biotechnology.

Dr. Mariechel J. Navarro, another ISAAA representative from Philippine said the
fact of effective communication is most important tool in capacity building.
While the biotech crops offer a sustainable solution and there is a dire need of
commercializing the crops to counter food insecurity to meet the challenges
being faced by today's agriculture in developing countries like Philippine and
Pakistan.

While responding to different questions, ISAAA experts explained that biotech
crops can bring huge deduction in the expenses and farmers can achieve healthy
production by using less labour than organic crops.

Experts said the farmer should be the decisive authority to choose best suited
option for sustainable production and should be educated regarding new
technologies.

Earlier, President Agriculture Journalists Association Lahore Munawar Hassan
stressed that journalists and opinion makers should develop their capacity
building.

He termed new technologies like biotech crops as life line for developing
countries to cope with their growing needs.

The workshop was organized by Agriculture Journalists Association Lahore to
explain the needs and importance of biotechnology amongst the opinion makers.

The members of agriculture journalists association Lahore and Capital's
agriculture journalists attended the event.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Islamabad Dateline
                              All Rights Reserved


                              840 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Frontier Post (Pakistan)

                             March 3, 2012 Saturday

BT crops can help meet food insecurity, rising prices

LENGTH: 333 words

DATELINE: Islamabad


Islamabad, March 3 -- International experts on Bio-Technology (BT) Friday urged
country to focus on bio-technology crops to get multiplied, healthy pesticide
resistive production of crops from less cultivations areas. They informed that
Pakistan was 8th country of the world who was gaining successful production of
BT Cotton from 2.8m hectors.

Addressing an international workshop on "International Perspective about the
Future of Biotech Crops" here, the International Services for the acquisition of
Agri-biotech Applications experts Dr. Mariechel J. Navarro and Rhodora R.
Aldemita stressed that the development of agriculture sector was important for
the food, social and economic security of developing countries, where as using
bio technology crops would contribute in achieving the food security and
development in a country. Dr. Mariechel J. Navarro said that mega influx in
human population has turned humans towards use of new technology called bio-tech
crops which were not only cost effective but resistant to the many aliments also
meeting the food needs in minimum lands.

The Bio-crop technology crops, Dr. Mariechel added, has become the need of hour
and only technological development could prevent the world especially developing
countries from food insecurity. The use of bio-technology in cultivating various
crops would not only meet the present challenges of food insecurity but would
also assist the human beings to maintain the reasonable food prices, she added
more.

To a question she mentioned that 29 countries were currently using biotech crops
and getting sustainable growth in their agriculture sector. She described the
Myths & Realities of Genetically Modified Crops as well and revealed the facts
regarding food ingestion, horizontal gene flow, gene transfer to human causing
disease, gene flow to weeds, cross pollination, effect on non target organism,
loss of biodiversity and safety of water soil and air. Published by HT
Syndication with permission from Frontier Post.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 The Frontier Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              841 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               The Frontier Post

                             March 3, 2012 Saturday

BT crops can help meet food insecurity, rising prices

BYLINE:  F.P. Islamabad Office

SECTION: Vol. XXVII No. 241

LENGTH: 319  words


International experts on Bio-Technology (BT) Friday urged country to focus on
bio-technology crops to get multiplied, healthy pesticide resistive production
of crops from less cultivations areas. They informed that Pakistan was 8th
country of the world who was gaining successful production of BT Cotton from
2.8m hectors.

Addressing an international workshop on "International Perspective about the
Future of Biotech Crops" here, the International Services for the acquisition of
Agri-biotech Applications experts Dr. Mariechel J. Navarro and Rhodora R.
Aldemita stressed that the development of agriculture sector was important for
the food, social and economic security of developing countries, where as using
bio technology crops would contribute in achieving the food security and
development in a country. Dr. Mariechel J. Navarro said that mega influx in
human population has turned humans towards use of new technology called bio-tech
crops which were not only cost effective but resistant to the many aliments also
meeting the food needs in minimum lands.

The Bio-crop technology crops, Dr. Mariechel added, has become the need of hour
and only technological development could prevent the world especially developing
countries from food insecurity. The use of bio-technology in cultivating various
crops would not only meet the present challenges of food insecurity but would
also assist the human beings to maintain the reasonable food prices, she added
more.

To a question she mentioned that 29 countries were currently using biotech crops
and getting sustainable growth in their agriculture sector. She described the
Myths & Realities of Genetically Modified Crops as well and revealed the facts
regarding food ingestion, horizontal gene flow, gene transfer to human causing
disease, gene flow to weeds, cross pollination, effect on non target organism,
loss of biodiversity and safety of water soil and air.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 The Frontier Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              842 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              The Herald (Glasgow)

                            March 23, 2013 Saturday
                                   1 Edition

How to marshal support of SNP s new recruits?

BYLINE: magnus gardham

SECTION: HS - FEATURES; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 611 words


IT S become a ritual eve-of-conference photo-op: Alex Salmond posing with the
SNP s latest eager recruit. So it was no surprise yesterday to see him welcome
Elysee Ahmed-Sheikh to the party, as fellow members prepared to gather for their
two-day get-together in Inverness. It was even quite predictable she just
happened to be a newly referendum-enfranchised 17-year-old.

What did raise eyebrows, though, was the number. Elysee is the party s 25,000th
paid-up member. A decade ago SNP membership stood at 9450. It rose steadily to
13,200 in 2007, when Mr Salmond became First Minister, but has exploded since
then. The tally was 15,097 in 2008; in other words they ve added just short of
10,000 members in four years.

This, of course, is great news for the Nationalists and contrasts sharply with
declining numbers in the other main parties. It has created headaches. Just what
does a political party do with such a sudden influx of new recruits, most of
whom have little or no previous experience of activism? That is one of the big
questions party chiefs are trying to get to grips with behind the scenes in
Inverness this weekend.

The answer is very firmly not an old-school diet of dreary branch meetings in
draughty church halls where a discussion about the common agricultural policy is
followed by a desultory pint in the pub. If you re lucky. Instead the SNP s new
recruits are bombarded with personalised texts and emails from Peter Murrell,
the party chief executive, Nicola Sturgeon and Mr Salmond.

They receive information on the party s message of the moment and are asked to
spread the word. They are encouraged to join campaign events in their area and,
if there isn t one, start organising it. They are asked to file information
about you, if they think you might be sympathetic to the cause, on the SNP s
voter database.

Remember New Labour MPs in the late 1990s and their pagers constantly bleeping
with  the line to take ? It s not dis-similar but in the modern SNP it goes
further and extends not just to elected politicians but the newest recruit.

Direct mobilisation  it s called and this weekend party strategists will be
discussing how to get even more from their recruits.

As one senior figure put it:  One of the problems the party has had to deal with
is the number of people who are really new and really enthusiastic. It is not
normal for a party to have such a sudden uptake in members and people wanting to
do things. It s a challenge.

While Angus Robertson, the party s elections co-ordinator, and colleagues
wrestle with that behind closed doors, Mr Salmond will take centre stage today.

With the referendum date (September 18 next year, in case you hadn t noticed)
unveiled, he will use his keynote speech first to fire up the party faithful
and, secondly, to step up the effort to persuade a largely unconvinced Scotland
to vote Yes. Iraq, Trident and North Sea oil will all feature heavily as he
focuses on what insiders call the  why  of independence.

With 18 months to go, the plan is to show that Scotland needs to be independent
before moving onto specific policies and how the new state might work in
practice. For that we ll have to wait for the white paper in November but the
SNP are well aware they ll have to create some momentum by then.

Their opponents know this and are already trying to spoil the party, demanding
answers on SNP plans for a currency union with UK, an independent Scotland s
membership of the EU and the proposed Scottish Defence Force.

We now need the details,  Better Together chief Alistair Darling said yesterday.
The pressure is sure to mount but today, at least, Mr Salmond will stick to his
own script.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GH


                      Copyright 2013 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              843 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                       July 12, 1991, Friday, 4* EDITION

Cherry pickers plentiful for Okanagan harvest

BYLINE: VANSUN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 59 words

DATELINE: Penticton


A predicted shortage of workers to pick this summer's Okanagan cherry crop
failed to materialize, employment officials said this week.

Enough workers have registered to get the crop off, mostly because of an influx
of pickers from other part of the province and Eastern Canada, said Cheryl Reid,
spokesman for the Agriculture Employment Service.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 1991 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              844 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Business Mirror (Philippines)

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday

PHL rice farmers cut production cost at par with exporting countries-DA

BYLINE: Alladin S. Diega

LENGTH: 649  words


ELEVEN individual and organized farmers were able to cut down on the cost of
their rice production, making it competitive with their Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (Asean) neighbors, the Department of Agriculture (DA) said.

Under the competition dubbed as "Palayabangan," select farmers and groups were
asked to try the "10-5" standard in rice production, which requires farmers to
produce 10 tons of rice per hectare while spending only P5 worth of input for
every kilogram of rice produced, the DA said in a statement.

The controlled area for the competition, or plots measuring 2,000 square meters
each, were inside the Philippine Rice Research Institute (PhilRice) research
stations in Muñoz, Nueva Ecija, and Isabela in Cagayan Valley.

The top winner, a group from Syngenta Philippines, attained a yield of 10.54
tons per hectare at P4.94 per kilo during this year's dry season harvest at the
Isabela station, according to PhilRice, an attached agency of the DA.

PhilRice Director Eufemio Rasco said on June 19 that one of the issues
confronting the country's farming sector is the free-trade regime that will come
into force in 2015.

According to the DA official, "for the rice industry, the Asean free-trade
regime could mean the influx of cheaper imported rice, which poses a challenge
to Filipino farmers," adding that if the Filipino farmers "achieve 10-5, they
will still gain even if rice is priced at P10 a kilo."

Rasco underscored the importance of controlling the cost of input because "the
cost of rice production in the Philippines came out to be P11 per kilo, while
other  Southeast Asian countries spend P8 or [even] lower."

The Syngenta group received a cash prize of P100,000 for the top prize, while 10
consolation prize winners, which also posted impressive records according to the
DA, each received P10,000. The winners also each received an additional cash
prize from Agriculture Secretary Proceso J. Alcala.

In an awarding ceremony held recently, Alcala handed out consolation prizes to
Organic Resource Biotic-Multipurpose Cooperative and Pioneer Hi-Bred Phils. The
former produced 7.99 tons per hectare at P6.24 per kilo cost (PKC), while the
latter yielded 10.23 tons per hectare at P5.92 PKC.

Alcala also awarded SL-Agritech Corp., which produced 9.63 tons per hectare at
P6.99 per kilo.

Among the winners is a farmers' group representing the local government of San
Mateo, Isabela, with 9.72 tons per-hectare-yield at production cost of P4.67 per
kilo. Another was Dynapharm (8.05 tons per hectare with P4.98 PKC).

Individual farmers awarded by Alcala were Rolando Terte, with 9.69 tons per
hectare at P5.67 PKC; Jomar Jarvinia, with 7.74 tons/hectare at P5.71 PKC; and,
Gawad Saka awardee Jolo Sevilleja with a yield of 7.45 tons/hectare at P5.28
PKC.

"They are model farmers who proved that Filipino farmers can compete with the
best in the world," Alcala said in the vernacular.

The DA chief said that the winning farmers showed that production at a lower
cost, "which translates to higher income, is realistic and attainable."

He said initial estimates by PhilRice showed paddy-rice production in the
Philippines costs higher compared to Thailand and Vietnam.

Results of the competition prompted the DA top official to instruct PhilRice to
expand the coverage of the contest to include farms outside PhilRice stations,
in support of the government's vigorous campaign to achieve total sufficiency in
rice, the statement issued on Thursday said.

Syngenta's Ronald de Guzman said his company achieved the feat by applying
appropriate technologies during the important stages in the development of the
rice plant, which include "seedling, vegetative, reproductive and harvesting."

For the PhilRice, interventions included were the generally accepted proper
cultural practices and methods such as seed selection, land preparation, proper
fertilization, and water management.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 Business Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                              845 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 14, 2008 Tuesday

From timberland to boutique agriculture;
TimberWest aims to turn 166 hectares of former forest land just north of
Courtenay into a series of medium-sized farms

BYLINE: BRENNAN CLARKE, Special to The Globe and Mail

SECTION: BRITISH COLUMBIA NEWS; LAND USE: COMOX VALLEY; Pg. S3

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: VICTORIA


One of Vancouver Island's largest logging companies has decided to stop cutting
wood and start growing food on some of its Comox Valley land holdings.

Citing factors such as high real-estate prices, plummeting lumber sales and
growing demand for local agricultural products, TimberWest has applied to turn
166 hectares of former forest land just north of Courtenay into a series of
medium-sized farms.

"When you look at how the Island has changed over the last five or 10 years, you
realize you can make way more money off this land than just growing trees on
it," TimberWest spokesman Stephen Bruyneel said. "We started looking at this
three years ago, even before the downturn in the forest industry."

While the land has been earmarked for timber harvesting for decades, it lies
within the Agricultural Land Reserve, limiting the chances of residential
development but allowing for a range of agricultural uses, including organic
farming, greenhouses, wineries and agricultural tourism.

Market research conducted by TimberWest indicated a strong demand for locally
grown agricultural products, in part to supply new restaurants catering to
retiring baby boomers who have settled in the area in recent years, Mr. Bruyneel
said.

"If you look at Comox and the kind of boutique agriculture that's going on, we
really think that's going to drive up the value of the land," he said.

The 166 hectares of land is made up of 11 parcels that TimberWest wants to
subdivide into "different lot configurations" to facilitate drainage work aimed
at improving the area's farming potential.

"We have to prove to the land commission we are increasing the net agricultural
value of the land," Mr. Bruyneel said.

John Watson, executive director of Invest Comox Valley, said an influx of
fifty-something retirees in recent years and the popularity of eat-local
concepts such as the 100-mile diet have created a niche for Comox Valley
agricultural products "It's partly why we have one of the strongest farmers
markets on the Island," Mr. Watson said.

But TimberWest's bid to liquidate its land assets extends far beyond a handful
of farms in the Comox Valley.

With about 325,000 hectares of private land, in addition to its 700,000 cubic
metres of renewable Crown logging rights, TimberWest is Vancouver Island's
largest private landowner.

A 2007 study identified about 54,000 hectares of TimberWest land as capable of
supporting "new, sustainable land management opportunities."

Early in 2007, TimberWest donated a 16-hectare parcel near its proposed farm
lots for the site of a proposed regional hospital for the North Island.

Last July, the company received rezoning approval for a 166-hectare parcel of
land near the Campbell River airport that can now be sold off for industrial
use.

Mr. Bruyneel said much of TimberWest's private land lies on the outskirts of
growing Vancouver Island communities with attractive development opportunities.
Some of the most coveted land lies on the outskirts of Ladysmith, a seaside
community between Duncan and Nanaimo.

Long-term plans include a recreational and residential development in the
Nanaimo Lakes area, about 35 kilometres southwest of Nanaimo, Mr. Bruyneel said.

"Nanaimo Lakes I would say is at least five years away," he said.

A report released earlier this month by PricewaterhouseCoopers estimated that
Canada's forest industry lost more than $1-billion in the first half of 2008,
with Western Canada accounting for about half that figure.

About 100 people attended an open house Thursday in the community of Merville,
near the proposed farm lots.

Mr. Bruyneel said TimberWest plans to take the feedback it received, refine its
development plans and make another presentation to the community later this
winter.

However, with more than 80 per cent of its land still earmarked for forestry,
Mr. Bruyneel said TimberWest isn't about to abandon the logging industry.

"We are still going to be a timber company at the core," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              846 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                         TendersInfo - Project Notices

                            October 25, 2016 Tuesday

The Agro-biodiversity Initiative (TABI)

LENGTH: 477  words


Period -  01.07.2012 - 31.03.2017
Budget - CHF 8'478'337


Country/region - Laos


Topic
Agriculture and Food Security
Environment
Biodiversity
Agriculture value-chain development


Background
Lao PDR is ecologically rich with an abundance of natural resources, but due to
population growth, land use changes, government sanctioned land allocation and
village consolidation policies, the biodiversity has eroded during the past ten
years. By allowing an influx of commercial resource extraction and large scale
commercial agriculture, there has been significant negative impact on poor
upland farming communities such as decreased availability of Non-Timber Forest
Products, soil degradation, increase water and land scarcity.


These threats to agriculture and food security have adverse effects to the
populations livelihoods where more than 80 percent of the countrys inhabitants
live in rural areas and depend mainly on wild plants, forest products and
domesticated crops.
Recognizing these challenges, Lao PDR is a signatory to the International
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). The government has developed a
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan to meet its obligations under the
Convention. In 2009, the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC)
launched The Agro-biodiversity Initiative (TABI), to support the Lao governments
effort to implement the CBD and to promote agrobiodiversity (ABD) conservation
overall.
The current phase of the TABI project will continue to focus on the sustainable
use of ABD, Non-Timber Forest Product (NTFP) marketing and forest land use
planning. The project will look to strengthen partnerships with potential
project partners, including NPA, INGOS, Private Sector and GoL Agencies involved
with village based development linked to improving community livelihood in the
uplands of Lao PDR.
Objectives
TABI aims to contribute to poverty alleviation and improved livelihoods of
upland communities through sustainable management and use of agrobiodiversity in
multifunctional landscapes.
Project partners
Contract partner
Private sector
Foreign private sector North
SDC Field Office
Implementing partner
Multiple Local Partners
Other partners
Department of Planning of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, with
technical support of NIRAS.
Budget
Current phase Swiss budget CHF

8'478'337 Swiss disbursement to date CHF

7'194'905
Project completion date : 2017-03-31 12:00:00

Major organization : SWISS AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT AND COOPERATION (SDC)

Address : Swiss Cooperation Office for the Mekong Region
192/1 Sibounheuang Road, Ban Sibounheuang,
Chanthaboury District, P.O. Box 5666,
Vientiane Capital, Lao PDR

Country :Lao People's Democratic Republic
Email : vientiane@eda.admin.ch

Url : https://www.eda.admin.ch

Financier : SWISS AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT AND COOPERATION (SDC),

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 811


                          Copyright 2016 Tenders Info
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              847 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                           September 13, 2005 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Africa's woes can be fixed

BYLINE: The Ottawa Citizen

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 506  words


The Citizen's Dan Gardner paints a grim portrait of Africa's urban poor in a
special section of today's paper. But amidst the stories and images of poverty
and hardship, there is evidence that things don't have to be that way.

In the run-up to this summer's G8 Summit in Gleneagles, Scotland, a common
refrain was that western aid money just goes to fund Mercedes for corrupt
leaders and their entourages, or weapons for militias. Even the head of the
Canadian Taxpayers Federation weighed in, arguing in an article for the Citizen
that the many billions of dollars pumped into Africa by western governments have
done little.

"Providing more foreign aid -- without fundamental governance reforms -- is a
costly proposition for taxpayers and one that will not help the world's poor,"
he wrote.

In fact, a few more dollars per Canadian would go a long way to helping reduce
the number of those facing extreme hunger.

Ghana is an example of a country that has turned itself around and now holds
peaceful elections and is considered to be a relatively well managed, uncorrupt
and increasingly prosperous nation. This could not have been achieved without a
massive influx of foreign aid.

Jacques Diouf, the director general of the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization, points out on the opposite page that 30 developing countries with
a combined population of 2.2 billion have cut the number of hungry people by 25
per cent. This is despite the fact that aid to the agricultural sectors of these
countries has been halved, not increased, over the last two decades. So there is
good news to find in the developing world if you look for it.

Nigeria offers a different example, where the Nigerian people's desire to
prosper is evident. As Mr. Gardner relates, some experts believe as much as 95
per cent of economic activity in east African cities is informal, including
bartering and under-the-table work. Even with a barely functioning government,
Nigerians have created an economy.

There will be more good news if the developed world comes close to the
often-stated goal of contributing 0.7 per cent of national incomes to aid.

Of course, throwing money at the situation isn't the only requirement for
success. And it's true that much money has been ill-used.

But as today's special report points out, any government anywhere would have had
a hard time coping with Africa's incredible population growth and swift
urbanization over the last half-century.

Marina Ottaway, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, points to another problem: in many cases, free markets were replaced with
government agencies, and food for the urban poor was subsidized, destroying
farmers' livelihoods and accelerating the process of urbanization. This, in
turn, creates even more need for subsidized food in the cities, in viciously
downward spiral.

As world leaders gather in New York tomorrow for the United Nations World
Summit, they must remember that aid alone won't save Africa -- but without it,
there would be no hope at all.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              848 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                This Day (Lagos)

                                October 24, 2014

Govt to Approve N100 Billion for Mini Modern Ranches

BYLINE: Jaiyeola Andrews

LENGTH: 481 words

DATELINE: Abuja


The federal government on Thursday said it was considering approving N100
billion for the establishment of mini modern ranches across the country.

The fund, according to the Committee on Grazing Reserves chaired by the Benue
State Governor, Gabriel Suswam, would be provided by the Central Bank of Nigeria
(CBN). Suswam made the disclosure while briefing State House correspondents
after the National Executive Council (NEC) meeting.

According to the governor, his committee's reports highlighted critical issues
to be considered.

The issues included struggle for land and water resources by the herdsmen and
farmers, uncontrolled influx of nomadic farmers into Nigeria and issues on
grazing reserves in states.

He said the committee recommended that the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) should
provide seed funding of N100 billion to assist states establish mini modern
ranches across the federation.

"That all grazing reserves/cattle routes already gazette and encroached upon
should be recovered and improved upon taking into consideration the present day
realities.

"That ranching and modern technologies of livestock production be
established-meat processing and packaging e.g. Halal certified and that
sensitisation/education workshops be organised for herdsmen and farmers to build
trust and confidence between the parties.

"The National Orientation Agency (NOA) and relevant ministries departments and
agency (MDAs) were charged to handle this," Suswam said.

He told journalists that NEC, discussed and amended some of the recommendations
and appointed the Hon. Minister of National Planning, Minister of Agriculture
and Benue State Governor to come up with the final framework for approval and
implementation.

He added that the Secretary to the Government of the Federation (SGF), Senator
Anyim Pius Anyim, presented the draft report of the Presidential Technical
Committee on Land Reform (PTCLR) which was reconstituted by Mr. President in
November 2011.

"Among the terms of reference for the PTCLR, according to him are provision
technical assistance to states and local governments to undertake land cadastral
nationwide; determination of individual possessory rights using best practices
and most appropriate technologies.

"Others are to encourage and assist states and local governments to establish an
arbitration mechanisms for land ownership conflict resolution; make
recommendation on mechanism for land valuation in both urban and rural areas in
the federation and any other recommendation that will ensure effective,
simplified, sustained and successful land administration in Nigeria.

"The PTCLR observed among others that there is critical and urgent need to
address the obvious and critical weakness in legal framework for land governance
in the country," he said.

The council, however, resolved that members should study the report, prepare
inputs and present at the next meeting.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              849 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Times of Zambia (Ndola)

                                August 27, 2012

North-West Mining Boom Cheers Chamber of Commerce

LENGTH: 605 words


SOLWEZI, the capital town of North-Western Province, has finally awakened from
slumber and is now positioning itself among the top attractive investment
destinations in the country.

The town, which not too long ago offered very little attraction in terms of
economic and social opportunities to warrant the pen name of a 'Cinderella'
town, is now a hive of activities, both economically and socially.

This follows an increased investment-flow into the mining sector in the region,
which has given birth to hundreds of offshoot businesses.

The opening of some of the country's biggest mining ventures such as Kansanshi
Mine owned by First Quantum Minerals (FQM) and Barrick Gold's Lumwana Mining
Company has put Solwezi town and North-Western Province in general, on the surge
in terms of economic activities.

Development of the Trident Mining project, also owned by FQM, is currently
underway and has boosted even further the economy of the region.

The North-Western Chamber of Commerce and Industry (NWCCI) is currently seeking
ways of exploiting economic benefits arising from investments in the mining
industry of the region.

According to Mathias Mutupa, president of the NWCCI, the region's mining
industry is adding significant value to the economy of Solwezi and the welfare
of citizens at large.

Mr Mutupa says the mining investments have seen an improvement in the standard
of living for the people as could be justified from the creation of more than
3,000 jobs in the industry.

The investments in the mining industry are translating into increased economic
opportunities for the people as well as increased business volumes for Small
Medium Entrepreneurs (SMEs), he adds.

"When you look at the historical background of North-Western, the province had
been considered a Cinderella type of region, which lacked necessary skills,
social amenities in education, health and other things."

But "We have seen remarkable improvement in these areas with the influx of a lot
of SMEs being set up because of opportunities offered by the mines which
themselves cannot absorb all the people."

This in itself, he reckons, is a mark of improvement in the standards of living
for the people of the province.

Critical sectors such as health and education have also received their fair
share of improvement resulting from mining companies setting up deliberate
corporate social responsibility (CSR) programmes, through which they have been
allocating substantial amounts of money in upgrading the referral hospital as
well as building schools.

Furthermore, Solwezi has recorded drastic improvements in its outlook. The only
major road passing through the town has become extremely busy with automobiles
being spotted all over the place.

"This for sure is an indication of increased disposable income which people are
using to improve their well-being and the region," Mr Mutupa says.

Several economic sectors such as agriculture, tourism, information and
communication technology, energy and many others, have also received a major
boost because of the influx of people in the region.

"It is obvious that economic activities such as farming have improved
tremendously because of the number of people coming into the province who need
to be fed," he notes.

"As chamber of commerce, we are gearing up to see how we can be able to harness
some of this money coming from the mines and in turn create further employment,"
Mr Mutupa said.

The challenge, however, remains for local business people to rise to the
challenge and see how they could harness some of the incomes from the business
opportunities in the mines to create further employment for the locals.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              850 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (Nairobi)

                              July 18, 2010 Sunday

Uhuru Failed to Protect Wheat Farmers [column]

BYLINE: Francis Ayieko

LENGTH: 643  words

DATELINE: Nairobi


Heat over wheat. That is all Finance minister Uhuru Kenyatta got last week for
being adamant that there was very little he could do about the new duty he
introduced on imported wheat.

In Parliament, legislators led by Deputy Speaker Farah Maalim and Ikolomani MP
Boni Khalwale, accused Mr Kenyatta of "exposing" local wheat farmers to unfair
competition from the highly-subsidised European farmers.

Angry wheat farmers from Narok have been demonstrating against the minister's
decision, which they say will discourage production "as it will lead to the
influx of cheap imported wheat". Mr Kenyatta's sin? He reduced import duty on
wheat from 35 per cent to 10 per cent in the 2010/2011 Budget.

But he has stuck to his guns, arguing that "his hands are tied" as the tax was
jointly agreed on by Finance ministers from the five partner states of the East
African Community -- Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi -- during their
pre-budget meeting in Kampala.

And that is where Mr Kenyatta seems to be losing it all. The question that
readily comes to mind is: What did he do to defend our wheat farmers at that
meeting? Under the EAC Customs Union, wheat is one of the 58 goods classified as
"sensitive" products.

They are so-called because their importation from outside the Community could
adversely affect production. So, whereas "non-sensitive" goods imported into the
region attract Common External Tariff -- an agreed set of duties levied on
imported goods entering any EAC partner state from non-EAC member countries,
ranging from zero to 25 per cent -- sensitive products like wheat, rice, milk
and maize, are given an additional protection over and above the maximum 25 per
cent duty.

Wheat imports, for instance, have been attracting 35 per cent duty in Kenya, 10
per cent in Tanzania, and zero per cent in the case of Uganda, Rwanda and
Burundi, since the Customs Union came into force in January 2005. That Kenya
levied the highest CET on wheat was not accidental.

As the leading wheat producer in the region, it needs to levy higher import duty
on the product to discourage the influx of cheap imports. This is a good way to
protect a sector where it has a comparative advantage. Tanzania has been
charging only 10 per cent because it relies partly on the "small" wheat it
produces locally and largely on imports.

The other EAC countries don't levy any duty on wheat imports because they almost
depend entirely on them. It was ridiculous to hear Mr Kenyatta argue that the
reduction of tariff on Kenya's wheat imports -- which is now the same as what
Tanzania charges -- was occasioned by "wheat shortage".

That is not true. Farmers from the main wheat-growing areas, namely Narok South
and North, report that they have realised a bumper harvest, barely one year
after emerging from a devastating drought. Granted, for a product to enjoy
protection under the EAC trade regime, it must pass one major test: the region
has to have adequate capacity to meet the demand for that particular commodity.

However, in our case, all indications are that currently, we are not very badly
off. Apart from the news that the crop is doing well, the other good news is
that globally, wheat prices have plummeted. So what must Mr Kenyatta do? First,
he needs to understand that Kenyan traders, especially motor vehicle assemblers,
cement producers, and now wheat farmers, are not happy with the way CET is being
applied by EAC countries.

They are unhappy with the CET violations by Uganda, Tanzania and Rwanda, mainly
in the vehicle assembly and cement industries over the last one year. More
importantly, he must petition the EAC to increase wheat import duty for Kenya
during the post-budget review meeting in October. That can only bear fruit after
the end of the current fiscal year. But he must push for it now.

Mr Ayieko is a business writer with 'The EastAfrican.'

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter


                     Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              851 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 13, 1985 Monday

Dutch order rise masks problems

BYLINE: LAURA RAUN; FT

LENGTH: 326 words

DATELINE: Amsterdam NETHERLANDS


By  LAURA RAUN
 AMSTERDAM
 The order book for the Dutch shipbuilding industry rose to its highest
 level in two years in the first quarter, according to the Netherlands
 Association of Shipbuilders. But the gain masks fundamental problems in
 the industry.

The 9 per cent rise in orders - to 2.04 billion guilders ($775-million)
 from 1.86 billion in the previous quarter - was attributed to sharply
 fewer deliveries during the harsh winter and to an influx of orders
 connected with new Government licencing regulations.

The Agriculture and Fisheries Ministry announced at the end of December
 that only fishing vessels with certificates of soundness would be allowed
 to catch fish under European Community quotas after Feb. 1. Apparently in
 expectation of the ministry move, fishermen ordered about 20 new boats,
 most of them in the final quarter of 1984.

The industry continues to suffer from a shakeout that has seen the
 demise of many companies and the loss of thousands of jobs in the past two
 decades. Shrinking world demand and comparatively high wages have shrunk
 the Dutch share of global shipbuilding to 1.3 per cent from 8 per cent in
 1960.

The most recent casualty was Amsterdam Drydock, the capital's largest
 shipbuilder, which was declared bankrupt at the end of February.

The trustees, the unions and the Government agreed to try to create a
 new, much smaller company from the ashes of the old one, but the outcome
 is not clear.

The Economics Ministry, meanwhile, has promised only 54.5 million
 guilders in shipbuilding aid for 1985-86, after which government
 assistance has been forbidden by the EC. The industry had said that 82
 million guilders was needed to preserve current capacity and jobs.

Van der Giessen-de Noord, one of the two largest shipyards, recently  said it
would dismiss 1,200 of its 2,000 workers because it is to receive  less
government aid over the next two years than it had requested.
Financial Times

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1985 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              852 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                This Day (Lagos)

                                 March 08, 2014

Nigerian U.S. Envoy Bags Martin Luther Award

BYLINE: Shola Oyeyipo

LENGTH: 928 words


The award of the revered Dr. Martin Luther King Legacy Award for 2014, on
Nigeria's Ambassador to the United States of America (USA), Professor Adebowale
Adefuye has been described as an honour well deserved.

Internationally recognised authority on performance management, Kemi Otegbade,
who commended the award, said it was well deserved, especially considering the
achievements recorded by the envoy in repositioning Nigeria in the US.

According to her, when Adefuye assumed office as Nigeria's envoy to the US in
2009, the mission was in absolute disarray with Nigeria's image "sinking" and
there was the urgent need to improve the badly broken image of the country, a
task she says he had achieved.

"With a rich intellectual and diplomatic background, and a high sense of
patriotism, Adefuye commenced his work. Months before, the prospects of having a
robust tenure looked dire, but the envoy a focus - to get Nigeria out of the
terrorist watch list and to boost all aspects of relations between US and the
country.

"During the presentation of his letter of credence to President Barack Obama at
the White House, Adefuye was emphatic in his call for a review of the placement
of the country on the terror watch list.

"A presidential voice was added to his call when the then Acting President
Jonathan visited Washington on the invitation of President Obama to attend the
Nuclear Security Summit held at the Walter E. Washington Convention Center along
with 46 other world leaders. Jonathan was among the few leaders hosted at the
White House by the US President. This consequently led to the setting aside of
the countries of interest list", she noted.

She added that with the envoy's efforts, a Bi-National Commission Agreement
which initially had four working groups; good governance, transparency and
integrity; energy and investment; food security and agriculture; Niger Delta and
regional security co-operation, was signed between Nigeria and the U.S with the
Niger Delta and regional security component later divided into two on US
suggestion, thereby bringing the components to five.

"Since 2010 when the agreement was signed, series of high level meetings had
been held both in Nigeria and in US. There had also been several investors' fora
on power and agriculture, including an upcoming forum on infrastructure.

"The gains of the various high level meetings and investors' fora include
increased interest of American investors in Nigeria's non-oil sector; US Exim
Bank $1.5 billion guarantee for investment in Nigeria's power sector; and
increased assistance to Nigerian security agencies to effectively tackle
internal security challenges, and donation of a warship to Nigerian Navy to
tackle piracy and armed banditry in the Niger Delta and the Gulf of Guinea. But
he was able to prove his mettle", she added

Adefuye, who was one of the top ten Nigerians in America award in September
2013, with the recent Dr. Martin Luther King bestowed on him by the
International Salute Group to pay tribute to the legacy of the late American
activist, joins the likes of General Colin Powell, Congressman John Lewis,
Senator Bob Dole, and former United Nations Secretary-General, Kofi Annan as
past recipients of the award.

CAPTION: Governor Murtala Nyako Boko Haram: Nyako Constitutes Assessment
Committee Daji Sani in Yola Following incessant attacks by the outlawed Boko
Haram sect on villages at the borders between Nigeria and Cameroon in Adamawa
State, which led to of killings and displacing a lot people from their ancestral
homes, Governor Murtala Nyako of Adamawa State yesterday constituted a 10 man
committee to assess the extent of destruction.

The committee is to pay particular attention to casualties and losses recorded
particularly the most recent attacks on Shuwa, Kirchinga and Michika Communities
of Madagali and Michika Local Governments.

The influx of displaced persons into Gulak in Madagali LGA of Adamawa State from
the border villages of both Bornu and Adamawa States was reportedly alarming and
needed quick response of the government.

Nyako expressed concern in a press release signed by his Director of press,
Ahmed Sajoh and made available to journalists in Yola, that his visit to the
problematic area has made him understand the extent of their suffering and
fears.

According to the release ,Nyako has appealed to all levels of government
concerned to be committed in the provision of relief materials and also appealed
to private organisations and individuals to assist the displaced persons.

Nyako also appreciated those who had made efforts to send relief materials but
said more needed to be done as government alone, cannot handle the influx
because many displaced persons were trooping into the State on daily basis
seeking refuge.

According to the release, the governor has reiterated the need to be "our
brothers keepers and called on the people of the state to be law abiding and
shun violence stressing that youths should engage in meaningful ventures that
would improve the economy and promote peace in the state. The Committee was to
be chaired by Alhaji Mohammed Ajuji a seasoned civil servant in Adamawa state
and also the committee was given two weeks to submit its report.

The committee's terms of reference was to assess the level of casualties' in
terms of death and injuries, assess the extent of destruction of properties and
identify victims, find out the number of displaced persons, identify areas of
immediate needs of affected communities for immediate intervention and to
provide recommendation for government consideration.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              853 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AID IS SOUGHT FOR JOBLESS FARM WORKERS IN ARIZONA

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: TUCSON, Ariz., July 30


An organization that assists migrant laborers says one-third of the state's farm
workers have lost their jobs or will soon be laid off and has asked Gov. Bruce
Babbitt to declare a state of economic emergency.

The layoffs, which could eventually affect more than 18,000 workers statewide,
is attributed to several factors, including recent flooding of farmland along
the Colorado River and a new Federal program that has prodded farmers to take a
record number of acres out of production, the organization says.

Also, a large number of Arizona copper workers, many of whom have been laid off
in the past year, are now competing for farm jobs.  Another factor is the recent
large influx of aliens coming illegally from Mexico because of the devaluations
of the peso.

The request for emergency aid came from the board of Portable Practical
Education Preparation Inc., a private, nonprofit agency based here that is
financed in part by the Department of Labor to train and assist migrant farm
families.

Rising unemployment in agricultural states like Arizona was confirmed by
Representative Timothy J. Penny, Democrat of Minnesota, a member of the House
Agriculture Committee. Mr. Penny recently told the National Association of
Farmworker Organizations at its annual meeting here that the new Federal farm
program would help put farmers back on their feet, but would reduce farm
employment.

The new farm program, in which farmers who agree to idle up to half their normal
grain and cotton acreage are paid with surplus Government crops, is called
payment in kind, often referred to by its acronym, PIK. According to the Arizona
Farm Bureau, which represents agricultural producers and ranchers, the program
has had little impact on the state, even though cotton is the state's largest
crop.  The organization said the claims of soaring unemployment were
exaggerated.

However, John Arnold, director of the Tucson educational project, called the
rise in unemployment the worst he had seen in 25 years.  Mr. Arnold, noting that
farm workers were not covered by unemployment benefits or health plans, said,
''When they become victimized by programs like PIK there are no resources to
fall back on.''

He said that among those recently laid off was a 43-year-old man who had worked
at the same cotton farm north of Tucson for 26 years.  Last week the man and his
family were asked to leave the farm, he said.

There are 1.6 million farm workers nationwide, including 55,000 in Arizona. The
Arizona workers include migrants, who move from region to region, and seasonal
workers, who stay in one state, but who help plant or harvest crops on a
seasonal basis. At least as many workers lacking immigration documents, most
from Mexico, call Arizona home, Mr. Arnold said.

Under the farm payment program, 40 to 50 percent of the nation's farmers will
need fewer workers, Mr. Arnold said in the statement sent to the Governor. In
Arizona, the Federal Government is expected to pay farmers $76 million for not
planting on 303,700 acres. Cotton acreage will be cut by two-thirds, according
to Federal figures.

In response to the appeal for emergency aid, Andrew Hurwitz, a spokesman for
Governor Babbitt, said: ''We don't have the technical power to declare an
emergency because of economic factors. We are limited to emergencies resulting
from natural disasters.''

He said a Babbitt aide would meet here next week with members of the migrant
training agency and the Arizona Department of Economic Security. If the Governor
decides to appeal for Federal aid, Arizona could be eligible under the $4.6
billion emergency job bill passed by Congress in March. The money would be used
to provide education, retraining and subsistence

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              854 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               New Indian Express

                              May 3, 2012 Thursday

Prices spiked as cyclone Thane swallowed Panruti

LENGTH: 308 words

DATELINE: CHENNAI


CHENNAI, May 3 -- The damage that Cyclone Thane wreaked in Cuddalore is now
being felt in different parts of the State. Jackfruit vendors now say that the
influx of the famous Panruti variety has gone down by a whopping 90 per cent
this season, upping the price several notches.

The cyclone crossed between Puducherry and Cuddalore in December, devastating
farm fields on its way. The Agriculture Department recorded extensive damage to
crops of various varieties, which was close to 100 per cent in some cases.

Officials in Panruti, which produces what is considered the juiciest variety of
the fruit in the country, say cashew and jackfruit have similar flowering cycles
occurring between December and February. Utmost care is required in tending to
the trees at this time. However, all calculations of the farmers were of no
avail this season as the devastating cyclone razed over 80 per cent of the 1,200
hectares in which jackfruit trees are hervested. "The flowers and the tender
unripe fruit were blown away," said Kanakasabai, Deputy Director of Horticulture
in Cuddalore.

Farmers say that while about 50 tonnes of the fruit are normally harvested from
a hectare of plantation, the figures were between 0.5 and 1 tonne in certain
fields. This reduction in supply has spiked the price of Panruti jackfruits to
'7,000 per tonne, from the earlier '5,000.

In Chennai, this has had an effect on prices in the end market. According to
Jayaraman, President of the Koyambedu Market Anna Podu Sangam, prices of have
gone up by almost 40 per cent. "What was selling for '200 a piece has touched
'280 to '300 this season," he says. "Now we spend a lot to transport the fruits
from Theni, which is showing on the end price. Moreover, these other varieties
are not preferred here," he adds. Published by HT Syndication with permission
from New Indian Express.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2012 Expressbuzz.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              855 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               Sunday Herald Sun

                             April 23, 1995 Sunday

URBAN SEWERAGE FEEDS ALGAL WOES

LENGTH: 685 words


REGARDING "Coming Clean on Green" by Graeme O'Neill, Science Watch, Sunday
Herald Sun, April 16.It is argued that agriculture contributes 75 per cent of
the total phosphates compared to 10 per cent from detergents. Even if this was
true it would still be misleading because most of the phosphates in agriculture
are distributed over the large Australian countryside and do not end in
waterways to feed algal blooms, unlike detergent phosphates discharged into
sewerage water.Most Australians live in towns and cities near waterways because
it is such a dry continent. This is why sewerage phosphates do conribute to
algal blooms.We acknowledge that sewerage phosphates are not the only factor
causing algal outbreaks. But to suggest that we should not bother switching to
phoshate-free detergents because we will not see benefits for at least five to
20 years is irresponsible and illogical.Bionomics Australia Pty Ltd has been
manufacturing and marketing Aware environmental specialist laundry powder in
Australian supermarkets for five years. Aware has always been phosphate-free and
has never used polycarboxylates (PCA).We would welcome the opportunity to wash
your dirty article with a great laundry powder made for the wonderful Australian
environment.- Gert Mueller,Director,Bionomics Australia P/LMagnus wrongDR Magnus
Clarke (April 16) claims that in the end all of us are boat people. That, of
course, is rubbish and does not deserve a detailed reply. What does worry me is
Dr Clarke's assertion that, because the modern day "boat people" crowd
themselves on leaking hulks to get into this country (illegally), they should be
permitted to remain. Australia's current economic situation just cannot stand
any kind of influx, particularly of people whose whole background and customs
are so different from ours.Dr Clarke said we adopt the "return to sender"
attitude. I say "thank God we do".- B.C. Ruxton,RSL State PresidentArchaic
attitudeMR Ruxton's reaction to the Vietnam Veteran's Motor Cycle Club being
included in Anzac Day's march is another fine example of his bombastic and
archaic attitudes.He may be chairman of the committee but he did not attend the
relevant meeting when the decision was made.Great to see democracy and common
sense prevailed in his absence.It is no wonder that Vietnam veterans still shun
the RSL.After all Bruce, it was not a "real war" like yours was it? Strange
though, my husband and his mates thought it was pretty fair dinkum.- M.L.
Morris,SeafordScot bashingCLARK Forbes' irresponsible "panning" of "Rob Roy"
(Sunday Herald Sun, April 16) shows him to be a "Scotophobe", maligning one of
the best and most adventurous stories to come out of Bonnie Scotland.He brings
shame on himself as a film reviewer.Trade concernTHE problems of our adverse
balance of trade have now reached the stage where, as Winston Churchill said of
Munich Agreement, in 1938: "We are in the midst of a disaster of the greatest
magnitude."In 1944, the Bretton Woods Agreement, to which the Federal Government
is a full signatory, set up the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund.The IMF has considerable powers of intervention into the affairs of member
states whose level of external debt attracts the concern of the said World
Bank.The IMF can then suspend the elected government, and fix wages, hours of
work, taxes, and take all other measures required to enforce its financial
policies; a matter that the Federal Government appears to have forgotten.-
Michael T. GleesonWarrnamboolNew vintageREGARDING the antics on the "Victoria's
Leading Lights" by Steven Wilson, especially the lighthouse at Cape Liptrap on
Pages 28/81 of the Sunday Herald Sun, April 16.It is not correct stating that
this lighthouse was built in 1913. The structure in your picture is of 1938
vintage.The original lighthouse was of steel structure and was on the seaward
side of the lighthouse pictured.I was involved in the cartage of the gas
cylinders to the former lighthouse every six months for quite a number of years
until the new concrete tower was erected around 1958.END OF STORY

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: THE CONCRETE LIGHTHOUSE AT LIPTRAP WAS BUILT ABOUT 1958.

JOURNAL-CODE: SHS

                   Copyright 1995 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              856 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Waterloo Courier (Iowa)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            February 1, 2011 Tuesday

Great Migration Railroad strike 100 years ago brought an influx of
African-Americans to Waterloo

BYLINE: Pat Kinney, Waterloo-Cedar Falls Courier, Iowa

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1401 words


Feb. 01--WATERLOO, Iowa  -- You won't find a more enthusiastic goodwill
ambassador for Waterloo than Roosevelt Taylor.

Now 83, he came to Waterloo from Water Valley, Miss., in his teens to live with
his grandfather. He's spent most of his life here except for a stint in the U.S.
Army.

He earned a good living at John Deere and volunteered with a number of
organizations, including Disabled American Veterans, Knights of Pythias and as a
board member of the largest credit union in the state, Veridian, formerly John
Deere Community Credit Union.

But he knows about the old days. The bad old days. The days when being black in
Waterloo was not just a disadvantage but downright dangerous.

He heard about those days from his grandfather, George Martin, who came to
Waterloo from Mississippi 100 years ago. He was one of hundreds of
African-Americans who came to Waterloo to work on the railroad.

"The Illinois Central went down South and asked people whether they wanted to go
to the Promised Land," Taylor said. "They got a whole bunch of people, brought
them back and unloaded them in the shop yard."

The arriving blacks found out they would be taking the jobs of striking railroad
workers, who were predominantly white.

"They (railroad officials) told the strikers, 'If you don't go back to work,
they (the black workers) will be on your job tomorrow,' " Taylor related.

The newcomers had two strikes against them: They were black, and they were
strikebreakers. This year marks the 100th anniversary of the beginning of that
strike, and with it, the major influx of what became Waterloo's present-day
African-American population.

Those early African-American railroad workers and their families were settled in
a neighborhood along the tracks near East Fourth Street, having been denied
housing elsewhere. Some lived in rail boxcars. When they had to venture out into
the community, they didn't go alone.

"When someone wanted to go to the store, they'd go out in groups," Taylor said.
"If they got a guy by himself, you wouldn't see him no more after that."

They could have been killed, or they just disappeared.

Despite those animosities and dangers, Waterloo's African-American population
became an integral part of the community.

According to research by former University of Northern Iowa visiting professor
Cliff Weston, in 1910 there were only 24 nonwhite residents in Black Hawk
County. By 1915 that number had grown to 395. The population would grow to
nearly 10,000 today, or 14.5 percent of the city's population according to the
2000 census.

According to the State Library of Iowa Data Center, and the Iowa Commission on
the Status of African Americans, Waterloo has the second-highest
African-American population in Iowa, surpassed only by Des Moines. Black Hawk
County has the highest percentage African-American population in the state.

Waterloo led the way

What happened in Waterloo was part of the so-called "Great Migration" of
African-Americans from the South to the North in the early 20th century.
Waterloo was not only part of that migration, but on the leading edge of it,
scholars said.

"Waterloo experienced African-American migration before most of the rest of the
nation," Grout Museum District historian Bob Neymeyer said.

"I think Waterloo's a really great case study of the Great Migration in
general," said John Baskerville, an associate professor of history at the
University of Northern Iowa. "Because many of the motivating factors that
precipitated the migration nationwide happened here in Waterloo.

"Basically, these people were running away from some things, but they're also
being pulled by other things," Baskerville said. "The South was not the best
place to live in the early 1910s at all because of lynching and lack of
political rights and so forth. Agriculture was in decline because of the boll
weevil. Those things were social factors and economic factors that were pushing
them out of the South.

"But also there was a lure in the North," he said. "Businesses and industries
were needing workers."

With the onset of World War I, immigration slowed. The supply of workers slowed
down. Southern blacks provided a ready labor pool.

"But also, as in the case of Waterloo, we see African-Americans being used as
strikebreakers," Baskerville said.

Unskilled and semi-skilled Illinois Central workers walked out with skilled
workers railroad in a show of solidarity. The railroad called in professional
strikebreakers to fill the skilled positions, but still needed unskilled and
semi-skilled workers. The Illinois Central had purchased the Yazoo line in
Mississippi, a small local carrier that employed blacks. Many blacks left for
better economic opportunities in Waterloo having no idea that they would arrive
as strikebreakers.

"When they got here, they entered a very hostile environment," Baskerville said.
"Any time you put someone's economic well being at risk, you're going to get
this violent reaction. Sure, race relations in this area were not great to begin
with, but the very fact they were now competing for these jobs with white
workers with jobs they thought were rightfully theirs caused this very hostile
environment.

"That's one of the reasons they had difficulty finding housing, because of the
racial stereotypes that exist, but (also) just because no one wanted to be
connected with the strikebreakers in Waterloo," Baskerville said. "Everyone was
hostile toward them."

Settling in an unsettled time

But as black workers settled and improved their standard of living they sent for
their families, or started families. The migration was regarded as an invasion
by the indigenous Waterloo population.

"What do we do with this invading force? We have to keep them separated.,"
Baskerville said.

They settled them in what is now know as the "African-American triangle" along
the IC tracks.

"That area was kind of infamous before they even moved there," Baskerville said.
"That was the area they called 'Smokey Row' for a number of reasons. That was
more or less the vice district, where no one else wanted to live." It also
happened to be near the railroad yard where they worked.

Grout historian Neymeyer noted many white Illinois Central strikers left the
area or found other work, including Italians who went to work for the Chicago
Great Western in Oelwein. That left blacks to retain many of the Illinois
Central jobs after the strike. While they were restricted to lower paying jobs,
those positions still offered a better standard of living than their previous
situations in Mississippi.

As neighborhood and families developed, so too did the black community, which
began to stand up for itself.

"One of the things they tried to do was to make that neighborhood their own,"
Baskerville said. "They wanted those elements -- the gambling houses, the liquor
houses and even the prostitution -- to get out of their neighborhoods. They were
pushing the leaders of Waterloo to make changes.

"One of the first things they built were the churches."

Payne African Methodist Episcopal Church and Antioch Baptist Church, among
others, became a forum for blacks to express opinions on community issues.

Ministers like the Rev. I.W. Bess, an AME minister, successfully petitioned city
leaders to lift a whites-only rule at city beaches, and also to get the racially
objectionable D.W. Griffith film "Birth of a Nation" removed from local
theaters. An NAACP chapter organized in the early 1920s

Blacks would struggle long and hard over the balance of the century to attain
local empowerment and a voice in the community. But that community took deep and
lasting root in the area of the railroad.

By the time young Roosevelt Taylor came to live with his grandfather in the
1930s and '40s, Waterloo was still far from the "promised land" railroad
officials had described a generation earlier. But the city offered much greater
opportunity to a new generation of African-Americans, who succeeded in spite of
lingering social restrictions.

"It never bothered me," Taylor said. "I always liked Waterloo. And that's why
I'm still here."

To see more of the Waterloo-Cedar Falls Courier, or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.wcfcourier.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Waterloo-Cedar
Falls Courier, Iowa Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune
Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20110201-OO-HLT-Great-Migration-Railroad-strike-100-years-ago-brought-an-influx
-of-African-Americans-to-Waterloo-0201-20110201

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: OO


                        Copyright 2011 Waterloo Courier


                              857 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                            November 10, 2014 Monday

Highland operation nets 200 illegals

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 442 words


CAMERON HIGHLANDS: A massive operation to flush out illegal immigrants led to
the arrest of nearly 200 of them in the highlands yesterday.

The four-hour operation, which began from noon and conducted by the Immigration
Department, targeted foreigners working in the services sector.

The operation, codenamed Op Gempak Mesra, involved 369 officers nationwide, the
first of its kind carried out by the department.

A total of 581 foreigners were screened, of which 181 failed to produce travel
documents and work permits.

Immigration Department deputy director-general Datuk Sakib Kusmi said the
operation was carried out following reports on the influx of illegal foreign
workers on the highlands, especially in the farming sector.

"Our main focus is on areas mentioned in the reports,.

Sakib said there were some 11,000 registered foreigners in the highlands,
working in numerous sectors, adding that from the number, about 10,500 worked in
the agriculture and farming sectors.

"Op Gempak Mesra is different from other integrated operations. Our officers
wore civilian clothes when we conducted the operation and it has proven to be
more successful. This is only the beginning before we go all out on an
integrated operation involving all government agencies," he said, adding that
the operation yesterday did not cover the agriculture and farming sectors.

Sakib said the integrated operation, requiring more manpower to cover a larger
area, would target the two sectors soon.

Yesterday's Op Gempak Mesra covered Ringlet, Tanah Rata, Brinchang, Kuala Terla
and Kampung Raja.

Sakib said the illegal immigrants detained would be further investigated and
those who did possess travel documents and work permits would be sent to
detention depots nationwide before they were deported to their country.

Meanwhile, the current school session for some 240 pupils of SJK(C) Bertam
Valley will proceed as normal.

The school's Parent-Teacher Associations (PIBG) president Ng Han Seng said the
students had been relocated to the Bertam Valley multipurpose hall.

"The session will continue. If the water recedes and the school has been
certified safe, we will return," he said when met after a gotongroyong at the
school yesterday.

Ng urged the relevant authorities to speed up the distribution of aid to the
school, which was approved when it was hit by similar floods in October last
year.

"Many items were damaged, such as tables, chairs and computers.

"We are waiting for the replacements."

The road to Cameron Highlands via Tapah, which was closed to vehicles since
Saturday night, was reopened yesterday afternoon. However, only light vehicles
are allowed to use the stretch.

( END )

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2014 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
                              All Rights Reserved


                              858 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Times of Zambia (Ndola)

                                 June 16, 2014

Zaca Advises State On Curbing Cheap Imports

BYLINE: James Kunda

LENGTH: 203 words


THE Zambia Consumer Association (ZACA) has urged Government to increase funding
towards the operations of commodity regulators in the 2015 National Budget, to
curb the influx of cheap and substandard imports.

ZACA executive director Samuel Simutunda said in an interview that the
importation of substandard products was a threat to growth in the local
manufacturing industry.

"Government must increase the capacity for agencies like the Zambia Bureau of
Standards and the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission in the 2015
budget to boost their operations.

"This would be one way to control the importation of substandard products such
as electrical appliances and foodstuffs," Mr Simutunda said.

He said the Zambia Revenue Authority should also be empowered to step-up efforts
to secure border posts and regulate the movement of uncensored products.

Meanwhile, Mr Simutunda has asked Government to increase funding to the Ministry
of Agriculture for the enhancement of the Farmer Input Support Programme to
achieve large scale crop production.

He said Government should empower small-scale farmers with equipment and farming
inputs and forester the development of farm blocs so that

the country maximises on productivity.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              859 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                  Morning Star

                               November 15, 2002

Euroflour warns of trade war;

SECTION:  Pg. 2

LENGTH: 209 words


THE president of European flour exporters' group Euroflour warned of risks of a
trade war yesterday after the EU decided to impose grain quotas to try to halt
an influx of Russian and Ukrainian wheat.

The European commission said on Tuesday that it would introduce a wheat import
quota from next year, ruling that Ukraine, Russia and other non-EU states
besides the US could export no more than 2.4 million tonnes to the bloc.

"The commission will have to agree something special for the Russians and
Ukrainians unless they are prepared to have a trade war with them, " Antonio
Costato, president of Euroflour and head of Italy's largest miller GMI.

"We hope that Russian President Vladimir Putin will show once more that he is
capable and in a position to defend the interests of his country and his
farmers, " added Mr Costato.

Russia and Ukraine will try to persuade the EU to reverse plans to apply the
duties on grain imports and may also consider possibilities for retaliatory
action, said Russian Agriculture Minister Alexei Gordeyev.

Mr Costato said that the quotas will sharply raise costs in the Italian
industry, which has turned to Black Sea wheat in preference to costlier EU
origins such as France and Germany.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2003

               Copyright 2002 People's Press Printing Society Ltd


                              860 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                    February 18, 2004 Wednesday Home Edition

Sudanese refugees get help;
CARE team to assist 135,000 in Chad

BYLINE: MARK BIXLER

SOURCE: AJC

SECTION: Atlanta & the World; Pg. 6F

LENGTH: 323 words


A team from CARE, the relief and development organization with U.S. headquarters
in Atlanta, is mobilizing an emergency relief effort to deal with an influx of
refugees in a remote part of Africa.

Roughly 135,000 refugees have fled in recent months from western Sudan to
eastern Chad, a desolate place where food and water are hard to find and rain
will soon turn roads to mud.

The exodus calls attention to escalating fighting in the Darfur region in
western Sudan, even as that country is on the verge of ending a civil war that
has raged since 1983. The conflict mainly has been a struggle for power and
resources between a northern government of Arab Muslims and groups of black
southerners who are Christians and animists.

The war has killed at least 2 million people and displaced about 4.5 million
others, but negotiators from north and south have made progress on a peace deal.
Complicating the picture, however, is the emerging conflict in western Sudan
between the government and opposition groups there.

As that fighting has increased, tens of thousands of people have fled to other
parts of Sudan and across the border into eastern Chad, a Central African
country where malnutrition rates hover around 20 percent, said Rick Perera, a
spokesman for CARE in Atlanta.

"Resources already are very scarce in the region," he said.

Several CARE employees traveled to the area last month in preparation for the
emergency delivery of relief supplies, which could begin this month.

In addition to food and water, the organization plans to deliver mosquito nets
to guard against malaria, Perera said. The supplies will come initially from
CARE stockpiles, though governments and other donors may contribute items later,
he said.

Aid workers want to deliver supplies before the rainy season that begins in two
or three months makes roads impassable.

"It's one of the most remote areas of Africa," Perera said.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The upcoming rainy season in Chad, one of the most remote areas
of Africa, is expected to turn the refugee camp, as well as dry dirt roads, into
a giant mudhole. / NICOLAS PALANQUE / CARE; Photo: The malnutrition rate in
eastern Chad was 20 percent before the influx of refugees, many of them
children. / NICOLAS PALANQUE / CARE; Map: Map pinpoints the locations of Sudan
and Chad in Africa. Inset map shows area of detail. / ROB SMOAK / Staff;
Graphic: SUDAN

* Size: 967,499 square miles (slightly more than one-quarter the size of the
United States)

* Capital: Khartoum

* Population: 38,114,160 (July 2003 estimate)

* Life expectancy: 57.73 years

* Racial/ethnic groups: Black Africans 52 percent, Arab 39 percent, Beja 6
percent, other 3 percent

* Religious groups: Sunni Muslim 70 percent, indigenous beliefs 25 percent,
Christian 5 percent

* Government type: authoritarian regime.

* Head of government: President Lt. Gen. Umar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir

* Economy: Agriculture remains Sudan's most important sector, employing 80
percent of the work force and contributing 43 percent of gross domestic product.
In 1999 Sudan began exporting crude oil, which led to its first trade surplus.

* History: For centuries Sudan has been a crossroads between the traditions of
Africa and the Mediterranean world. Since gaining independence from Britain and
Egypt in 1956, Sudan has suffered civil wars and unrest for all except 10 years
(1972-1982).
Sources: CIA World Factbook, Encyclopaedia Britannica; staff research by ALICE
WERTHEIM; Photo: A tent city housing Sudanese refugees has sprung up in Ouadi
Tine, Chad, in Central Africa. The CARE team will be taking food and water as
well as mosquito netting to guard against malaria. Supplies will come initially
from CARE stockpiles. / NICOLAS PALANQUE / CARE

                Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                              861 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                           August 10, 2011 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Big blow to Goulburn Valley as SPC to retrench 150;
THE ECONOMY

BYLINE: DARREN GRAY SHEPPARTON

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 520 words


THE Goulburn Valley will bear the brunt of about 150 job cuts under an overhaul
of the SPC Ardmona food business that includes the end of manufacturing at its
Mooroopna factory by the middle of next year. The 150 SPC Ardmona employees
affected by the overhaul will be offered "alternative employment opportunities"
at parent company Coca-Cola Amatil, but this could require moving, possibly
interstate. Some staff from the Mooroopna plant are likely to be moved to the
nearby Shepparton plant, while about 13 finance roles now at Mooroopna will be
moved to Sydney.

Some staff will remain at Mooroopna and the site will be used as a warehouse.
The job cuts will not be confined to Mooroopna, with employees from the
company's other two Goulburn Valley plants (at Shepparton and Kyabram), in
Melbourne and elsewhere also able to apply for redundancy. The job losses are
the second major blow to the Goulburn Valley in recent months, after the
announcement by Heinz that it would close its tomato processing plant at
Girgarre in January, for the loss of 146 jobs. In recent years SPC Ardmona has
faced flat domestic sales, a slump in exports, rising production costs and an
influx of cheap, imported processed fruit. SPC managing director Vince Pinneri
said that under current conditions the company could not compete with the cheap
foreign produce now on supermarket shelves. The decision to cut 150 jobs was not
taken lightly, he said. "The one thing that you shouldn't forget is that we are
maintaining manufacturing in the Goulburn Valley and we have made a commitment
to stay here and you will see, in the not too distant future . . . significant
millions of dollars in capital to be invested, both in Shepparton and in
Kyabram," he said, suggesting that the future investment could be close to $100
million. After a meeting where Mooroopna workers were briefed about the job
losses, seasonal worker Dannell Bird said she was not surprised by the cuts. The
40-year-old mother of three has worked at the factory as a seasonal worker for
the past 15 years. "It's not looking good for us to get a job in Shep or
anything at the moment," she said. "It just doesn't look good, because they've
got to find the permanents jobs first." Ms Bird said she had work at the factory
until April next year. "I'm going to start looking for another job, or go back
to school and get some skills," she said. Shepparton mayor Geoff Dobson said the
council would look closely at the "knock-on effect" from the job losses. "We've
got a very big freight and logistics centre here, a big retail area and of
course we've got a big food production and manufacturing area . . . There's no
doubt that all those areas will be affected," he said. Jason Hefford from the
Australian Manufacturing Workers Union said: "It's 150 pay packets that won't be
in the area . . . And taking that money out of the community will have a huge
impact and people will probably have to move away from the area to find
employment." Federal Liberal MP Sharman Stone said the job cuts were a bitter
blow to an area that had already lost many families during the drought.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Staff at the Mooroopna plant were given the news yesterday. The
company has faced flat sales, rising production costs and an influx of imported
fruit.PICTURE: JOE ARMAO CARTOON: Mooroopna

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              862 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       BBC Monitoring Europe - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           January 15, 2015 Thursday

Bulgaria steps up efforts to curb influx of illegal immigrants

LENGTH: 297 words


Text of report in English by Bulgarian news agency website Novinite

Novinite.com Domestic) -Bulgaria will continue building the fence along its
border witn Turkey meant to stem the flow of illegal immigrants, the government
has decided.

The Interior Ministry should draft an engineering project and set a timeline for
its implementation by 30 January, according to an action plan approved by the
cabinet on Wednesday.

The Agriculture Ministry will continue the construction of new roads and the
repair of the existing ones in the forest areas in southeastern Bulgaria along
the border with Turkey to make patrolling by border guards more efficient.

The Defence Ministry will provide all-terrain military vehicles and logistical
support to the Interior Ministry's Border Police units patrolling the border,
Defence Minister Nikolay Nenchev said.

The controversial issue of potential deployment of Military Police units at the
border to assist patrols by Interior Ministry staff hasn't been discussed at the
cabinet meeting, Nenchev added.

Prime Minister Boyko Borisov said in parliament on Wednesday that Bulgaria will
need about BGN 90M to build additional 82 km of fence along the border with
Turkey. To provide the extra funding, he said, the parliament may have to
authorize the government to increase spending under the 2015 budget.

The number of Turkey#sthash.ojUjZWtV.dpuf">illegal immigrants who tried to enter
into Bulgaria more than doubled last year compared to 2013, reaching 38,502,
Interior Minister Veselin Vuchkov said last week.

At the same time, the number of illegal migrants detained by police at
Bulgaria's border with Turkey nearly halved, decreasing to 6,023 in 2014 from
11,524 a year earlier.

Source: Novinite.com website (www.novinite.com) in English 1500 gmt 14 Jan 15

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2015 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              863 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     August 19, 1990, Sunday, City Edition

Russian official accuses Soviets of dumping gold on the market

SECTION: NATIONAL; WORLD DIGEST; Pg. 26A

LENGTH: 480 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW; BEIJING; CASTELNAUDARY, France; TEL AVIV; BELFAST, Northern
Ireland; BONN; AMRITSAR, India; SEOUL, South Korea; NICOSIA, Cyprus; VATICAN
CITY; MILAN, Italy; BUCHAREST, Romania; KNIN, Yugoslavia



The Soviet Union has quietly dumped $ 1-billion worth of gold on the world
market as part of a reckless sell-off of natural resources that violates the
law, the minister of justice of the Russian federation charged in an interview
Saturday. The recent sale amounted to one-third to one-half of the total average
annual Soviet gold sales, said Nikolai V. Fyodorov, 32, one of the team of young
progressives recruited by Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
 Elsewhere . . .
  BEIJING China has drawn up an ambitious plan to raise grain prices for farmers
and consumers, a major reform to boost producers' incomes and output and slash
hefty state subsidies on food, the official newspaper, China Daily, said.
  CASTELNAUDARY, France A fire Saturday destroyed a Dominican monastery founded
in the Pyrenees region by St.  Dominic in 1209, causing an estimated $
1.9-million in damage and leaving little standing but the outer stone walls.
  TEL AVIV Some 3,000 Israelis marched peacefully in Tel Aviv on Saturday,
saying an influx of Soviet Jews has priced them out of the property market and
demanding government action.
  BELFAST, Northern Ireland A bomb placed on a mechanical digger killed a
construction worker Saturday, and the Irish Republican Army reportedly claimed
responsibility.
  BEIJING A Chinese driver employed by the U.S. Embassy was shot to death as he
tried to speed through a police roadblock near the capital, an embassy spokesman
said.
  BONN The Soviet Union will remove all its 363,000 troops from East Germany by
the end of 1991, the West German newspaper, Welt am Sonntag, said.
  AMRITSAR, India Suspected Sikh extremists bombed a theater near Amritsar,
killing two people.
  SEOUL, South Korea About 5,000 Korean Christians were baptized Saturday in a
ceremony officiated by hundreds of Korean and foreign pastors at the 16th
Baptist World Congress.
  NICOSIA, Cyprus An earthquake measuring 5.4 on the Richter scale shook
northeastern Iran Saturday, the Islamic Republic News Agency reported. There
were no reports of casualties.
  VATICAN CITY Pope John Paul II on Saturday appointed the Vatican's first envoy
to Romania in 40 years, the Rev. John Bukovsky.
  MILAN, Italy A judge ordered 18 people Saturday to stand trial over an Italian
wine-doctoring scandal in the mid-1980s that killed at least 19 people and
blinded 10 others, judicial sources said. Nine face murder charges.
  BUCHAREST, Romania Executed Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceausescu's daughter,
Zoe, was released from jail Saturday but still faces accusations she helped
undermine the economy.
  KNIN, Yugoslavia Serbs with shotguns and hunting rifles sealed roads into
southwestern Croatia on Saturday to keep police from interfering with a
referendum Sunday on Serbian autonomy.


LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: DIGEST

                            Times Publishing Company


                              864 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                THE KOREA HERALD

                           January 3, 2007 Wednesday

Korea to discuss U.S. beef next week

BYLINE: Yoo Soh-jung

LENGTH: 381 words


Korea will hold a meeting with the United States next week concerning U.S. beef
import issues, a Seoul Agriculture Ministry official said yesterday.

Kim Chang-seob, chief veterinary officer of the Agriculture Ministry, confirmed
the meeting will be held next week in Korea. "We will hold the meeting next
week, but the exact date has yet to be fixed," the official said in a telephone
interview.

Washington on Dec. 12 proposed holding a consultation meeting on the beef
dispute stemming from Korea's standard of "de-boned" beef, which the U.S.
government has criticized as having been "invented."

The meeting will come right before the sixth round of bilateral free trade
agreement talks scheduled to begin in Seoul on Jan. 15. As a condition for
clinching a successful FTA with the world's largest economy, Washington has
requested that Korea's beef market be fully open to U.S. competition.

Korea was America's third-largest beef market until it banned imports in
December 2003 following confirmation of a case of mad cow disease.

Seoul and Washington agreed in January to resume imports of de-boned skeletal
muscle meat from cattle less than 30 months of age. Seoul believes bones pose
greater risk for mad cow disease.

The United States argues that such conditions go beyond international rules,
which declare some bone in beef cuts to be safe.

But since the first imports arrived in September, Seoul has rejected shipments
three times after detecting bone fragments in some meat slabs.

U.S. officials are expected to discuss Seoul's quarantine and inspection
procedures with Korean Agriculture Ministry officials and quarantine experts.

Farmers of Asia's third-largest economy oppose more competition in fear of
losing their livelihoods as a result of an influx of cheaper, high-quality
American produce and livestock.

Food safety regulations and animal health standards, or sanitary and
phytosanitary regulations, have been one of the bone of contentions in the
Korea-U.S. FTA negotiations. Seoul's "strict" regulations have been cited as
barriers to trade.

Both countries had agreed to hold SPS talks on Dec. 19 and 20, separately from
the fifth round of FTA talks, but the meetings were postponed over failure to
agree on an overall agenda for treating various issues.

(sohjung@heraldm.com)

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2007 The Korea Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              865 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

Nation's cattle herd still shrinking due to drought

BYLINE: Brian Brus

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 640  words


Before Lane Broadbent starts each day in the agriculture markets, he calls the
Oklahoma City National Stockyards for an overview of what to expect of cattle
passing through the nation's largest livestock auction, a small set of test
data, so to speak.

"I've been a broker for 23 years, and this is the first time I can remember that
I've had trouble finding enough feeder cattle for a test," the KIS Futures
analyst said. "I've never seen that happen. The number of feeder cattle is way
down, and for the consumer that's not a good sign; you're more than likely to be
paying more at the meat counter in coming months. "

Broadbent's perspective agrees with what the numbers reveal: The nation's herd
is still shrinking, according to the latest market reports and Oklahoma State
University agriculture economist Darrell Peel. According to the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's statistics service, adult cattle and calves on feed in
preparation for slaughter in the nation's larger feedlots totaled 11 million
head at the beginning of the month, 3 percent less than Oct. 1, 2011.

But the more ominous statistic was found in new placements in feedlots during
September, which totaled only 2 million, down 19 percent from the same period a
year earlier, the USDA reported. That's the lowest total for September since the
agency started tracking the statistic in 1996. Broadbent said he typically
doesn't see that sort of slowdown for another month or two.

"After two years of drought in a row, which hit cattle producers pretty hard, we
still haven't leveled off yet, although I think we're about ready to," Peel
said. "The economics are there to stop liquidating our herd and start
rebuilding. But it won't happen this year. In the absence of drought, we might
start to rebuild a little next year. "

Last year cattlemen in Oklahoma and much of the Southwest had to sell off their
cattle because they couldn't keep up with water and feed demands through the
drought; it was better to move cattle to market than let them die in the fields.
Fortunately, beef demand was high enough to support the influx with good prices.

Many of those same market conditions repeated this year. According to the USDA,
much of the Southwest is still considered to be in drought. The primary
difference between the 2012 and 2011 droughts is that weather last year was
harsher on the central states and this year it was more widespread.

Peel said that even if next year's weather patterns shift and doesn't trigger
another drought, supplies are projected to continue to shrink into 2014. The
alternative is even more dismal.

"Climate center predictions for three months out still show no improvement in
much of the drought area," he said. "For all we know, we're only into the first
two years of a seven- to 10-year drought cycle. We are actually making some
plans and doing some educational programs with the consideration that we really
could be in a multiyear drought cycle.

"Regardless, from the consumer's perspective we're nowhere near the crunch yet,"
Peel said.

Broadbent said experience shows that the herd shrinkage due to sell-offs will
continue until buyers balk at rising prices and individual producers reach a
point at which they can't afford to move their livestock into the pipeline for
slaughter.

"The one thing that's keeping a lid on the feeder cattle market and the market
overall is the cost of grain," he said. "Costs are so high that people are
reluctant to put cattle on feed because the cost to gains are so high. If the
price of corn is too high, you can't afford to buy feeder cattle. If the corn
prices dropped a little, the cattle market would rally again. "

Even when the sell-off levels out, it will still be several more years before
the nation's herd grows back to its pre-drought sizes, he said.

© 2012 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              866 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                          September 20, 2007 Thursday

Hypermarkets can help out

BYLINE: V. Thomas

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 241 words


THE issue of excessive pesticide use in vegetables has surfaced again and the
authorities should not wash their hands of the matter by adopting a flippant
attitude and questioning the sampling methods of researchers.

It is an open secret that pesticide has been used excessively for a long time
and it is now worse due to the influx of foreign workers in the agricultural
sector, who are ignorant of the dangers posed by the insecticides to themselves,
as well as consumers who have no means of knowing how tainted the vegetables
are.

The agriculture and health departments are also finding it difficult to control
the situation as vegetables and fruits are grown in a large number of isolated
and remote farms and can be disposed of in various venues such as pasar malam,
pasar tani, pasar harian, wet markets, mini markets, mobile traders, etc, that
have mushroomed in recent years.

Consumers have generally given up hope of eating untainted greens. They simply
hope for the best, thanks to the indifference of the authorities involved in the
food chain. The only consolation for consumers could be from hypermarkets, which
can set up mini labs to test vegetables purchased in bulk. They can also engage
contract farmers for their supplies.

This is possibly the only way to put an end to tainted vegetables. This
private-sector initiative would be more effective than the on-off response, if
not indifference, of the authorities.

V. THOMAS

Sungai Buloh

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH; MALAY

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2007 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
                              All Rights Reserved


                              867 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                        Warwick Daily News (Queensland)

                             May 16, 2015 Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 225  words

Plenty of fish in the...local dams

FISHERMEN and women will be pleased to know two great fishing spots will soon
have an influx of fish.

The Warwick Fish Stocking Association has been allocated a record amount of
money by Department of Agriculture and Fisheries.

Leslie Dam recceived almost $38,000 through the Stocked Impoundment Permit
Scheme, while Connolly Dam was allocated $2237.

Interested people are also invited to attend the group's AGM tomorrow morning at
the clubhouse on Saddledam Rd, Leslie Dam from 9am.

Take extra care

WARWICK parents are being warned of the risk expanding polymer balls pose to
children.

The Office of Fair Trading issued the warning after an increase in the number of
children requiring medical attention after swallowing the products. Expanding
polymer balls are small bead-like objects that expand when they are immersed in
water. The OFT is asking consumers to report products on sale in Queensland to
safety@justice.qld.gov.au or by calling 13QGOV (137468).

Optus delivers 4G to Ballandean

OPTUS will bring 4G services to Ballandean, delivering faster mobile internet
speeds to clients with compatible devices, while enhancing 3G customer
experience.

"It's an exciting time as we're bringing 4G to Optus customers in Ballandean for
the first time," said Queensland and Northern Territory State Manager, Mark
O'Shea.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WDN


                    Copyright 2015 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              868 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                            January 10, 2014 Friday

Sindh govt plans to make Karachi a global city

LENGTH: 858  words

DATELINE: KARACHI


Chief Minister Sindh Syed Qaim Ali Shah has said that Karachi bears immense
significance for Sindh and Pakistan and his government has planned to mobilise
its resources to implement mega development projects so as to convert it into a
global and most favourable city of the world.



"Better provision of clean drinking water, efficient sewerage & sanitation and
mass transit system are the main areas for investment to change the face of the
city."

He said this while talking to Rachid Benmessoud, Country Director of the World
Bank, who called on him at the CM House here on Thursday.

Qaim Shah said that the Sindh government was trying its best and investing huge
amount for the development of Karachi but since the population of Karachi has
crossed 20 million mark due to influx from all over the country and abroad,
foreign investment was required to achieve the goals.

The chief minister appreciated the contribution and financial assistance being
provided by the World Bank for bringing improvement in education, agriculture
and water sectors. He said that by the World Bank's financial assistance of up
to 400 million dollars in education sector, $450million in agriculture and water
sectors, considerable improvement in the social development of the province
would be achieved. He also appreciated the $66 million grant of the World Bank
for the management sector of Education Department under the global partnership
for education programme, which would probably be implemented in June this year.


Inviting the attention of the World Bank towards the development projects of
Karachi, Qaim Shah said that the Sindh government was spending huge amount to
maintain law and order in Karachi and trying its best to overcome this issue
within shortest possible time.

He said that the federal and the provincial governments were on the same page as
far as the development of any sector was concerned, adding, "Karachi has good
potential for investment which could be availed by the foreign investors to whom
the Sindh government would provide all facilities. Taking keen interest in the
development of Karachi, Country Director World Bank Rachid Benmessaoud said:
"Urbanisation is a long term and most difficult subject and it needs leadership
and coordination among all stake holders to make it success". He, however,
expressed his confidence in the leadership of the chief minister Sindh to change
the face of Karachi and convert it in to a modern, most favourable and
commercially viable city of the world.

WB team meets KMC chief

A World Bank (WB) delegation comprising of six members called on Karachi
Metropolitan Corporation (KMC) Administrator Rauf Akhtar Farooqui in his office
and discussed the ongoing dialogue on transformation of Karachi. The area of the
proposed discussion was related to non-lending technical assistance.

The WB team consisted of Peter Ellis, Ming Zhang, Fatima Shah, Shahnaz Arshad,
Moazzam Ahmed and Khalid Siddiqui. The KMC administrator was assisted by the KMC
Commissioner Samiuddin Siddiqui and senior directors of relevant departments of
the KMC.

Briefing the delegation, Faroouqi reiterated the eminent position of Karachi in
context of the economic and social development of Pakistan. He described that
the metropolis as a fast growing metropolis with a rural-urban migration ratio
of 3.5 percent per annum and emphasised that the city resources were being
depleted fast in meeting the demands of its populace.

He also pointed out that the cardinal issue facing the city managers and
planners is the multiplicity of agencies controlling 70 percent of its vast
resources leaving its premier civic body, the KMC, with as little as 30 percent
of its resources that in turn are expected to provide civic amenities to the
city.

"Owing to these constraints the city planners devised 'Karachi Strategic
Development Plan' with the prime aim to fill the void in these resources and
expenditure. The KMC requires far large resources to provide civic services to
the citizens of the metropolitan".

The leader of the WB delegation briefed the KMC administrator about the ensuing
discussions about this matter and said that the WB has had exhaustive debate
about these urban transformation issues.

The current visit of his team was to explore the possibility of non-lending
technical assistance with a view to provide technical expertise once indigenous
agencies are prepared to launch a civic project on their own, he said.

The WB was looking into areas of development from three angles; planning,
investment and financing investment. He, however, mentioned that necessary
funding could well be arranged by the WB for more specified areas through
pre-feasibility reports. The WB emphatically encourages the financiers to come
forward for helping the development, he added.

Farooqui emphasised the need to bring in projects with shorter gestation periods
so that their efficacy was soon apparent instead of long duration schemes.

The installation of storm water drainage system in the city was amongst his top
priorities followed by urban road transport facility and solid waste management
and other sectors, he claimed.


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              869 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              May 10, 2015 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Your dear organics are owned by a giant firm

BYLINE: Peter Whoriskey

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F02

LENGTH: 572 words


One of the essential questions of the organic movement is, "What foods are
worthy of the USDA 'organic' label?"

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's legal definition of the word is hammered
down in semiannual meetings which involve a federal advisory board and people
working in the organic industry.

But who, exactly, is that?

Increasingly, the answer is large food companies.

The boom in organic food has boosted sales over $32 billion annually and has led
some of the nation's biggest food companies to acquire or invest in smaller
organic outfits. Annie's Homegrown, for instance, was bought by General Mills
last year. Coca-Cola has 10 percent equity in Green Mountain Coffee. Kellogg has
owned Bear Naked since 2007.

People within the industry debate whether the entrance of the big companies
could tarnish the ideals of a movement opposed to conventional foods. Moreover,
some worry that shoppers may be too easily fooled into thinking that some of the
quaintly named organic labels, now owned by a big company, are still managed by
their organic founders.

"Some of these big companies go out of their way to hide their ties to the
organic labels," said Phil Howard, an associate professor at Michigan State
University, who has tracked the changes. "They know that consumers tend to be
skeptical of the corporations, that a person who buys organic is often someone
looking for an alternative to conventional food."

Howard says the influx of money from big food companies has been mixed. "It's
easier than ever to get access to foods," he said, "and the prices have come
down. On the other hand, there is continual pressure to weaken the national
organic standards to increase profits - and the big companies have the clout to
do that."

To be sure, attendees at the semiannual meetings that define organic still
include plenty of small farmers. But the large companies have a presence, too,
and within the industry, the value of the transformation is debated.

Myra Goodman, who with her husband founded the major organic label Earthbound
Farm in 1984, argued in a TED talk last year that the growth has benefited
everyone. She spoke just a few months after it was announced that Earthbound
Farm would be sold to dairy producer WhiteWave Foods for $600 million.

"We don't want organic to be an exclusive club," she told the audience. "The
benefits of organic farming are just too huge."

Noting that only about 4 percent of food sales go to organic products, she said
that "the organic industry is way too small."

"Sadly, less than 1 percent of our farmland is organic - that means about 99
percent is still awash in conventional agricultural chemicals," she said.

Others, however, have warned about the arrival of conventional food companies.
Nature's Path, a family-run label, is one of the largest organic companies to
rebuff investors. Arjan Stephens, the son of the founders and a company vice
president, said the family has been dismayed at times by the acquisition of
organic brands.

"We have witnessed the sale of numerous organic brands to Big Food and have also
seen how many of those brands have struggled to retain their soul," he said.
"While we support the growth of the organic industry, the purchase of many
independent brands has come at a price. . . . [T]he long-term effect often comes
with a diluted product line, a change in company values . . . and decisions
based solely on profits, not people."

peter.whoriskey@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2015 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              870 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                 The State Journal- Register (Springfield, IL)

                            February 8, 2011 Tuesday

Our Opinion: State must learn to communicate

BYLINE: Gatehouse Media, Inc.

SECTION: EDITORIAL

LENGTH: 664 words


Today, as we ponder the probable end of Springfield's role as host city to the
National High School Finals Rodeo, we invoke the spirit of "Cool Hand Luke":
"What we've got here is a failure to communicate."

Two weeks ago, Springfield city and tourism officials learned that the Illinois
Department of Agriculture would not provide funding to host the rodeo at the
Illinois State Fairgrounds in 2012 and 2013. The rodeo, which features the top
high school rodeo participants in the country, has been in Springfield four
times - in 2000, 2001, 2006 and 2007 - and was scheduled to return next year for
Springfield's normal slot in the five-year, three-city rotation.

But despite being a significant tourism draw for the Springfield area, the rodeo
was a money loser for the Department of Agriculture. A big money loser.
According to department spokesman Jeff Squibb, the state lost a total of nearly
$1.4 million on the rodeo in 2006 and 2007. With a budget now 36 percent smaller
than that of 2007, the ag department notified the rodeo that the fairgrounds
would not be able to accommodate the event in 2012.

We won't argue with the numbers. And on Sunday we learned that, should
Springfield lose its host-city status for the rodeo, it would not be the first
site to do so voluntarily. Farmington, N.M., which was scheduled to host the
rodeo in 2014 and 2015, already has backed out. Even in the heart of rodeo
country, the event lost $600,000 to $800,000 each time it was in Farmington.

"It is very expensive," Keith Johns, chief executive of San Juan County, where
Farmington is located, told State Journal-Register reporter Chris Wetterich.
"It's a major event. We just weren't seeing a big influx of money from people
who come to the rodeo."

Our problem, however, is in the suddenness with which this decision was dropped
on local officials. For this community, the rodeo was a significant tourism draw
and, as such, a worthwhile contributor to the local economy. Now representatives
of city government have roughly 30 days to scrape together a plan to keep the
rodeo's return on schedule. Even in the best circumstances, finding advertisers
and corporate sponsors to make up the state's loss would be daunting. Doing so
within a month appears, even to the greatest of optimists, unlikely.

If the rodeo was losing hundreds of thousands of dollars in 2006 and 2007, the
ag department probably should have been sounding an alarm then. Where was the
communication?

Had they been alerted in summer 2007 that the state would not be able to
continue its subsidy of the rodeo, local tourism and government officials might
have been able to craft an alternative plan. Tiny Gillette, Wyo., for example,
sells $100,000 in advertising to Springfield's $20,000, according to Tim Farley,
executive director of the Springfield Convention and Visitors Bureau.

"That should be a winner for Springfield, because it's a city packed full of
businesses. Gillette, Wyo., is absolutely in the middle of nowhere, and they
sell five times as many ads," said Fred Wilcox, president of the rodeo.

Well, maybe or maybe not. It's a different economy out there now than in 2007.
The demographics of Gillette and Springfield may be the biggest contributor to
the advertising disparity.

It's possible that a warning from the state in 2007 would only have led to
confirmation that the numbers won't work for a rodeo event of this scale in
central Illinois - which has been the easternmost location for a sport that is
most popular in the West.

The problem is we just don't know, and there's probably not enough time now to
find the answers. We can't responsibly argue here for a million-dollar gamble
with limited state funds based on the returns thus far. But in the future,
whether discussing railroad plans or rodeos, the state must take greater care in
including local communities in decisions that will affect them. A failure to
communicate should never lead to the negative surprises Springfield has
encountered of late.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 The State Journal- Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              871 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                    Wilkes Barre Times Leader (Pennsylvania)

                            March 15, 2006 Wednesday

Reassessment could spur area Clean and Green boom;
Program allows landowners to qualify for a reduced property tax rate.

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 697 words


An estimated 10,000 Luzerne County property owners with sizable tracts of vacant
land are expected to apply for Clean and Green status in order to get reduced
property taxes in exchange for preserving farmland and forested property.

County officials expect an influx into the program because reassessment will
hike the assessed values of many larger parcels of raw land that don't contain
buildings.

Traditionally, vacant land has enjoyed very low assessments in the county. But
when newly assessed values take effect in 2007, they should more closely mirror
the likely selling price or fair market value of the property.

A plot of vacant land typically assessed at $200   which equates to a market
value of roughly $3,000   might be valued at $15,000 or more today, county
officials warn.

Under Clean and Green, the land's assessed value is not based on what the
property would be worth if someone wanted to buy it for something like a housing
development.

Instead, the value is based on the property's worth as agriculture, woodland,
pasture or open space land. The state Legislature passed the Clean and Green law
to encourage the preservation of raw land.

While there are extensive eligibility rules, three categories of land are
generally eligible for Clean and Green:

Agricultural Use: Land devoted to agriculture during the previous three years.
It must be at least 10 contiguous acres or have an anticipated annual
agricultural production income of at least $2,000. The land may be rented out by
the property owner for agricultural production. The definition of agriculture
goes beyond traditional crops to include beekeeping, the growing of flowers and
the cultivation of grapes.

Agricultural Reserve: At least 10 contiguous acres of non-commercial land that
must be open to the public for outdoor recreation or enjoyment. The owner may
not charge for public access or post "no trespassing" signs. However, the
property owner can "reasonably" limit public access in order to prevent damage
to the property or danger to individuals, such as prohibiting hunting or
firearms. The county assessor's office must OK reasons for limiting public
access.

Forest Reserve: At least 10 contiguous acres of land capable of producing at
least 25 cubic-feet-per-acre of timber per year.

Currently 115 county properties are enrolled in the Clean and Green program  a
total of 8,824 acres, according to the county assessor's office.

All or some of the money saved through the tax break must be repaid if property
owners decide to sell the land for development. That way, property owners can't
enjoy the break and then suddenly sell the land for a housing development.

The reduced Clean and Green assessment applies to local, county and school
taxes.

The normal June 1 deadline to apply has been extended to Oct. 15 because of the
reassessment. Property owners approved this year will start participating in
2007   the year the reassessment takes effect. Once approved, property owners
remain in the program and don't have to reapply annually.

Reassessment officials had planned to help potentially eligible property owners
to decide by including two values when they receive their new assessments   the
straight market-driven one and an estimated Clean and Green value.

County Public Information Officer Kathy Bozinski said the county Board of
Assessment Appeals will decide whether Clean and Green estimates are included.
Appeals board member Andy Shiner said he thinks it would be useful to include
both numbers and knows of no objections to including both.

County Commissioner Todd Vonderheid expects hunting and fishing clubs to sign
up.

"I think most of them don't know the program exists, so we look forward to
making sure people who should be part of the program are aware of it," he said.

County open space advocates have encouraged property owners to explore Clean and
Green rather than selling off land for development.

However, some developers hope more large landowners will sell, freeing up more
land for homes in desirable areas.

Check out your current (pre-reassessment) assessed value at  www.timesleader.com
.

Jennifer Learn-Andes, a Times Leader staff writer, may be reached at 831-7333.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Wilkes Barre Times Leader
                              All Rights Reserved


                              872 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (Nairobi)

                              June 6, 2011 Monday

Poultry Farmers Decry High Input Costs

LENGTH: 283  words

DATELINE: Nairobi


High cost of feeds, rising market taxation rates by local authorities and influx
of brokers are conspiring to kill the poultry sector.

The situation has not been helped either by prevailing shortage of chicks as
well as high cost of incubators.

Escalating fuel prices have also had a negative impact since farmers are
spending more on chick warming and hatchery.

Kenya Poultry Farmers Association (Kepofa) meeting said their fortunes were fast
waning.

"Besides high cost of production, lack of sound technological advancement with
time has seen that farmers have to place an order with chick suppliers and wait
for six months to get deliveries," said chairperson Ms Wairimu Kariuki.

Currently, over 21 million people rely on poultry farming for their livelihood.
It contributes 2.1 per cent of the gross domestic product (GDP) generated from
livestock industry.

They urged the government to speed up enactment of the Poultry Farming Policy
that will target maximisation of productivity and also establish a fully fledged
department to coordinate the sector.

They said the policy that is currently at the Attorney General's office was best
suited to arrest the current poor state of this sector since it will provide
structures that will fight the ever escalating cost of inputs and unavailability
of breeding stock.

"The cost of rearing 10 chicken has risen from Sh800 in 2007 to the current
Sh2,500. Local authorities are imposing stiff taxes that account for 30 per cent
of total value delivered to markets," said Mrs Agnes Murugi, a farmer.

Ms Lydiah Wanjiru a Nairobi based incubator dealer said they are forced to
source from South Africa at exorbitant prices hence transferring the cost to the
end user.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              873 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                           Manila Times (Philippines)

                            December 20, 2010 Monday

Agriculture dept. firm on frozen meat ban

BYLINE: BY JAMES KONSTANTIN GALVEZ

LENGTH: 484 words


The Department of Agriculture (DA) announced over the weekend that it would not
defer the implementation of Administrative Order (AO) 22 which bans the selling
of frozen meat and other meat products in the country, despite reported appeals
by the United States and Canadian governments.

In an interview, Agriculture Secretary Proceso Alcala also said that he has yet
to receive a formal letter from the US and Canadian government requesting for
the deferment of the AO 22.

"An attaché for US and Canada approached me during a chance meeting at the
American Chamber of Commerce conference, they said that their government will
write me a letter requesting for the deferment of the order. But up to now, I
have not yet receive any letter from them," Alcala said.

Alcala, however, clarified that the Agriculture department will not immediately
revoke the implementation of AO 22, saying that they will still have to study
the proposal if it would be beneficial to local pork producers.

"Hindi po dahil malaki silang bansa, basta basta na lang nila tayong didiktahan.
Unfair po ito sa mga local farmers at pork producers [Just because they are big
countries, they can just dictate what we should do. This is unfair to local
farmers and pork producers]," Alcala stressed.

Earlier, DA-Bureau of Animal Industry Director Efren Nuestro told reporters that
the United States and Canadian governments have asked the department to defer
the implementation of AO 22, which outlines rules and regulations in the
handling of frozen and chilled meat and meat products in markets.

"The [AO] took effect December 12. The Canadian and US embassies underscored the
need to prepare frozen meat retailers to establish cold chain systems," Nuestro
said, adding that he already had the copy of the formal letter from the US and
Canadian embassies asking for a deferment in the implementation of AO 22.

The department issued the said order last month after the rise in the influx of
frozen meat and meat products in markets amid reports of unsafe handling.

Meanwhile, the Pork Producers Federation of the Phil. Inc expressed support for
the implementation of the order, saying that the department should not lift the
ban on the selling of frozen meat products, but instead reinforce the
implementation of the order to prevent "unfair competition" between importers
and local pork producers.

They added that the implementation of AO 22 would help local pork producers to
recover their losses brought by the massive sale of frozen meat products in wet
markets.

Earlier, the Meat Importers and Traders Association Inc. (MITA) urged the
department to immediately defer the implementation of the AO 22 pending further
consultations with meat exporters and stakeholders.

MITA said that they were caught off-guard and was puzzled in the timing of the
AO 22, saying that it was hastily issued without prior consultation with the
industry.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2010 News Bites Pty Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                               Global News Bites


                              874 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Press (Christchurch, New Zealand)

                             May 20, 2009 Wednesday

Farming poses threat to Canty groundwater - report;
NITRATE POLLUTION

BYLINE: WILLIAMS David

SECTION: NEWS; NATIONAL; NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 475 words


Contamination of Canterbury groundwater by farming will get worse without better
management, a new report warns.

If farm practices do not change, the report says, some rural families in the
worst- affected areas could be forced to drill deeper wells to find unpolluted
drinking water.

Deep groundwater flows, including aquifers that provide Christchurch's drinking
water, would be unaffected.

The report, released yesterday by Environment Canterbury (ECan), shows nitrate
levels would be boosted in shallow groundwater if more land were converted to
agriculture.

ECan director of investigations and monitoring Ken Taylor said the report was a
warning to the agricultural industry. "They've got to use best practice to avoid
the worst effects of nitrate pollution," he said. "There's no room for
complacency here at all. We have to manage it very carefully."

High nitrate levels, above the national threshold, can poison bottle-fed babies
less than six months old and animals.

Taylor said that if practices did not change, nitrate levels in some areas could
exceed national standards for drinking water. Drinking-water supplies for towns
and cities would be unaffected.

Public concern over the effect of agriculture land use on water quality sparked
the report, which was commissioned by the Canterbury Water Management Strategy
Steering Group. Lincoln Ventures, Landcare Research and ECan prepared the
report.

The report's lead author, Vince Bidwell, said there was a tradeoff between the
economic benefits of agriculture and the effect on the environment.

Shallow groundwater could potentially be most affected because dairying and
cropping could generate high loads of nitrate, he said.

Deep groundwater was relatively well-protected from nitrates because of an
influx of water from the region's big rivers. "We are very fortunate to have
this flushing going on," he said.

Federated Farmers dairy chairman Lachlan McKenzie said farmers did not want to
lose nitrogen from their land because it was too expensive.

"The reality is any human activity - whether you're flushing the toilet, digging
the potato patch or farming cows - leads to more nitrogen losses than if there
was tussock prairie grass there," he said.

Farm practices had changed markedly, and waterways were now in a much better
state.

Ashburton Mayor Bede O'Malley, the strategy steering group chairman, said the
strategy was trying to prevent high nitrate levels. North of Ashburton, a
potential "hot spot" identified in the report, was home to three freezing works
and abattoirs, he said.

"Up until about 10 years ago they just chucked the blood and bone over the
fence," O'Malley said. "Even though those practices have changed, it will take
decades for the nitrate levels to fall considerably."

Public submissions on the strategy's long-term management options for
Canterbury's water close on May 25.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                              875 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                           August 21, 2013 Wednesday

PROBLEMS AT AQUARIUM DRAW HEATED DEFENSE, CONDEMNATION

SECTION: CLEARWATER & NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; READER REACTION: OPINION; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 721 words


The Tampa Bay Times reported Sunday that five times since 2010, federal
inspectors have cited the Clearwater Marine Aquarium for problems that have the
potential to harm marine mammals.

SeaWorld in Orlando didn't have any violations during the same period. Neither
did the Florida Aquarium in Tampa. The Miami Seaquarium had three.

The Georgia Aquarium, a model of sorts for CMA as it is seeking to build a new
$160.5 million facility in downtown Clearwater, had one violation.

Between September 2010 and June this year, U.S. Department of Agriculture
inspectors cited the nonprofit Clearwater aquarium for chipping paint and rust
in the main dolphin pool, salinity levels in the stranding tank that exceeded
standards, storing animals' food in inadequate conditions, and failing to
perform weekly coliform bacteria tests on pool water for three months in 2010.

One inspection in 2012 found no violations.

Some marine mammal experts told the Times the violations were troubling and
could endanger the animals that live at the aquarium, which has seen soaring
attendance since the movie Dolphin Tale was made there. But aquarium CEO David
Yates called the violations minor and easily misunderstood.

Here are some comments posted by readers who saw the story on tampabay.com.

* * *

"The CMA is supposed to be a non-profit animal rescue. I'd like to know how much
of their "influx of movie cash" has actually gone to rescuing more animals - or
taking better care of the ones they have."

HannahH

* * *

"As a non-profit, the CMA's books are open for your inspection. If you are
really interested, go down and ask. They have spent a bunch of money on the
existing facility, nearly doubling its size. They have doubled the animal
capacity for rehab, with new high tech pools for treating stranded animals. They
upgraded the filtration system for all pools - and are in the process of
refinishing existing pools. They also still have a significant amount banked
waiting to see what happens with the new expansion plans. I believe the CEO
drives a Taurus. Yes, I think the money is being used just fine."

DDGator

* * *

"DDGator, since there is no way, none, that dolphins or other cetaceans can be
kept humanely in captivity your ignorance is glaring and your promotion of the
captivity of cetaceans is disgusting, self-serving and purposely uninformed."

Marooned

* * *

"My grandson volunteered at the aquarium. When reading about its shortfalls,
understand the difficulties of working in an outdated facility and how much
young people are affected by what they do. Some of these kids come away wanting
to pursue a career based on what they've learned there. Think of it as an
educational facility and not just a tourist attraction."

Dominick

* * *

"Every cent of the money CMA clears after overhead goes to the care of every
animal rescued and cared for at CMA, that includes everything from the buildings
upkeep to the grade A quality food to the medical and medicinal costs. As far as
staff, there are roughly 70 paid staff and several hundred volunteers, myself
being one. And as far as the quality of care ... I can personally tell you on an
average day, the trainers get there at the break of dawn and stay late, spending
one on one time with each of our resident animals every day and treated as
though they are family members, not animals. All the animals, in every stage of
care at CMA, I doubt could be cared for better anywhere else. So until you
actually know what you are talking about, my suggestion is ... don't talk."

JodieN

* * *

"All the subsidies from city, state, AND federal taxpayers PLUS the windfall
they were given because of Winter, and this 'nonprofit' just keeps making
excuses for this stuff. Pathetic. No more freebies."

* * *

Travelin

"Having been a past member and a long-time fan of the Clearwater Marine Aquarium
I can attest to how old the facility is and difficult to maintain. It is NOT a
state of the art marine aquarium, but rather a facility that rescues, rehabs,
and sometimes gives a permanent home to marine animals that can no longer live
in the wild. What they have done over the years is nothing short of amazing. I
can only imagine what they can do in a state of the art facility! The citizens
of Clearwater definitely need to allow them to thrive and flourish by moving
forward with the new aquarium!"

onlymyopinion

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - JIM DAMASKE - Times (2012): Hope, left, and Winter swim
together as visitors watch them through an underwater window at Clearwater
Marine Aquarium.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2013 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              876 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The Advocate (Burnie)

                            March 22, 2012 Thursday

BRIEFLY State funeral MELBOURN...

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 205 words


BRIEFLY State funeral MELBOURNE _ A state funeral to honour AFL legend Jim
Stynes will be held in Melbourne at 11am on Tuesday. The 45-year-old Irishman
succumbed to cancer on Tuesday at his home.

Kiwi influx WELLINGTON _ New Zealanders continue to flock to Australia, with
departures accelerating to a record 53,000 in the 12 months to last month.

Beef quota dive JAKARTA _ Indonesia will press ahead with the cut in Australian
cattle imports it announced last year after Canberra's snap suspension of live
trade, but the 2012 quota is set to be even tighter than first feared. The
Indonesian agriculture ministry has confirmed a projected quota for the year
ahead of 283,000 head _ a sharp cut compared with pre- suspension levels of more
than 500,000 a year.

Nude man hunt ADELAIDE _ South Australian police are looking for a muscular,
naked man in his mid-30s who they believe indecently assaulted a woman in the
Adelaide suburb of Dover Gardens. Police said a 19-year-old woman was walking in
the Adelaide suburb of Dover Gardens in the early hours of yesterday when she
saw a naked man coming towards her. He passed her, but then ran back, grabbed
her arm and indecently assaulted her before fleeing with his clothes under his
arm.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              877 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK)

                              July 6, 2009 Monday

Course marks new partnership;
A course aimed at training a new wave of students with the skills necessary for
21st century food production and gardening is being launched jointly by the
Dartington Hall Trust and Duchy College at the Dartington estate.

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 420 words


The course is the Dartington Certificate in Sustainable Horticulture, which will
add a fresh influx of students to the Dartington estate and launch a new
partnership between Dartington and Duchy College through "a shared desire to
meet the pressing need to train the sustainable farmers of tomorrow".

Bill Herring, curriculum manager for horticulture at Duchy College, said: "This
new certificate marks the beginning of what we hope will be a series of
educational collaborations between the trust and the college.

"The strength of this partnership lies in combining Duchy College's range of
further education courses in practical rural skills fit for employment with
Dartington's pioneering approach to sustainability and innovation."

The certificate is a one-year course, with the intention of extending to a Level
3 (A-level equivalent) in a second year. It has been designed  for young people
wishing to gain essential skills and knowledge in horticulture, linking into a
future when cheap fossil fuel products and energy will be more scarce. It will
involve a mixture of theory sessions with hands-on  practical application, as
students gain real-life experience working alongside three horticultural
projects on the Dartington estate. These include the nationally renowned
Dartington School Farm LandScope Project, a community- focused market garden
working to organic standards, and the celebrated Schumacher College, which
demonstrates the potential for ecological land management practices, including
forest gardening techniques.

The course will run from Wednesdays to Fridays, so  is expected to attract
interest from both school leavers and mature students, particularly those local
to the Totnes area.

Charlie McConnell, director of sustainability at Dartington, said: "Learning to
grow food in an oil-scarce world is possibly one of the most useful skills any
young person could be learning.

"Similarly, there is an increasing demand for ways to manage heritage gardens
that are less dependent on fossil fuels and promote biodiversity.

"Dartington is proud to be pioneering this new programme, equipping young people
with skills and recognised qualifications for employment in the future job
market."

Anyone interested  is invited to an information morning at Dartington on  July
20, where they can visit and experience the various gardening projects and meet
some of the course staff.

To register for details about the course and the advice session, e-mail
rosewarne.enquiries@duchy.ac.uk or telephone 01209 721321.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 83


                 Copyright 2009 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              878 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK)

                              July 6, 2009 Monday

Course marks new partnership;
A course aimed at training a new wave of students with the skills necessary for
21st century food production and gardening is being launched jointly by the
Dartington Hall Trust and Duchy College at the Dartington estate.

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 420 words


The course is the Dartington Certificate in Sustainable Horticulture, which will
add a fresh influx of students to the Dartington estate and launch a new
partnership between Dartington and Duchy College through "a shared desire to
meet the pressing need to train the sustainable farmers of tomorrow".

Bill Herring, curriculum manager for horticulture at Duchy College, said: "This
new certificate marks the beginning of what we hope will be a series of
educational collaborations between the trust and the college.

"The strength of this partnership lies in combining Duchy College's range of
further education courses in practical rural skills fit for employment with
Dartington's pioneering approach to sustainability and innovation."

The certificate is a one-year course, with the intention of extending to a Level
3 (A-level equivalent) in a second year. It has been designed  for young people
wishing to gain essential skills and knowledge in horticulture, linking into a
future when cheap fossil fuel products and energy will be more scarce. It will
involve a mixture of theory sessions with hands-on  practical application, as
students gain real-life experience working alongside three horticultural
projects on the Dartington estate. These include the nationally renowned
Dartington School Farm LandScope Project, a community- focused market garden
working to organic standards, and the celebrated Schumacher College, which
demonstrates the potential for ecological land management practices, including
forest gardening techniques.

The course will run from Wednesdays to Fridays, so  is expected to attract
interest from both school leavers and mature students, particularly those local
to the Totnes area.

Charlie McConnell, director of sustainability at Dartington, said: "Learning to
grow food in an oil-scarce world is possibly one of the most useful skills any
young person could be learning.

"Similarly, there is an increasing demand for ways to manage heritage gardens
that are less dependent on fossil fuels and promote biodiversity.

"Dartington is proud to be pioneering this new programme, equipping young people
with skills and recognised qualifications for employment in the future job
market."

Anyone interested  is invited to an information morning at Dartington on  July
20, where they can visit and experience the various gardening projects and meet
some of the course staff.

To register for details about the course and the advice session, e-mail
rosewarne.enquiries@duchy.ac.uk or telephone 01209 721321.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 83


                 Copyright 2009 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              879 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                     Belfast News Letter (Northern Ireland)

                          October 22, 1997, Wednesday

FARMING LIFE: NIAPA HOLD TALKS WITH LORD DUBS;
          EXPORT BAN AND SPARD GRANT SCHEME CLAIMS TOP AGENDA

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 306 words


NIAPA officials, lead by chairman Leslie Craig, have had an intensive meeting
with Northern Ireland Minister for Agriculture Lord Dubbs.

The agenda covered the current issue in regard to the SPARD Capital Grant Scheme
Claims and their payment dates, the export ban and HLCA payments.

NIAPA were assured that SPARD claims are being processed as quickly as possible
with a distinction being made as before in regard to applications which had been
lodged in the last two days category, i.e. March 24-25, 1995.

Two-day applications will probably not be paid until at least April 1998

Lord Dubbs explained that this situation was as a result of the influx of
applications on March 24 and 25 and budgetary pressures were now dictating due
payment dates.

In this regard NIAPA, whilst appreciating the Government's position, put it to
the Minister that farmers can ill afford to wait on payment for works on which
they have have already expended considerable financial resources.

On the wider issue of the EU export ban Lord Dubbs reiterated to NIAPA the view
that all haste was being made both in Westminster and in Europe to overcome any
remaining hurdles in regard to lifting the export ban.

In terms of CAP reform NIAPA members made it clear to the Minister they favour
cross compliance

NIAPA went on to put it to the Minister that there is at present ample
opportunity for the new Government to put agriculture within the UK and in
particular in Northern Ireland on a firm footing for the future.

This opportunity is dependant, however, on the export ban being removed and on
firm leadership and decisions being taken by Government and the industry alike

As regards HLCA a further meeting is planned with the Minister next week to
further press the issue in regard to this year's payments rates.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Lord Dubs

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                   Copyright 1997 Century Newspapers Limited


                              880 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                             Sunday Times (London)

                           September 16, 2001, Sunday

'Outsider out' policy is beyond the pale

BYLINE: Mark Keenan

SECTION: Features

LENGTH: 830 words


Small town planners are using desperate and destructive means to keep
inhabitants local

Nobody can deny that Dublin has been growing at a steady rate for the past 40
years. In the last decade particularly, the rate of growth has escalated beyond
a sustainable level.

The capital's sprawl has been such that it has now actually bypassed the
boundaries of its own county and spread into its neighbours. It is a city
bursting at the seams. Public transport is under strain, traffic is gridlocked,
shops and cinemas are full, taxis are scarce, restaurants booked out and prices
have surged. There is little room remaining in Dublin for new homes,
particularly at an affordable rate.

Dublin's growth has occurred largely because Ireland has been moving from a
predominantly agricultural economy to the eclipse of agriculture by other
sectors. Erosion of agriculture's status in a national economy naturally causes
people to move from the country to the city and thus the cities grow.

These days you would be hard pressed to find someone whose parents and
grandparents were all born in the capital. For the most part, Dublin's bulging
middle class suburban estates are packed full of people from all over Ireland,
who met, married and settled in the city. Nobody complained and nobody is
complaining.

But now the boot is on the other foot.

With property prices so high and congestion so severe, families are moving en
masse out of Dublin to seek affordable homes in cleaner and healthier
environments. They are heading for the very towns where for generations, the
one-way journey was to Dublin or abroad.

As a result, rural areas and smaller towns which have been subject to decades of
population decrease find themselves with influxes of new families seeking to
build new homes. The reaction has been encouraging in most places, but not
everywhere.

While it is known that some counties have been wielding planning policies
bordering on protectionism, two incidents have shown that some local authorities
are prepared to throw away all pretences and discriminatory planning is designed
quite plainly to keep outsiders out.

Clare has been pushing an "outsiders out" policy and now Kerry has joined the
rush. At a recent meeting in one Kerry town about plans by private business
interests to expand, questions from a sceptic were reportedly dismissed on the
grounds that he was a recent arrival in the parish.

Some of the noises being made on planning issues by certain local authorities,
particularly in regard to new homes, are approaching nothing short of a
regionalised tin-pot regime.

In an extraordinary and unprecedented move, Wicklow county council last week
requested the details of proposed occupants before making a decision to grant
permission to build a handful of houses.

Long known to be among the toughest and most conservative regional planning
regimes in the country, Wicklow's local authority was labelled "Trotskyite" by
the developer.

Wicklow, like so many other local authorities operating the "outsiders out"
approach, claims it is doing so to prevent the destruction of its landscape and
to ensure that house prices remain affordable for locals. Both aims are worthy,
but the methods are discriminatory and completely at odds with the policies
promoted by government. They may also be unconstitutional.

Many of those who are now priced out of Dublin are "Dubs" whose families have
lived in that city for generations. Many are traumatised at being forced to move
out of their home town. Houses on local authority estates, which have been
privatised in Dublin, are being sold off to the highest bidder. But Dublin
families would not be priced out at all had there not been such a demand for
houses over the past four decades from investors and private buyers from areas
such as Clare, Wicklow and Kerry, counties which have advocated "outsiders out".
Buyers from counties who discriminate against "blow ins" are among those who
continue to pump money into buying houses at all prices in the capital.

What might have happened in the last 40 years if Dubliners, fearful for the
future of their surroundings and for their jobs, had decided to prevent
non-Dubliners settling in their city?

What if Dublin's local authorities had introduced similar planning regulations
stating that only Dubliners would be permitted to live in any new houses
constructed? What if the Pale had been rebuilt and enforced again? Certainly
Dublin families would not now be seeking cheaper homes outside their city. But
rightly, there would have been outrage. There would be accusations of elitism,
discrimination and fascism, pure and simple.

Such desperado planning policies, if they continue unchallenged by government,
will destroy fundamental rights of our citizens; not least the right of an
individual to move from a town in which they can no longer afford to live to an
area where they may still have a chance to buy.


LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Property watch

                    Copyright 2001 Times Newspapers Limited


                              881 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Denver Post

                        April 24, 1994 Sunday 2D EDITION

Save some open space; don't build on every foot

BYLINE: Joanne Ditmer

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. F-05

LENGTH: 862 words


Any report of an influx of new residents to Colorado gets two decidedly
different reactions. People who build or sell housing are very excited. People
who love Colorado as it is and value as irreplaceable the quality of life
enjoyed in the Centennial State get very depressed. The natural resources and
open space that make Colorado special become more endangered with every wave of
newcomers - 61,000 of them last year.

"Wherever they came from looks a lot worse than it does here    and in 10 years
we'll look that bad if we don't start doing a lot more to preserve open space
all across the state," said a glum Jim Crain, director of the City of Boulder's
Open Space program for 15 years. "What you see out there today is the best
you're going to see    It's only going to get worse.

"Another flood in the Midwest, another quake in California, we'll get another
flood of immigrants," he said.

"Everywhere in this country, we go to really nice places,
develop-develop-develop, and when the attractiveness is destroyed, those with
money move on to another desirable place and destroy it.

"Sometime we'll run out of space."

Crain is proud and pleased with what Boulder has accomplished in preserving open
space - and he commends Jefferson and Pitken Counties and the passage of Great
Outdoors Colorado as excellent programs that will benefit us greatly. But he
points out that all these efforts won't equal the hundreds of thousands of acres
of productive agricultural land - which also is part of our cherished open space
inventory - being lost in Colorado each year to development. He grew up in
Arizona, and sees how popularity destroys desirable and fragile landscapes.

"People look at those open lands and don't realize that they are going to
disappear," Crain continued. "Communities need to start thinking about this, and
setting aside land for the future."

"Where are the people with vision? In the past we had Mayor Speer and George
Cranmer, Denver's manager of parks, who with others set aside mountain parks for
Denver and many parks in the city    Today's 'visionaries' talk about growth,
housing and shopping malls."

A Colorado Department of Agriculture statistician said that in 1981 Colorado had
35.5 million acres of privately owned farmland; it dropped to 32.8l million
acres by 1992, a loss of 2.7 million acres of food-producing lands, averaging
245,000 acres lost each year.

The May/June Harrowsmith Country Life gave national figures, equally depressing,
from American Farmland Trust estimates: 33 percent of the nation's farmland is
located within or adjacent to cities, and 56 percent of all agricultural
production occurs on those 320 million acres. They raise 86 percent of all our
country's fruits and vegetables, 45 percent of all meat, poultry and fish, and
80 percent of all dairy cows.

Nationally, the Soil Conservation Service estimates, 27 million acres of
urban-edge farmland were lost from 1978 through 1987 to industrial, commercial
and residential development, with 2 million to 2.5 million acres lost last year.

Boulder began its open space program in 1967 and has spent $ 90 million, from
sales tax revenues, to acquire 24,500 acres. Boulder's first open space
acquisition was in 1898, when the city established Chicago Park; the city's
parks and open space now total 32,000 acres.

Those 32,000 acres have 3 1/2 million visitors annually - triple 15 years ago.
Rocky Mountain National Park, with 230,000 acres, had 3 million visitors last
year, Crain said. That heavy use shows the absolute necessity to set aside open
space while there is still some available.

Recently Boulder Open Space spent $ 10 million to buy 1,000 acres of land near
Superior, and there was much comment over that being an extravagance. But the
city couldn't afford to let that land be developed with more housing, Crain
said. Population has grown from 12,000 in 1946 to 90,000 today, even with a city
"growth management plan."

He cited a Boulder County school district balance sheet on development, which
figures that it costs $ 8,000 per house to build the capital plant - a school;
for 100 houses, that's $ 800,000. The average annual cost to provide school
services is $ 3,192 for each house    and the 1992 average property tax in new
subdivisions is $ 750    a shortfall of over $ 2,400 per residence each year in
school costs. By comparison, maintaining open space is $ 150 an acre, Crain
said.

The county also would have paid $ 18 million to improve roads around the
Superior land, and $ 1 million to upgrade the volunteer fire department to
handle new homes. Those figures make absurd a Mesa County developer's comment
this week that developers are willing to pay a "fair share" of school costs in
each new house, that $ 225 seemed adequate.

"The history of the West is that we mine the environment just like we mined gold
or silver    take the best part and run," Crain mused. "We have to stop this Hit
and Run development approach and start planning for the future, preserving open
space for those who come after us."

Joanne Ditmer's Denver Post column began in 1962 and is published here every
other week

LOAD-DATE: October 04, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: COLUMN

                        Copyright 1994 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              882 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                           December 8, 2011 Thursday

Cabinet panel to solve potato glut crisis

BYLINE: Pramod Panwar

SECTION: RAJKOT

LENGTH: 313 words


<p>

PALANPUR: The state government has formed a committee of four cabinet ministers
to sort out the potato mess in Deesa, where a glut is forcing farmers and cold
storage owners to dump the tuber in river Banas.</p>

<p>

According to BJP president, Banskantha, Dr K S Mogra, finance minister Vajubhai
Vala, panchayat minister Narottam Patel, water supply and irrigation minister
Nitin Patel and agriculture minister Dileep Sanghani will look into the
problem.</p>

<p>

A delegation of farmers had called on principal secretary of agriculture R K
Tripathi, urging the state government to solve the problem of potato glut which
has put the potato growers as well as the storage owners in a critical
situation.</p>

<p>

"Potatoes of other states, particularly from Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, are sold
in Gujarat at very low prices, while we have even this day 20 lakh bags (each
bag containing 50 kg) causing us a loss of Rs 300 crore, which we had borrowed
from banks. Every month we have been paying lakhs of rupees as interest,"
president of the Potato Cold Storage Owners' Association Ganpat Kuchhwah
said.</p>

<p>

On the other hand, secretary of Potato Grower's Assosciation Babu Mali lamented,
"We are not in the position to get back our produce from the storages because
each bag requires Rs 50 as a rent. Thus, for one kg of potato, we have to pay a
rupee to cold storage owner and equal amount for the freight charges, brokerage
and labour charges. Hence, one kg potato costs us more than Rs 4."</p>

<p>

"We have requested the state government to ban immediately on influx of potatoes
from other states and stressed on the need for transporting and selling Gujarati
potatoes to the states like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh where the
tuber's cost is on high, up to 6-7 Rs/kg," Kuchhwah added.</p>

<p>

<meta content="cms.next" name="cmsei" />

</p>

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              883 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 15, 2016 Thursday

FAO opens new subregional office in Lebanon to tackle effects of crises

LENGTH: 665  words

DATELINE: New York



 Rome: Food and Agricalture Organization has issued the following news release:



 Conflicts in Syria, Iraq and Yemen are the prime culprit behind the doubling of
undernourished people in the Near East, FAO Director-General José Graziano da
Silva said today as he visited Beirut, where FAO is opening a new sub-regional
office.





 Lebanon and 14 other countries in the Near East and North Africa region
achieved the Millennium Development Goal of halving hunger rates by 2015, but
food security problems have grown in absolute terms due to civil conflicts in
the region.



 Graziano da Silva praised the people of Lebanon and its government for "their
great commitment and solidarity towards the displaced Syrians, as well as other
refugees."

 He also congratulated newly-elected President Michel Aoun and Saad Hariri, the
prime minister designate.



 The country currently hosts almost 1.5 million refugees, a third of its own
population, and many of them live in rural areas where public infrastructure and
natural resources are both under strain.



 "The degraded food insecurity situation today in the Near East and North Africa
is not only constrained by the food production index or the increased dependency
on imported goods, but it is also linked to conflict, migration and the
increased refugee influx," said Akram Chehayeb, Lebanon's Minister of
Agriculture. Conflicts have a "tremendous effect" far beyond their national
borders, he added.



 To address the challenge, and support countries that are taking in the lion's
share of refugees, FAO is opening its new Sub-Regional Office for the Mashreq
countries. Chehayeb and Graziano da Silva signed the agreement to set up the
facility at an event in Beirut today.



 The expanded office will serve as a technical centre of excellence in support
of food and nutritional security, sustainable agricultural development, as well
as food safety, trade and rural development initiatives in Lebanon, Jordan,
Syria, Iraq and Iran.



 It "comes at a very crucial time as the sub-region is aggravated by
longstanding challenges such as water scarcity, soil degradation, the impacts of
climate change and high unemployment," Graziano da Silva said.



 FAO scales up its presence in Lebanon



 The new sub-regional office "is not the first collaboration between FAO and
Lebanon, and it will not be the last," said Chehayeb.



 FAO is already engaged in Lebanon as part of a broader plan to boost resilience
of regional communities in the face of the Syrian crisis. It has vaccinated the
entire national livestock population against major transboundary animal
diseases, strengthened veterinary surveillance and control systems, distributed
seeds and farm tools to 20,000 people to improve homestead food production, and
helped set up 500 semi-intensive poultry farms to provide food and employment.



 FAO projects to strengthen local capacity and improve water management
practises are key in the long-run effort to tackle climate change, Graziano da
Silva said. "Climate action offers the triple win of tackling extreme poverty,
hunger and climate change at the same time," he added.



 On Tuesday, Lebanon and FAO also signed two new major projects, both funded by
the Government of the Netherlands.



 One is a three-year $8.25 million initiative to support 1,220 farmers in
reclaiming degraded lands and establishing water reservoirs, as well as
assisting them in establishing irrigated fruit orchards. A key element of this
project is to promote agricultural livelihoods and rural jobs, with more than
80,000 days of labour expected to be required for completion.



 Another three-year $5.2 million project is geared to rehabilitating seven
technical agricultural schools to give Lebanese youth and displaced persons an
opportunity to acquire necessary skills to access career opportunities in
farming and related agribusinesses in Lebanon and Syria.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              884 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 15, 2016 Thursday

FAO opens new subregional office in Lebanon to tackle effects of crises

LENGTH: 665  words

DATELINE: New York



 Rome: Food and Agricalture Organization has issued the following news release:



 Conflicts in Syria, Iraq and Yemen are the prime culprit behind the doubling of
undernourished people in the Near East, FAO Director-General José Graziano da
Silva said today as he visited Beirut, where FAO is opening a new sub-regional
office.





 Lebanon and 14 other countries in the Near East and North Africa region
achieved the Millennium Development Goal of halving hunger rates by 2015, but
food security problems have grown in absolute terms due to civil conflicts in
the region.



 Graziano da Silva praised the people of Lebanon and its government for "their
great commitment and solidarity towards the displaced Syrians, as well as other
refugees."

 He also congratulated newly-elected President Michel Aoun and Saad Hariri, the
prime minister designate.



 The country currently hosts almost 1.5 million refugees, a third of its own
population, and many of them live in rural areas where public infrastructure and
natural resources are both under strain.



 "The degraded food insecurity situation today in the Near East and North Africa
is not only constrained by the food production index or the increased dependency
on imported goods, but it is also linked to conflict, migration and the
increased refugee influx," said Akram Chehayeb, Lebanon's Minister of
Agriculture. Conflicts have a "tremendous effect" far beyond their national
borders, he added.



 To address the challenge, and support countries that are taking in the lion's
share of refugees, FAO is opening its new Sub-Regional Office for the Mashreq
countries. Chehayeb and Graziano da Silva signed the agreement to set up the
facility at an event in Beirut today.



 The expanded office will serve as a technical centre of excellence in support
of food and nutritional security, sustainable agricultural development, as well
as food safety, trade and rural development initiatives in Lebanon, Jordan,
Syria, Iraq and Iran.



 It "comes at a very crucial time as the sub-region is aggravated by
longstanding challenges such as water scarcity, soil degradation, the impacts of
climate change and high unemployment," Graziano da Silva said.



 FAO scales up its presence in Lebanon



 The new sub-regional office "is not the first collaboration between FAO and
Lebanon, and it will not be the last," said Chehayeb.



 FAO is already engaged in Lebanon as part of a broader plan to boost resilience
of regional communities in the face of the Syrian crisis. It has vaccinated the
entire national livestock population against major transboundary animal
diseases, strengthened veterinary surveillance and control systems, distributed
seeds and farm tools to 20,000 people to improve homestead food production, and
helped set up 500 semi-intensive poultry farms to provide food and employment.



 FAO projects to strengthen local capacity and improve water management
practises are key in the long-run effort to tackle climate change, Graziano da
Silva said. "Climate action offers the triple win of tackling extreme poverty,
hunger and climate change at the same time," he added.



 On Tuesday, Lebanon and FAO also signed two new major projects, both funded by
the Government of the Netherlands.



 One is a three-year $8.25 million initiative to support 1,220 farmers in
reclaiming degraded lands and establishing water reservoirs, as well as
assisting them in establishing irrigated fruit orchards. A key element of this
project is to promote agricultural livelihoods and rural jobs, with more than
80,000 days of labour expected to be required for completion.



 Another three-year $5.2 million project is geared to rehabilitating seven
technical agricultural schools to give Lebanese youth and displaced persons an
opportunity to acquire necessary skills to access career opportunities in
farming and related agribusinesses in Lebanon and Syria.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              885 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                             April 3, 2014 Thursday

Industrial wastage threat to aquaculture

BYLINE:  Our Staff Reporter

SECTION: Vol. XXVIII No. 35

LENGTH: 438  words


Punjab Governor Ch Muhammad Sarwar said that fish despite being healthy source
of food is facing threat due to indiscriminate throwing of waste in natural
water.

He regretted that there is no water treatment before its influx into water
natural bodies. He was addressing opening session of First International FEEDing
Pakistan Aquaculture Conference held at a local hotel on Wednesday.

Prof Dr Talat Naseer Pasha, UVAS Vice Chancellor, Dr Michael Schwarz, President
of World Aquaculture Society, and R Shahnawaz Janjua, Country Representative,
American Soybean Association& World Initiative for Soy In Human Health also
addressed the conference.

The Punjab Governor expressed pleasure that Feeding Pakistan project has brought
aquaculture technical experts to Pakistan and sent three teams of Pakistani fish
farmers to the United States for technical training. He said the countrymen
would hear the results of fish feeding trials held on working fish farms in
Pakistan. As part of the project, he said a Pakistan feed manufacturer installed
proper equipment to make soy-based floating fish feed.

Aquaculture is the fastest growing sector of Agriculture in the world, he said,
adding that the oceans, rivers, lakes and dams have been and are still the major
sources of fish for inhabitants of the country as well as for export. He
appreciated American Soya Association for addressing the food security of
Pakistan.

Sarwar said the government was pleased to work with the United States Department
of Agriculture and its co-operators like ASA, WISHH, Kansas State University,
SoyPak, and other organisation like FAO, World Aquaculture Society to strengthen
the Institutional Collaborations for the sustainable growth of Aquaculture
Sector of Pakistan. The University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore is
producing under-graduate and postgraduate students for Aquaculture Sector of the
country and conducting problem oriented research in collaboration allied
industry and donor agencies and I am glad to know that UVAS is joining hands
with the organisers for success of this important event, Sarwar said.

Dr Michael Schwarz, President of World Aquaculture Society said through its
commitment to excellence in science, technology, education and information
exchange would contribute to progressive and sustainable development o
aquaculture especially in Pakistan.

Dr Shah Nawaz Janjua said there is lot of potential in Pakistan to promote
aquaculture and even farmers can make their own brands to reap huge benefits.
Janjua said that the local farmers needed proper training and the last session
of the conference would be on Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              886 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                             April 3, 2014 Thursday

Industrial wastage threat to aquaculture

BYLINE:  Our Staff Reporter

SECTION: Vol. XXVIII No. 35

LENGTH: 438  words


Punjab Governor Ch Muhammad Sarwar said that fish despite being healthy source
of food is facing threat due to indiscriminate throwing of waste in natural
water.

He regretted that there is no water treatment before its influx into water
natural bodies. He was addressing opening session of First International FEEDing
Pakistan Aquaculture Conference held at a local hotel on Wednesday.

Prof Dr Talat Naseer Pasha, UVAS Vice Chancellor, Dr Michael Schwarz, President
of World Aquaculture Society, and R Shahnawaz Janjua, Country Representative,
American Soybean Association& World Initiative for Soy In Human Health also
addressed the conference.

The Punjab Governor expressed pleasure that Feeding Pakistan project has brought
aquaculture technical experts to Pakistan and sent three teams of Pakistani fish
farmers to the United States for technical training. He said the countrymen
would hear the results of fish feeding trials held on working fish farms in
Pakistan. As part of the project, he said a Pakistan feed manufacturer installed
proper equipment to make soy-based floating fish feed.

Aquaculture is the fastest growing sector of Agriculture in the world, he said,
adding that the oceans, rivers, lakes and dams have been and are still the major
sources of fish for inhabitants of the country as well as for export. He
appreciated American Soya Association for addressing the food security of
Pakistan.

Sarwar said the government was pleased to work with the United States Department
of Agriculture and its co-operators like ASA, WISHH, Kansas State University,
SoyPak, and other organisation like FAO, World Aquaculture Society to strengthen
the Institutional Collaborations for the sustainable growth of Aquaculture
Sector of Pakistan. The University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore is
producing under-graduate and postgraduate students for Aquaculture Sector of the
country and conducting problem oriented research in collaboration allied
industry and donor agencies and I am glad to know that UVAS is joining hands
with the organisers for success of this important event, Sarwar said.

Dr Michael Schwarz, President of World Aquaculture Society said through its
commitment to excellence in science, technology, education and information
exchange would contribute to progressive and sustainable development o
aquaculture especially in Pakistan.

Dr Shah Nawaz Janjua said there is lot of potential in Pakistan to promote
aquaculture and even farmers can make their own brands to reap huge benefits.
Janjua said that the local farmers needed proper training and the last session
of the conference would be on Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              887 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        Pasadena Star-News (California)

                              June 17, 2011 Friday

Caltech scientist gets $5 million plant grant

BYLINE: From staff reports

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 360 words


PASADENA - Caltech biology professor Elliot Meyerowitz, an expert in plant
genetics and developmental biology, has been awarded a five-year, $5 million
grant for fundamental plant science research.

Meyerowitz received one of 15 such grants made by the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, and Caltech officials said
Thursday that the $75 million represents an unprecedented influx of cash in an
underfunded field.

Meyerowitz, now on leave from Caltech and serving as inaugural director of the
Sainsbury Laboratory at Cambridge University, said this type of funding is "long
overdue, but not surprising."

"Medical researchers and policy makers are becoming increasingly aware that
health and agriculture are critically related," he said in a statement Thursday.

"The World Health Organization estimates that 10 percent of the entire world
disease burden is due to undernutrition," he said. "The United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization estimates 925 million people are undernourished, and
most estimates indicate that more people die of starvation every year,
worldwide, than of cancer."

Plants, he said, are also at the heart of many solutions to energy problems and
the relation of energy use to climate change, because plants absorb carbon
dioxide and emit oxygen.

Meyerowitz, the institute's George W. Beadle Professor of Biology, is an expert
in the study of Arabidopsis thaliana, a small flowering plant in the mustard
family and a model organism for plant genetics and molecular biology studies.

In three decades of research, Caltech officials said his work revealed the
mechanism plants use to create their characteristic patterns of leaves and
flowers; uncovered the first plant hormone receptor; and led to the sequencing
of the Arabidopsis genome.

Announcing the awards, HHMI President Robert Tjian, said their joint program
with the Moore foundation "underscores the importance of investing in
fundamental plant science," and said he hoped other would be encouraged to
pledge funds.

Meyerowitz said he will use the funding to develop a new interface between plant
developmental biology and computational modeling.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2011 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              888 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Brattleboro Reformer (Vermont)

                            January 18, 2016 Monday

Letters: Legalize it?

BYLINE: Brattleboro Reformer

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 312 words


Legalize it?

Editor of the Reformer:

Legalizing recreational marijuana will have an outsize impact on Vermont if 3.2
million non-resident users living conveniently within 200 miles in states where
it remains illegal are added to 80 thousand resident users   five marijuana
users per Vermonter   the RAND Corporation Drug Policy Research Center report
commissioned by our legislators warns us.

State-by-state, legalizing recreational marijuana is creating a national
marijuana industry like the tobacco industry where, at least initially, there
may be a niche market for premium Vermont marijuana. Seizing their opportunity
for riches, marijuana entrepreneurs and their financiers will outbid thrifty,
conventional Vermont farmers to lease or buy agricultural land and buildings for
their very valuable crop that must be grown, processed and sold here to an
influx of marijuana tourists displacing other tourists, especially families.

Dibs on diversifying to individually grow and cooperatively process and
wholesale premium Vermont marijuana and marijuana products would protect and
reward experienced Vermont farmers working so long and hard to preserve our
cherished rural Vermont and their livelihoods. They could employ former
clandestine marijuana growers and processors, who lack necessary knowledge and
experience of professional agriculture, legal and regulatory compliance,
environmental stewardship and ethical marketing.

Like voters elsewhere, Vermonters should decide by Australian ballot whether to
legalize recreational marijuana for residents or for nonresidents and give dibs
on marijuana agriculture to conventional Vermont farmers. There is a precedent:
In 1936, the governor and a majority of legislators endorsed the ridge-line
Green Mountain Parkway, but allowed town-meeting voters to decide whether it
should change Vermont.

Howard Fairman, Putney, Jan. 12

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              889 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        Facts on File World News Digest

                                 August 9, 2007

Fiscal 2008 Appropriations Bills;
House Passes Agriculture, FDA Funds

SECTION: Pg. 509F2

LENGTH: 481 words


The House August 2 passed, 237-18, a $90.7 billion appropriations bill for the
Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The
bill's $18.8 billion in discretionary spending, most of it for the USDA, was
almost $1 billion more than President George W. Bush had requested in his budget
proposal. The House bill would appropriate $1.69 billion for the FDA. [See 2007
Fiscal 2007 Spending Bills: Appropriations Totals; 2006 Fiscal 2007 Spending
Bills: House Approves Agriculture Funds]

The bill included increased in spending on food safety of $38 million for the
USDA and $28 million for the FDA. It also included a provision that would force
the USDA to implement by September 2008 a rule requiring meat to be labeled by
country of origin. Congress had delayed implementation of the rule, which was
included in a 2002 farm policy law but had been resisted by the meatpacking
industry. [See 2007 Legislation: House Passes Five-Year Farm Bill]

It also included a provision seeking to effectively bar the sale of horse meat
by forbidding the FDA from using funds to inspect it. [See 2006 Legislation:
House Bill Prohibits Horse Slaughter]

The bill was the latest to include a measure to ease restrictions on the import
of prescription drugs, which had drawn a veto threat from the Bush
administration. Some U.S. residents had resorted to obtaining prescriptions in
Canada, where they were cheaper, but opponents of permitting the practice said
it would lead to an influx of unsafe counterfeits. [See 2006 Fiscal 2007
Spending Bills: Homeland Security Bill Approved]

The House bill would allocate $39.8 billion to the USDA's Food Stamp program.
The Women, Infants and Children (WIC) nutrition assistance program would receive
$5.6 billion, an increase of $416 million from the year before, due to rising
food costs.

Vote Dispute

 The bill's passage August 2 was marred by a dispute over the vote tally for a
Republican motion to send the bill back to the House Appropriations Committee.
The motion would have required the committee to add an amendment that would bar
illegal immigrants from receiving benefits from programs included in the
legislation. The vote was recorded as 216-212 against the proposal, even though
at the time the gavel was dropped, amid a flurry of vote switches, it had
received 215 votes in favor, to 213 against.

Republican lawmakers demanded that the 215-213 tally stand, and rejected a
proposal to hold the vote anew, walking out of the chamber in protest. Some said
it was part of a pattern of abuses by the Democratic leadership intended to shut
the GOP out of the legislative process. House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D,
Maryland) apologized, saying he believed it was an error rather than intentional
wrongdoing.

The House August 3 unanimously approved the formation of a special select
committee to investigate the incident.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 Facts on File, Inc.


                              890 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                 Sunday Express

                                October 24, 2004

ARE TOWNIES THE COUNTRYSIDE'S ONLY HOPE . . ?; REVIEW

BYLINE: EXCLUSIVE By Marthe Gomer and Michelle Stanistreet

SECTION: U.K. 1st Edition; FEATURES; Pg. , 51

LENGTH: 1355 words


A QUIET revolution is taking place in the countryside and it is transforming the
face of British farming. At a time when much of the traditional agricultural
community is dying out, victim of such repeated crises as BSE and foot and mouth
as well as rampant EU legislation, a new breed of farmer is flourishing.

Increasing numbers of disenchanted city slickers are swapping their flash cars
and expense accounts for wellies and a new life as a country squire.

The political hot potato that is the foxhunting debate has, in recent weeks,
once again portrayed the relationship between town and country as irrevocably
divided. However, a Sunday Express investigation has uncovered startling new
evidence that reveals how a new influx of hotshot executives is, in fact,
throwing a lifeline to a beleaguered farming community in danger of extinction.

Our findings reveal that British agriculture is in a state of unprecedented
decline and that the percentage of the population currently farming - at less
than 1.8 per cent - stands at an all-time low.

The number of farms has fallen in real terms from 530,099 in 1944 to less than
150,000 today.

With national acreage prices at £2,326 for pasture and average farm prices in
the West Country topping £1million, it is not surprising that today's buyers are
so-called "incomers" with a very different agenda to their predecessors.

Where in the past such buyers would have been happy to acquire a farmhouse to
act as a second home with a 20-acre "buffer zone" to separate them from their
neighbours, now they are snapping up all the available land and renting it back
to farmers who cannot afford to buy a farm or pay for its upkeep themselves.

This exodus of secure-income city dwellers has meant that in some parts of the
country, all farms are now being sold to non-farmers.

According to Martin Lamb, director at estate agents FPD Savills in Exeter, this
is good news for existing farming communities: "Over the past 18 months, 100 per
cent of the farms we have sold have been to non-farmers. Their value is not in
agriculture but in the residential element.

"These people are looking for protection of their lifestyle and want the land to
look nice, and as long as it doesn't cost them money in day-to-day terms,
they're happy.

"They are a lifeline to the farming community as they get to use the land, and
it's wonderful conservation for the Government.

The new owners replant woodlands and hedgerows. They repair dilapidated
buildings. They won't have pesticides and insecticides on the land and they
usually farm a few rare-breed animals."

But not everyone is so welcoming of this new breed of country squire.

Ian Johnson, spokesman for the South West National Farmers Union, said:
"Migration to the South-west is the highest in the country. Everyone wants to
come here and live in the countryside.

Inevitably there will be friction.

"We are at a crossroads. Within 18 months the future of farming in the UK will
have been decided.

JOHNSON believes that if farmers can't get a reasonable return for their
efforts, they will stop producing and either diversify or sell up. "And then the
influx of both urbanites and suburbanites becomes unstoppable and it will be
they who choose which kind of farmer they want looking after their land, " he
adds. "They will put a stop to the smells because they don't like them. They
will get rid of the cockerels because of the early morning noise and the church
bells will be silenced."

However, such a grim view of a sanitised countryside is passionately denied by
those who have chosen to embrace farming life. Until 2002, Donald Arlett and his
wife Janet were a high-flying couple, used to a life that involved jetting
around the world. Then they bought a farmhouse set in 50 acres of land
overlooking Dartmoor National Park. Although they have yet to keep animals, they
have painstakingly restored the decrepit outbuildings and are passionate about
the need to preserve the character of the place.

The couple's investments, private pensions and Don's new career as a painter
means that they can easily keep the farm in good repair - something that many
traditional farmers simply do not have the means to do.

"Some of our farming neighbours are incredibly reverential about what they are
custodians of, " said Don, who is in his 60s, "but for others, just getting
through the day is a major achievement and worrying about whether the farmyard
looks a mess is way down on their list of priorities.

"I can understand why so many want to convert old barns into holiday lets, but
we are not interested in converting our old buildings. Once you start doing
that, all the auxiliary things take over - washing machines, car parking, extra
noise.

"All of that affects the aesthetics of the totality. It's the landscape that's
important. The visual aspects of life are more important than anything else."

Jan says: "I hope we are not changing things or having an impact on our
surroundings. Perhaps traditional farming will die out but there is still a
proportion of young people coming into the business who want to farm in a more
specialised way. That is the way forward."

WEALTHY INCOMERS have become the new custodians of the countryside and their
desire for privacy, peace and quiet, and a return to what they perceive were the
halcyon days before mechanisation will inevitably have an impact.

The Fletcher-Neals were the archetypal Dinkies: Double Income - No Kids.
William, 43, was a management consultant for Coopers and Lucinda, 41, was a
director for Barclay's Capital.

They met while at university and later worked in Hong Kong, where the hours were
long and the rewards were great.

"When we were in Britain we had a house and a flat in south London, " said
Lucinda. "We had a housekeeper and life was fairly easy. All we had to do was
the job but I really had a silent song.

I originally came from Cornwall and I wanted to live in the country again.

Will was a complete city boy but I knew he'd love it if he gave it a chance."

Lucinda's hunch was proved right when the couple bought a farm in Devon as an
investment four years ago. The seven-bedroomed farmhouse came with 100 acres,
two cottages and a range of outbuildings with planning consent for conversion to
residential use. While the couple's 160 ewes, six cows, three sows with weaners
and five horses would never provide them with a profitable income, the holiday
lets, capital investment from the farm and the legacy of pensions and
investments from their careers is easily enough to make them self-sufficient.

These days the farm is their permanent home and Will does not miss city life one
bit. In fact, their farm is on the market - for more than £1.5million - and they
are looking to buy a bigger plot of land and build their own farmhouse.

"It wasn't the solitude that was the shock, it was raising animals only to
slaughter them that I found very hard.

I'd kill a pig, Lucinda would fly in for the weekend, eat it and leave.
Fortunately I've adapted to it now. I do the dying and Lucinda gets the
birthing, " said Will. "I don't miss London at all - in fact I hate towns and
cities now. Just going to Exeter is a big deal."

For Lucinda, what started off as an investment has become a new and more
fulfilling way of life. "If you get it wrong, things die, but what started out
as a capital investment has become a wonderful way of life. We are so lucky.

There's no lights, no noise; it's heaven."

The only problem on the horizon is that increasing numbers of the city workers
that are just a distant memory for couples like the Fletcher-Neals will be
following in their wake.

Whatever happens, Martin Lamb is convinced that the demographic makeup of rural
Britain is experiencing a change unlike any that has gone before.

"The curiosity about new rural people is that they all have other jobs and other
incomes, " he said. "It's going to go full circle to the return of the old
landowners and they'll buy 10,000 acres at a time if they can get it."

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2004 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS


                              891 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                                October 20, 2005

RSPB issues plea: Don't assume migrating birds are health threat

BYLINE: Iain Ramage

SECTION: News; Other; Others; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 342 words


The Rspb issued a plea yesterday not to assume that migrating birds are the
source of bird flu, should it reach the Highlands. With huge public attention on
the season's big influx of geese and wild ducks, it said the concern was
understandable but imports of poultry and live pets were a greater threat.

It is working with the British Trust for Ornithology, the Wildfowl and Wetlands
Trust (WWT) and the British Association for Shooting and Conservation to monitor
the situation and respond accordingly.

RSPB spokesman Rob Tomlinson said: "People shouldn't be overly concerned that
migratory birds are the major threat.

"We still think it's a low risk compared with some of the other ways it can be
brought in - imported poultry is one route; the trade in wild birds for the pet
trade is another. We're asking people to get a sense of perspective. It is a
speculative story. Nobody knows a lot of the answers to a lot of the questions
that are being posed. We would urge people to continue to enjoy birds in the
wild across Scotland. It hasn't affected the number of people coming to our
reserves." The National Farmers' Union has urged UK poultry farmers to remain
vigilant. Staff at RSPB reserves across the north are on the lookout for dead
birds which, if found in numbers will be passed on to the Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to have them tested.

WWT is trapping and testing birds for Defra at sites including its reserve in
Dumfries and Galloway. Its own reserves largely contain wildfowl, which are the
key species classified as 'at risk'. The busiest bird migration period is late
September and through October.

Favourite destinations are the RSPB's Islay reserve, Vane Farm in Perthshire,
and Strathbeg in Aberdeenshire which is a winter home for 20% of the world's
population of pink-footed geese.

Defra is paying special attention to the arrival of wild ducks from west from
Siberia and Russia. Anyone spotting a unusually high number of dead birds is
urged to contact Defra on 08549 335 577.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2005

LANGUAGE: English

                  © Copyright 2005 Aberdeen Press and Journal


                              892 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                         The Straits Times (Singapore)

KL target: Exporter of quality farm produce;
Farmers who meet standards for high-quality fruits and vegetables will get a
'Malaysia's Best' seal in a move to make country a net exporter

                           February 2, 2002 Saturday

Reme Ahmad


MALAYSIA is launching a multi-million dollar advertising campaign to promote its
fruits and vegetables worldwide in a bid to be a net exporter of food within
eight years.

In preparation for the 'aggressive' branding campaign, the government has
initiated a new scheme to boost the quality of local produce.

Farmers who meet international standards under the Farm Accreditation Scheme
would receive a seal identifying their produce as being 'Malaysia's Best'.

'This scheme encourages farmers to produce high quality and safe produce that
can be distributed in local and international markets, thus meeting the needs of
consumers and eliminating the influx of produce into the country,' said
Agriculture Minister Datuk Effendi Norwawi.

'This is the first time we are producing Rolls Royces for our mangoes, durians
and starfruits. If we don't do it, we won't survive,' he told a seminar for
farmers on Thursday.

He said the farmers have to upgrade or get left behind when the regional market
is fully liberalised under the Asean Free Trade Area agreement.

Thailand is the biggest competitor for Malaysian produce overseas, with
Vietnamese and Chinese farms growing in stature, he told a news conference
later.

The agriculture sector, long seen as a sunset sector in the industrialising
nation, is targeted as a future engine of economic growth.

The government wants 2010 as the year Malaysia will become a net food exporter.

Food imports are expected to reach a total of RM13 billion (S$6.3 billion) this
year, about four times the RM3.5 billion worth of food imported in 1985.

In contrast, local output from agriculture, livestock, forestry and fisheries
totalled RM17.7 billion in 2000, only a quarter of the RM70 billion output from
the manufacturing industry, Finance Ministry data showed.

Datuk Effendi declined to say how much would be spent in the advertising
campaign, aided by advertising agency Leo Burnett, but added that it would focus
on both Asian and European markets.

Officials say the main markets for Malaysian fruits are Singapore, Brunei,
Hongkong, Europe and the Middle East - the likely primary campaign targets.

The accreditation scheme, which will initially cover five types of fruits, will
be expanded later to cover all farm produce. The Agriculture Ministry is working
with 20 farms to upgrade their produce.

SECTION: EAST & SE ASIA

LENGTH: 394 words

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2002 Singapore Press Holdings Limited


                              893 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                               May 8, 2009 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

In Reprisal, India Probes U.S. Trade Barriers

BYLINE: Rama Lakshmi; Washington Post Foreign Service

SECTION: FOREIGN; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


India has begun a tit-for-tat study on the barriers its exporters face in the
United States, part of an effort to aggressively counter an American
investigation into Indian trade hurdles.

The Indian move came in response to the U.S. International Trade Commission's
recent inquiries into the effects of Indian farm trade barriers on U.S. exports,
initiated by the Senate Finance Committee in January. In February, India's
Commerce Ministry asked exporters to begin reporting instances of hidden
American barriers.

"We are collating information from various industries to prepare a list of
American non-tariff barriers to Indian exports. There are many subtle,
sophisticated ways in which America stalls our exports," Gopal Pillai, India's
commerce secretary, said in a recent interview. "For too long, the developed
countries lectured us on what we are doing wrong on trade. But this is a game
that India can play, too."

Pillai said the ministry's report should be ready by August, ahead of the U.S.
report, which is expected in November.

Meanwhile, two teams of U.S. agriculture and trade officials are scheduled to
visit India this month to discuss barriers to farm exports.

Farm trade is a politically sensitive issue in India. Two-thirds of Indians work
in agriculture, according to the government, but most barely eke out a living.
Indian food policy activists and farmers' unions have called on wealthy nations
such as the United States to repeal their farm subsidies and have agitated
against the influx of food imports that they say harms millions of poor local
farmers.

In Geneva last July, World Trade Organization talks on free trade broke down
when the United States accused India and China of inflexibility on the issue of
opening up markets. Analysts say the ongoing U.S. and Indian efforts to list
barriers is likely to intensify the face-off.

At an International Trade Commission hearing in Washington last month, the U.S.
National Cotton Council testified that India's cotton subsidy program --
including an increase in price supports and a recent export incentive --
represents a major impediment to trade.

Many Indians view such testimonials with indignation.

"The Americans are very cleverly giving the impression to the whole world that
India is a culprit in the global free trade. Everybody knows how America pampers
its rich cotton farmers with subsidies," said Devinder Sharma, a trade policy
activist at the Forum for Biotechnology and Food Security in New Delhi. "India
bends over backwards to accommodate the first world on trade issues. In fact, we
are too easy. You can bring an elephant into India and nobody will even check.
But the U.S. makes us dance for every export."

One story that many Indians cite concerns the mango, called the "king of fruits"
here.

After 17 years of persistent lobbying by New Delhi, the United States reopened
its doors to Indian mangoes in 2007. It had stopped imports because of concerns
about seed weevils and fruit fly infestations but finally agreed to reverse the
ban if the mangoes were subjected to radiation. But the move did little to
lessen tensions.

"First they took a very long time to allow Indian mangoes. Then they insisted
that the mangoes should be irradiated. We spent $2.5 million to set it up,"
Pillai said. "But they don't trust us. They send an American official to India
to inspect the irradiation. And we have to pay the official's airfare and hotel
bill, too. This adds to the price of Indian mangoes in the U.S."

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              894 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           November 9, 2006 Thursday

China's local authorities ordered to protect trademarks of Taiwan farm products

LENGTH: 269 words


Text of report in English by official Chinese news agency Xinhua (New China News
Agency)

Beijing, 9 November: The China State Administration for Industry and Commerce
(CSAIC) issued a circular on Thursday [9 November] ordering its local branches
to strengthen protection of trademarks of farm products originating from Taiwan
in an effort to promote cross-straits cooperation in the agricultural sector.

The circular asked its administrative branches to step up the protection of
Taiwanese applicants' legal rights in trademark registration.

It also told the branches to earnestly pursue their responsibility in market
supervision and protect the intellectual property rights of agricultural
products from Taiwan, especially in the fruit market. Fake trademarks, false
advertising and infringement of registered trademarks will be seriously
punished, it said.

Statistics show that cross-straits trade in agricultural products had totalled
421m US dollars by the end of 2004 and closer ties in the last three years have
spurred an influx of Taiwanese produce into the mainland market.

The mainland has granted market access to 22 categories of Taiwan fruit and
removed tariffs on 15 of them. It has also removed tariffs from 11 categories of
vegetables and eight kinds of aquatic products.

"Mainland consumers have reported a robust demand for quality farm produce from
Taiwan, including its tropical fruit, flowers, seeds and seedlings," said He
Ziyang, an official with the Ministry of Agriculture, at a cross-straits trade
fair held last month in Xiamen.

Source: Xinhua news agency, Beijing, in English 1046 gmt 9 Nov 06

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2006 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              895 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           The Japan Economic Journal

                                 March 19, 1988

Import profits sprout from foreign produce

SECTION: NIPPON; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 452 words


Imports of fresh vegetables, such as mushrooms, broccoli and pumpkins, once
supplied mostly by Japanese growers, have increased rapidly.  Due to the higher
value of the yen, foreign products have become more competitive in the Japanese
market even when transportation and other costs are taken into account.  The
taste and quality of these vegetables, grown from Japanese seeds, are getting
closer to Japanese preferences, and major supermarket chains are carrying more
of them.  "Whereas the prices of domestic products fluctuate with the weather,
imported vegetables offer the advantage of stable production costs and ready
supply, making it easier for us to set our sales strategy," said a local
manager.

According to an official of Daiei Inc., a major Japanese supermarket, prices of
imported Canadian mushrooms dropped to Y130-150 per 100 grams from Y200 two
years ago.  The price of Mexican asparagus is Y198 per 130 grams, down from
Y248.

Vegetables from throughout the world daily fill the quarantine office at the
Tokyo International Airport in Narita awaiting parasite inspections.  "Asparagus
imports are increasing remarkably, mostly from the U.S. and Mexico.  On Mondays
and Wednesdays when the market prices are high we have asparagus everywhere,"
said an official at the Narita branch of the Yokohama Plant Protection Station,
a division of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.

Imported vegetables have generally been limited to those that can keep for
relatively long periods, such as onions, or those that can command high prices
in Japan, such as matsutake mushrooms.  But recently a remarkable variety of
products has become evident.  According to trade statistics, 125,876 tons were
categorized as "others," for outside traditional import categories: onions,
garlic, green onions, lettuce and matsutake mushrooms.  This was a record
figure, a 491-ton increase from the previous year and 3.6 times more than four
years ago.

Popular items are Canadian mushrooms, Taiwanese pea pods (kinusaya), green
soybeans, and broccoli, Chinese garlic shoots, asparagus, New Zealand and
Mexican pumpkins, and asparagus from Australia, New Zealand and the U.S.

These major increases are coming because "they pay off thanks to the strong
yen," said a purchasing manager at Seiyu Foods Co.

Availability during Japan's off-season is another advantage of imported
vegetables.  Pumpkins are a typical example.  "In Japan, the peak pumpkin season
is summer, May to September.  But pumpkins sell best in March, so those from
Southern Hemisphere producers like Australia and New Zealand are indispensable
to our product lineup," said a manager at Ito-Yokado Co.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture, Shoppers delight in peeled imported chestnuts from South
Korea.  The strong yen has resulted in an influx of price-competitive imported
vegetables.

                    Copyright 1988 The Nihon Keizai Shimbun


                              896 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        The Balochistan Times (AsiaNet)

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

3-day 'Book Fair' begins at MNSUA

SECTION: Vol. 39 No. 287

LENGTH: 234  words


A three-day 'Book Fair' of Mohammad Nawaz Sharif University of Agriculture
(MNSUA) began here on Monday.

As many as 150 stalls have been set up by publishers where books on various
topics were put on display. On the first day huge influx of visitors
particularly students from different schools, colleges and universities were
witnessed.

MNSUA Vice Chancellor Prof Dr Professor Asif Ali inaugurated the Book Fair.
Director Mango Research Institute (MRI) Hameedullah was chief guest in the
opening ceremony.

Speaking on the occasion, Vice Chancellor Dr Asif urged the students to pay
immense focus on books reading for knowledge.  He visited different stalls and
appreciated publishers for putting books related to almost all disciplines in
the fair.

There are nearly 150,000 books in the Fair. The books on

Agronomy, Entomology, Soil Sciences, Plant Breeding and Genetics, Horticulture,
Food Sciences, Literature, History, Arts, Sports

have been displayed in the Fair, said Public Relations Officer (PRO) MNSUA
Mohammad Ali Raza. He informed that there was 27 concession on sale of these
books.

Similarly, five deserving students would be given syllabus books free of cost,
on last day of the fair. He observed that the university had invited heads of
schools and colleges, local politicians and many others. He also appreciated
keen interest taken by students and other citizens on first day of the book
fair.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 The Balochistan Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              897 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                             Sowetan (South Africa)

                           October 26, 2011 Wednesday

Sudanese face starvation

SECTION: HUMAN INTEREST

LENGTH: 159 words


THOUSANDS of refugees who have fled from the boiling war in Sudan's Blue Nile
state are facing starvation as aid agencies complain about not being able to
cope with the influx.


  The civil war that started last month has led to 27000 refugees fleeing to the
neighbouring states of South Sudan and Ethiopia.
 The Food and Agriculture Organisation has warned of a looming food crisis in
Blue Nile as a result of erratic rains and food shortages, which could increase
the number of people seeking refuge in Ethiopia
  Aid agencies have also warned that resources are stretched thin as they cope
with a separate refugee crisis in southeast Ethiopia, with tens of thousands
Somalis arriving at the Dolo Ado camp in recent months, fleeing drought and
conflict.
 The United Nations expects the number of new arrivals to swell in the coming
weeks, as fighting continues between Sudanese troops and Sudan People's
Liberation Army-North fighters in the border region.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: Sowetan


                    Copyright 2011 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              898 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 23, 1994

WALDEGRAVE DEFENDS FISHING VOTE DEFEAT

BYLINE: Julie Wolf In Brussels And Michael White

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 524 words


THE Agriculture Secretary, William Waldegrave, was yesterday forced to allow
Spanish fishing vessels into waters off south-west England when EU fisheries
ministers voted through a deal on fishing rights over British objections.

Mr Waldegrave, who abstained, said he had decided not to vote against the
package because of last-minute concessions aimed at ensuring that Spanish
vessels did not use their new fishing rights to exceed quotas.

"We have a result which was not as good as I would have liked, but which was
much better than it looked at the beginning of the week," Mr Waldegrave said.
"There is no Spanish free-for-all . . . it is a package I can defend." He added
that it had been a "very fine judgment" as to whether to vote no or abstain.

Tory Euro-sceptics and the Opposition reacted angrily to the deal. While some
Conservative MPs urged Britain to threaten withdrawal from the common fisheries
policy (CFP) others said ministers should have dug in as the Italians or
Spaniards would have done.

Labour's spokesman, Gavid Strang, who tried to toughen the official negotiating
stance in the Commons last week, called the result "unthinkable" in already
overfished waters where the influx of Spanish vessels could decimate surviving
stock after 1996.

A leading Tory rebel, Bill Cash, said: "The British people are thoroughly sick
and tired of feeble acquiescence. We always get the short straw."

In contrast to Sir Teddy Taylor and other de-whipped Tory MPs who want Whitehall
to start negotiating withdrawal from the CFP, Mr Cash said ministers should
exercise the freedom of action they retain to say No to a single currency. "It
takes two to Euro-tango."

The accord puts an end to Spain's threat to block Sweden, Finland and Austria
from joining the EU on January 1.

The threat to enlargement put Mr Waldegrave and his Spanish counterpart, Luis
Atienza, under pressure to reach a deal during 31 hours of negotiations this
week. EU diplomats said Helmut Kohl, the German Chancellor, whose country holds
the EU presidency, discussed the issue over the telephone with John Major and
Spanish Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez.

Under yesterday's agreement, the Spanish fishing fleet - the biggest in the EU -
will get access to parts of the so-called Irish Box, a fisheries protection zone
of nearly 100,000 square miles round Ireland.

Spain agreed to British demands that its vessels be excluded from two
particularly sensitive portions of the Irish Box - the Irish Sea and the Bristol
Channel. Madrid also agreed that no more than 40 Spanish boats can fish in the
Irish Box at any one time.

However, the Government failed in its bid to also keep Spanish ships out of the
fish-rich western approaches between south-west England and south-west Ireland.

Mr Waldegrave said Spain was in a strong legal position, because the treaty
setting terms for its accession in 1986 to what was then the European Community
promised access to the Irish Box from 1996.

He expressed sympathy for British fishermen, but "they know the strengths of the
Spanish negotiating position legally, like me".

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                              899 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Guardian

                     January 26, 2016 Tuesday 12:28 AM GMT

Want to do good at work? Here's where to find a job in the sustainability
market;
The historic COP21 agreement is poised to create a jump in sustainability
hiring. Here are four areas of the job market expected to grow significantly in
five years

BYLINE: Bruce Watson and Ellen Weinreb

SECTION: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS

LENGTH: 985 words


The COP21 agreement was a historic milestone for climate change action, with a
similarly historic price tag. According to the International Energy Agency,
achieving its goals will cost an estimated $16.5tn by 2030.

By comparison, when US President Barack Obama referenced "the single biggest
investment in clean energy in our history" in his 2016 State of the Union
address, he was referring to a comparatively tiny $90bn investment part of the
2009 Recovery and Reinvestment Act.

But while America's prior efforts can't compare to the scale of COP21, they do
hint at its impact on the sustainability job market. From international policy
and financial services to research and development, the pledge to cut local
carbon emissions will affect a vast range of job sectors - and create a host of
opportunities.

1. Policy

Jobs at this level vary widely. In addition to senators and directors, cabinet
secretaries and Obama himself, the US COP21 delegation included a host of
lawyers, economists, scientists and public relations experts. But the most
represented job title was foreign affairs officer, under the US Department of
State's Bureau of Oceans, Environment and Science (OES).

Aiming to promote US foreign policy goals in areas such as climate change,
renewable energy and resource scarcity, OES officers work nationally and
internationally to negotiate climate policy, form partnerships and develop
programs. The job requires an academic background in public policy, economics,
the environment or energy, as well as several years of work experience or a
master's degree.

As countries work together on COP21's initiatives, international policy
negotiation will become even more crucial. And, as the agreement's effects
ripple around the world, negotiators, policy experts, economists, lawyers and
others will be needed on the national level.

For its part, Obama's $90bn clean energy program quickly created a host of
administrative, bureaucratic and negotiating jobs. Within a year of its
announcement, the Department of Energy hired 200 people just to process the
grants that it disbursed. On the opposite end, states, municipalities, research
labs, companies and universities scurried to hire skilled grant writers,
administrators and lawyers to help them take advantage of the influx of money.

2. Renewables and construction

The sustainability job surge is enhanced by the fact that many vital sectors are
already on the upswing. For example, according to the International Renewable
Energy Agency, 724,000 Americans were working in renewables in 2014 - a 16%
increase over the previous year. Green construction is similarly energized: it
grew by an estimated 15% between 2014 and 2015, with comparable growth predicted
until 2018.

According to the White House, the clean energy program directly created 60,800
new jobs and 72,400 support jobs within its first quarter. By the second quarter
of 2010, the program had "saved or created" between 2.5-3.6m jobs.

Green administrative support jobs aren't far behind. After the clean energy
program passed, the Bureau of Labor Statistics found that professional and
business services accounted for 36.2% of green jobs, including work in finance,
market strategies, operations and business administration.

3. Research

 Several of COP21's initiatives are designed to spur new innovations. For
example, the Low Carbon Technology Partnership Initiative (LCTPI) hopes to
create plans for the large scale development and deployment of low-carbon
technologies. It specifically targets agriculture, forestry, energy,
construction, chemistry, carbon capture and transport.

The partnership estimates that - if taken to scale - its programs could provide
$5-$10tn in business opportunities between today and 2030, directly creating
between 5-10m jobs per year, and indirectly providing another 15-35m jobs.

These jobs would range widely. On the research and development side, LCTPI's
plan to develop new biofuels, insulation materials, low-carbon fuels and
building materials would lead to work for researchers, administrators and grant
writers at research labs and academic programs around the world.

These R&D investments would create new innovations, investments, and startups -
and, not incidentally, jobs for people with backgrounds in investor relations,
finance, operations and market strategies.

Another intiative, the Breakthrough Energy Coalition (BEC), also hopes to
transform the green energy market by focusing on electricity generation and
storage, transportation, industrial use, agriculture and energy system
efficiency. Launched in November by 28 billionaires, including Bill Gates, it
plans to circumvent the current research structure, which it says is too rigid.
Instead, it will provide seed, angel and Series A investments, leading to a
quick influx of investment into R&D followed by a quick move from lab to market.


4. Global development

As part of COP21, developed countries will provide the developing world an
estimated $100bn per year to help them convert to greener energy and adapt to
climate change.  AECOM, a US-based global engineering design firm, is already
positioning itself for this by calling for CVs from climate change experts with
experience in adaptation and mitigation projects.

Given AECOM's previous work with large scale infrastructure projects like the
Southern Africa Trade Hub, the Delhi sewer system and the Adapt Asia-Pacific
program, it's likely that these specialists will work in climate adaptation,
resiliency planning and greenhouse gas mitigation projects for local governments
and other public agencies.

It's almost impossible to imagine the breadth of COP21's potential economic and
employment impact. But, while its scale is potentially world-transforming, its
mechanism will likely be very familiar. Which means that bright days are likely
on the way for people in policy and negotiation, startups and finance and R&D.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              900 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Guardian

                      January 24, 2016 Sunday 9:00 PM GMT

Want to do good at work? Here's where to find a job in the sustainability
market;
The historic COP21 agreement is poised to create a jump in sustainability
hiring. Here are four areas of the job market expected to grow significantly in
five years

BYLINE: Bruce Watson Ellen Weinreb

SECTION: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS

LENGTH: 985 words


The COP21 agreement was a historic milestone for climate change action, with a
similarly historic price tag. According to the International Energy Agency,
achieving its goals will cost an estimated $16.5tn by 2030.

By comparison, when US President Barack Obama referenced "the single biggest
investment in clean energy in our history" in his 2016 State of the Union
address, he was referring to a comparatively tiny $90bn investment part of the
2009 Recovery and Reinvestment Act.

But while America's prior efforts can't compare to the scale of COP21, they do
hint at its impact on the sustainability job market. From international policy
and financial services to research and development, the pledge to cut local
carbon emissions will affect a vast range of job sectors - and create a host of
opportunities.

1. Policy

Jobs at this level vary widely. In addition to senators and directors, cabinet
secretaries and Obama himself, the US COP21 delegation included a host of
lawyers, economists, scientists and public relations experts. But the most
represented job title was foreign affairs officer, under the US Department of
State's Bureau of Oceans, Environment and Science (OES).

Aiming to promote US foreign policy goals in areas such as climate change,
renewable energy and resource scarcity, OES officers work nationally and
internationally to negotiate climate policy, form partnerships and develop
programs. The job requires an academic background in public policy, economics,
the environment or energy, as well as several years of work experience or a
master's degree.

As countries work together on COP21's initiatives, international policy
negotiation will become even more crucial. And, as the agreement's effects
ripple around the world, negotiators, policy experts, economists, lawyers and
others will be needed on the national level.

For its part, Obama's $90bn clean energy program quickly created a host of
administrative, bureaucratic and negotiating jobs. Within a year of its
announcement, the Department of Energy hired 200 people just to process the
grants that it disbursed. On the opposite end, states, municipalities, research
labs, companies and universities scurried to hire skilled grant writers,
administrators and lawyers to help them take advantage of the influx of money.

2. Renewables and construction

The sustainability job surge is enhanced by the fact that many vital sectors are
already on the upswing. For example, according to the International Renewable
Energy Agency, 724,000 Americans were working in renewables in 2014 - a 16%
increase over the previous year. Green construction is similarly energized: it
grew by an estimated 15% between 2014 and 2015, with comparable growth predicted
until 2018.

According to the White House, the clean energy program directly created 60,800
new jobs and 72,400 support jobs within its first quarter. By the second quarter
of 2010, the program had "saved or created" between 2.5-3.6m jobs.

Green administrative support jobs aren't far behind. After the clean energy
program passed, the Bureau of Labor Statistics found that professional and
business services accounted for 36.2% of green jobs, including work in finance,
market strategies, operations and business administration.

3. Research

 Several of COP21's initiatives are designed to spur new innovations. For
example, the Low Carbon Technology Partnership Initiative (LCTPI) hopes to
create plans for the large scale development and deployment of low-carbon
technologies. It specifically targets agriculture, forestry, energy,
construction, chemistry, carbon capture and transport.

The partnership estimates that - if taken to scale - its programs could provide
$5-$10tn in business opportunities between today and 2030, directly creating
between 5-10m jobs per year, and indirectly providing another 15-35m jobs.

These jobs would range widely. On the research and development side, LCTPI's
plan to develop new biofuels, insulation materials, low-carbon fuels and
building materials would lead to work for researchers, administrators and grant
writers at research labs and academic programs around the world.

These R&D investments would create new innovations, investments, and startups -
and, not incidentally, jobs for people with backgrounds in investor relations,
finance, operations and market strategies.

Another intiative, the Breakthrough Energy Coalition (BEC), also hopes to
transform the green energy market by focusing on electricity generation and
storage, transportation, industrial use, agriculture and energy system
efficiency. Launched in November by 28 billionaires, including Bill Gates, it
plans to circumvent the current research structure, which it says is too rigid.
Instead, it will provide seed, angel and Series A investments, leading to a
quick influx of investment into R&D followed by a quick move from lab to market.


4. Global development

As part of COP21, developed countries will provide the developing world an
estimated $100bn per year to help them convert to greener energy and adapt to
climate change.  AECOM, a US-based global engineering design firm, is already
positioning itself for this by calling for CVs from climate change experts with
experience in adaptation and mitigation projects.

Given AECOM's previous work with large scale infrastructure projects like the
Southern Africa Trade Hub, the Delhi sewer system and the Adapt Asia-Pacific
program, it's likely that these specialists will work in climate adaptation,
resiliency planning and greenhouse gas mitigation projects for local governments
and other public agencies.

It's almost impossible to imagine the breadth of COP21's potential economic and
employment impact. But, while its scale is potentially world-transforming, its
mechanism will likely be very familiar. Which means that bright days are likely
on the way for people in policy and negotiation, startups and finance and R&D.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              901 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Pioneer (India)

                           December 24, 2009 Thursday

Ladakh pays the price for tourism

LENGTH: 719  words

DATELINE: India


India, Dec. 24 -- Life in Ladakh is changing rapidly. This rugged mountainous
region, a cold desert slashed by icy winds during long winter months, first
opened to tourism in 1972. Back then only very few tourists came. Over the years
numbers have increased. Today nearly 60,000 foreign and domestic travellers
visit the region every year. In 2008 there was a tourist inflow of 74,334
travellers.

Today approximately 318 guesthouses, 120 hotels, 1,035 cabs and 205 travel
companies are operating in the region. Leh, the capital city, has particularly
seen an upsurge in guesthouses and hotels.

The Sindhu Darshan festival was started with a view to draw tourists at the
tail-end of the season in September after which Ladakh is snow-bound for the
remaining six months of winter. This has drawn tourists in hordes.

What do these changes signify for communities living in Ladakh and for the
fragile ecosystem?

Understandably, it has created several livelihood avenues for local people.
Predominantly an agricultural economy with most people living in villages, till
the late 60's, the influx has had a dramatic impact on economic patterns. Those
involved who were engaged in farming previously began to gravitate towards the
city perceiving better returns from jobs in the bludgeoning tourist industry.
The entire infrastructure is now geared towards catering to tourism which has
opened up work opportunities as guides, porters, pony-men and drivers.

On the flipside, the ugly face of this boom is quite visible. Once clean streets
and mountainous streams are now littered with garbage. Existing facilities and
infrastructure have not been able to keep pace with the surge in tourism. Public
toilets, for instance, are not a priority.

The conventional practice in Ladakh's mountainous terrain, which faces severe
water shortage, is to have dry toilets or 'compost' toilets. The waste is used
as manure. This practice not only conserves resources but also uses low-cost
technology to nourish the soil.

However, the influx of tourists who prefer Western-style toilets has compelled
hotels and guesthouses to cater to their needs them despite knowing that the
region cannot afford wastage of water.

Understandably, nor have the authorities been able to evolve a system which
adequately meets the need of sanitation specifically for managing the toilet
water. The Deputy Director of Jammu & Kashmir Tourism of Leh, Mr Nissar Hussain
said that only a few tourists accept compost toilets. We have to develop
facilities according to them. It is difficult to draw tourists to Ladakhi
traditional houses which has the old sanitation system.

Other changes too are taking place, sometimes innocuously, sometimes blatantly,
which were not something that Ladakhis had to contend with during its
pre-tourism period. Trekkers and tourists brought with the culture of packaged
foods, especially bottled water, which is responsible for mounds of plastic
waste.

Pristine mountain trails are now dotted with plastic bottles, polythene bags,
etc. Laura, a German volunteer, who spent a winter in Ladakh, said, "Only
tourists are responsible for plastic pollution."

Further, taxi drivers, who often in a rush do not drive on the tar road but on
either sides, destroy the pastureland in Ladakh's portion of the Tibetan Plateau
in the Changthang region where the nomadic community depends on livestock.

The more overt signs of change, socially and culturally, are there to observe
and experience specially for the old-timers. The traditional dress - a long robe
neatly tied at the back - has nearly vanished.

Many students are prompted to abandon their studies as they feel that there is
lot of money to be made as tourist guides. Some youths even buy their own taxis
and during the tourist season they earn enough for the whole year.

The influx has also brought in its wake social evils like alcohol and drug
abuse. For youngsters, the things to aspire towards are laptops, camera and
iPods - all symbols of a Western modern lifestyle.

It is time Ladakhis need to be vigilant otherwise all that has sustained its
culture, traditions, its ecological and environmental harmony will be destroyed.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Pioneer. For more information
on news feed please contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 CMYK Printech Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              902 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                  The Dominion Post (Wellington, New Zealand)

                              May 5, 2015 Tuesday

Westpac salutes credit card 'game-changer'

BYLINE: RICHARD MEADOWS

SECTION: BUSINESS; NATIONAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 476 words


WESTPAC'S rapid profit growth has slowed, but the bank is expecting a major
influx of credit card customers to be a "game-changer".

The Australian-owned bank made a $441 million net profit in the six months to
March 31, up 2 per cent on the same period last year.

While that figure is technically a record high, the bank's steady lending growth
was largely offset by an increase in bad debt provision.

Chief executive David McLean said winning the Air New Zealand Airpoints credit
card partnership from BNZ was "a bit of a game-changer in the market".

The bank had already received more than 27,500 applications, 70 per cent of
which had been approved on the spot "with just a few clicks" through a
streamlined online application form.

While the official changeover date has passed, McLean said he expected the
influx of new customers to ramp up even more. "People are only really getting
around to it now," he said. "We think the next few weeks are probably the
critical period where most people will be switching."

Chief product officer Shane Howell said the goal was to secure new customers
across multiple products, with an Airpoints-linked mortgage also on offer.

"This is such a big acquisition opportunity for us to win customers through a
credit card, but make them whole-of-bank customers over a period of time," he
said.

Other banks are also fighting hard for credit card market share, not least the
BNZ itself, which has introduced a new cash-back rewards scheme.

ANZ recently renewed its partnership with Air NZ for a further five years, and
said applications had "accelerated", while Kiwibank had received over 7000
applications.

However, Massey University banking expert David Tripe questioned how valuable
credit card customers were.

"Credit cards don't make a huge impact on bank income levels and bank profits,"
he said. "They're a relatively small part of banks' overall business."

Tripe said the BNZ in particular tended to have a high proportion of customers
whose credit card was their sole relationship with the bank.

"One of the dangers Westpac will face is they'll get those customers as well,"
he said. "[But] it's better than having no relationship - it isn't all bad."

Westpac's mortgage lending growth of 5 per cent was in line with the market,
while a focus on agriculture accounted for half the growth in its business
lending portfolio.

The downward spiral of milk prices means many dairy farmers are entering dire
financial straits, but Tripe said Westpac's interest in the sector was less
concerning than other more heavily exposed lenders.

McLean said the bank only had about 12 per cent market share in agri, which it
wanted to bring in line with its roughly 20 per cent overall banking presence.

"We're doing it with our eyes wide open, and being very careful about the
business we write." Fairfax NZ

--------------------

CAPTION:

David McLean

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                              903 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Concord Times (Freetown)

                                  May 18, 2015

Gov't Takes Leadership of 'Voluntary Guidelines On the Governance of Tenure'

LENGTH: 562 words


The Government of Sierra Leone, through relevant line ministries, has taken
leadership in the implementation of the Voluntary Guidelines on Responsible
Governance of Tenure (VGGT) at country level.

The purpose of the 'Voluntary Guidelines' is to serve as reference and to
provide guidance to improving governance in tenure of land, fisheries and
forests, with the main goal of achieving food security for all and to support
the progressive realization of the right to adequate food in the context of
national food security.

This decision was taken on Tuesday, 12 May during an Inter-Ministerial Committee
meeting that was held at the conference room of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Forestry and Food Security at Youyi building in Freetown. The meeting was meant
to update and discuss the way forward on the implementation of the VGGT project.

The key ministries of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security, Lands, Country
Planning and the Environment, Fisheries and Marine Resources, and Justice
endorsed the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security, Dr. Joseph Sam
Sesay, as Chairman of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for a period of six
months, while the Ministry of Lands, Country Planning and Environment agreed to
host the VGGT secretariat.

Consultant for the VGGT project in Sierra Leone, Dr. Fatmata Kebay-Sesay,
informed the ministerial committee that political will, multi-sectoral approach,
an establishment of a multi-stakeholder platform and sourcing of qualified
internal consultants, among others, were key in the implementation of the
'Voluntary Guidelines' at country level.

Dr. Kebay-Sesay told the committee that Sierra Leone has greater opportunity to
incorporate the 'Voluntary Guidelines' because the country is currently
reviewing its constitution and major policies within the line ministries. She
called on the government to tap the expertise of the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) for technical guidance in reviewing the policies.

The new Committee Chairman, Dr. Sam Sesay, in an interview, stated that the
'Voluntary Guidelines' were very essential in the management of natural
resources. "It is important for government to implement the VGGT in order to
ensure that the natural resources benefit the people," he stressed.

He noted that the country had over the years witnessed an overwhelming influx of
foreign investors, with many acquiring large swathes of land for investment
purposes, resulting to loss of land by people through lease agreements that
might not be beneficial to land owning families.

Dr. Sesay maintained that better policies were to be formulated to address land
issues in order to avoid a situation resulting to landlessness in the country.

Representative of FAO, Dr. Gabriel Rugalema, commended the government ministers
for their active participation and for taking the lead in the implementation of
the 'Voluntary Guidelines', noting that the country stands a better opportunity,
especially now that it is undergoing economic transformation.

Dr. Rugalema implored the ministerial committee and partners to decentralize the
VGGT process because of the complications involved in land management, as that
will greatly help reduce tensions and conflicts over land issues.

The VGGT implementation processes started in Sierra Leone in 2015, but
activities were scaled down due to the Ebola disease outbreak in the country.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              904 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                             March 3, 2012 Saturday

Biotech crops can bring huge cut in expenses

BYLINE:  OUR STAFF REPORTER

SECTION: Vol. XXVI No. 12

LENGTH: 465  words


Experts believe that biotechnology is necessary for developing countries as in
the given international circumstance, it can help in improving standard of
farmers living and to ensure food security that is big future issue for most of
the countries.

During a workshop on "International Perspective about the Future of Biotech
Crops", International Services for the acquisition of Agri-biotech Applications
(ISAAA) experts Dr Mariechel J. Navarro and Rhodora R. Aldemita said that it was
need of the time to teach people about the future technologies and its benefits.

The workshop was organised by Agriculture Journalists Association Lahore to
explain the needs and importance of biotechnology amongst opinion makers. The
members of agriculture journalists association Lahore and Capital's agriculture
journalists attended the event.

Mariechel J. Navarro from Philippines said that many countries were using
biotechnology and every one can see results. She gave the example of Brazil that
used the technology and its growth is highest among the developing countries.
She described the Myths & Realities of Genetically Modified Crops as well and
revealed the facts regarding food ingestion, horizontal gene flow, gene transfer
to human causing disease, gene flow to weeds, cross pollination, effect on non
target organism, loss of biodiversity and safety of water, soil and air.

Mariechel also presented the test case of biotech crops' adoption in her own
country and explained the role of media in the promotion of new technology. She
described the role of Philippine's media regarding biotech crops and revealed
that fact of effective communication as most important tool in capacity
building. To meet the challenges being faced by today's agriculture in
developing countries like Philippine and Pakistan, biotech crops offer a
sustainable solution and there is dire need of commercialising the crops to
counter food insecurity.

ISAAA's biotech expert Rhodora R. Aldemita while explaining the need for biotech
crops said that due to mega influx in human population, use of new technology
has become the need of the hour and only technological development can prevent
the world especially developing countries from food insecurity. While talking
about the application of biotech crops, she mentioned that 29 countries are
currently using biotech crops and getting sustainable growth in their
agriculture sector.

While responding different questions, ISAAA experts explained that biotech crops
can bring huge deduction in the expenses and farmers can achieve healthy
production by using less labour than organic crops. Experts said that farmers
should be the decisive authority to choose best suited option for sustainable
production but should be educated regarding new technologies to decide.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2012 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              905 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Western Daily Press

                                 April 14, 2004

Double burden on casualty unit

SECTION: News; Other; Others; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 144 words


The overstretched casualty unit at Weston-super-Mare General Hospital is now
treating twice as many patients as it was designed for, it emerged yesterday.
Hospital chiefs and local Tory MP candidate John Penrose are campaigning for a
£2million extension to the facility.

Because of the town's growth in population and the annual influx of
holidaymakers staff have found themselves stretched to the limit.

Mark Gritten, chief executive of Weston Area Health Trust, said: "This
department was built for 25,000 to 30,000 patients a year.

"We are now seeing about 50,000 patients a year, which is almost as many as Bath
and the Bristol Royal Infirmary. Their departments are much bigger to cope with
that." Former Conservative Agriculture Minister Tim Yeo spoke visited the
hospital yesterday and said: "The staff are doing a magnificent job."

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2004 1404WESTDP232doubl

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                      Copyright 2004 Bristol United Press


                              906 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                 Hobart Mercury

                           December 19, 1987 Saturday

BYLINE: AAP

LENGTH: 264 words


Victorian dairies may have to pay back subsidy MELBOURNE. - Dairy producers in
rural Victoria may have to pay back $2,000,000, following a Supreme Court ruling
yesterday that a freight subsidy is invalid.

Dairy sources said the total cost of repaying the subsidy and possible damages
sought by city producers could reach $2,000,000.

City producers took court action because of an influx of subsidised regional
milk into the Melbourne market.

The State Minister for Agriculture, Mr Evan Walker, implemented the subsidy in
July after country producer Midland Milk complained it was cheaper to transport
its product to Sydney.

Mr Justice Hampel said yesterday the dispute centred on a written direction by
Mr Walker on June 4 to the Victorian Dairy Industry Authority.

The authority was directed under the Dairy Industry Act to pay an allowance of
0.97 cents a litre from July 1 for the wholesale distribution of market milk
other than UHT and flavoured milk processed outside the central milk district
and sold within Victoria.

Major dairy group Associated Dairies Limited challenged this direction, on the
grounds that it sought to vary the price determination made by the authority in
May, Mr Justice Hampel said.

Associated Dairies argued that Mr Walker's direction was invalid, as the Act
said only the authority could vary its own determination.

Dairy sources said the case would return to the Supreme Court in the New Year
for argument on the issues of repayment of the subsidy to the authority, and
damages for losses allegedly suffered by city producers.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: MER

                   Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              907 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                   The Rural

                          September 24, 2016 Saturday
                                Internet Edition

Young farmers set to meet in Wagga

LENGTH: 313 words


NSW YOUNG Farmers Wagga Branch will host its end of year catch up next Thursday
29 September to wrap up 2016.

Newly appointed Chair Tobie Payne said the aim of the night was for members to
get to know NSW Farmers and understand the benefits of being a member of the
state's peak farming lobby group.

With an influx of new members in the past month reinvigorating the branch, Mr
Payne said the final event of the year would be a great networking opportunity
for young people involved in farming and the agriculture industry.

NSW Farmers' President and Corowa farmer Derek Schoen is locked in as a key
speaker for the night and members will have the chance to speak with their
Regional Services Manager, Simone Norrie along with Mr Payne and Vice Chair
Laura Bruce.

"NSW Young Farmers is for those aged 18 to 35 and it's important we all come
together and have our voices heard on issues both locally and at a state level,"
Mr Payne said.

"The work NSW Farmers is doing for the industry is so important and its crucial
young people get involved and show their support for the farmer's lobby group."

Mr Payne hails from Parkes in the Central West and is currently in his third
year of a Bachelor of Agricultural Science at CSU.

"Anyone who is a young professional working in agriculture or a university
student looking to enter the field should be a member - not only are you
directly supporting farming and the industry, it's the best platform to have
your say on issues that are impacting your future.

"Memberships start from just $50 at this time of the year so it's a great time
to get involved," Mr Payne said.

The event will be held at the Mantra Pavilion Wagga from 6pm on Thursday 29
September. Free entry, dinner and drinks for NSW Farmers' members. There will be
a $25 charge for non-members and a cash bar available. Non-members can join on
the night for the October rate of $50.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              908 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                Southern Weekly

                          September 24, 2016 Saturday
                                Internet Edition

Young farmers set to meet in Wagga

LENGTH: 313 words


NSW YOUNG Farmers Wagga Branch will host its end of year catch up next Thursday
29 September to wrap up 2016.

Newly appointed Chair Tobie Payne said the aim of the night was for members to
get to know NSW Farmers and understand the benefits of being a member of the
state's peak farming lobby group.

With an influx of new members in the past month reinvigorating the branch, Mr
Payne said the final event of the year would be a great networking opportunity
for young people involved in farming and the agriculture industry.

NSW Farmers' President and Corowa farmer Derek Schoen is locked in as a key
speaker for the night and members will have the chance to speak with their
Regional Services Manager, Simone Norrie along with Mr Payne and Vice Chair
Laura Bruce.

"NSW Young Farmers is for those aged 18 to 35 and it's important we all come
together and have our voices heard on issues both locally and at a state level,"
Mr Payne said.

"The work NSW Farmers is doing for the industry is so important and its crucial
young people get involved and show their support for the farmer's lobby group."

Mr Payne hails from Parkes in the Central West and is currently in his third
year of a Bachelor of Agricultural Science at CSU.

"Anyone who is a young professional working in agriculture or a university
student looking to enter the field should be a member - not only are you
directly supporting farming and the industry, it's the best platform to have
your say on issues that are impacting your future.

"Memberships start from just $50 at this time of the year so it's a great time
to get involved," Mr Payne said.

The event will be held at the Mantra Pavilion Wagga from 6pm on Thursday 29
September. Free entry, dinner and drinks for NSW Farmers' members. There will be
a $25 charge for non-members and a cash bar available. Non-members can join on
the night for the October rate of $50.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              909 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                           February 25, 1997 Tuesday
                                  Late Edition

Wanted: partners in new 'paradise';
* DEVELOPMENT

BYLINE: IAN VERRENDER

SECTION: BUSINESS; International News; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 440 words


A century after 120 Australians embarked on an idealistic journey to create
their own Utopia in South America, the Paraguayan Government - which now shows a
town called New Australia on its maps - is seeking an Australian influx of a
vastly different

nature.

Rather than a socialist invasion, this small republic is inviting Australian
investment to help it play its part in what may be the next economic miracle.

Paraguay is part of the Mercosur free trade region established with Brazil,
Argentina and Uruguay which has brought new prosperity to the region and
encouraged other countries to begin negotiations on joining.

Paraguay's new Consul General in Sydney, Mr Amado Martinez-Rojas, says Mercosur
has stimulated economic growth in the region and given investors access to 200
million consumers.

He says Paraguay, still largely reliant on cattle-raising and agriculture, is
keen for foreign investment in the telecommunications industry - which is up for
privatisation - and a range of infrastructure projects.

"We need Australian investment to help develop our agriculture, forestry,
communications, electric power, textiles, tourism and education," he says.

In addition to the lowest wage rates in the region of $US250 ($322) a month, Mr
Martinez-Rojas says the Paraguayan Government is offering a package of
attractive tax breaks, free currency exchange, free movement of capital and
freedom from import and

export duties in its bid to attract foreign capital to its rapidly growing
economy.

Paraguay's drive towards a free market has coincided with the resumption of
democracy and the first civilian elected leader, Mr Juan Carlos Wasmosy, for
many decades.

In the late 1800s, Paraguay led the South American continent with a thriving
industrial base and an efficient rail system.

It also developed one of the most powerful armies on the continent which it
pitted against the combined forces of Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil with
devastating consequences.

In the 1930s, the country again threw itself into an extended conflict with
Bolivia that left it in ruins. Its decline was exacerbated by the decades-long
dictatorship of Mr Alfredo Stroessner.

In recent years, however, the shift to democracy coupled with huge
infrastructure programs such as the Itaipu dam - the biggest in the world - have
seen a turnaround in Paraguay's fortunes. The dam has given the country
unprecedented access to cheap power. Meanwhile, Paraguay has joined forces with
its former enemies in a series of major investment programs to improve
transport. One such program is Hydrovia, which aims to make almost 3,500 km of
waterways navigable between Bolivia and Uruguay.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1997 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              910 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       The Sun Herald (Sydney, Australia)

                            December 8, 1991 Sunday
                                 Early Edition

STERILE FRUIT FLIES AND KIND-HEARTED WASPS

SECTION: REAL AUSTRALIA; Pg. 92

LENGTH: 335 words


NSW Agriculture's Horticultural Postharvest Laboratory at Gosford is the first
link in a chain that will see a weekly release of three million sterile
Queensland fruit flies.

Research horticulturist, Andrew Jessup, said sterile flies would be released
from 25 sites around Cowra each week for the duration of the district's fruit
fly season, and at Irymple in north east Victoria and Adelaide to eradicate
seasonal outbreaks.

The experiment is aimed at replacing regular insecticide spraying to control
Queensland fruit fly in urban areas of fruit-growing districts.

Mr Jessup has a colony of more than 500,000 Queensland fruit flies from which
between two and three million pupa (insect larva) per week will be produced.

Dyed pupa are sterilised by gamma radiation at Lucas Heights near Sydney then
air freighted to Cowra and stored in temperature-controlled plastic bins

At Cowra, sterile and wild flies will be monitored at 50 trapping stations to
estimate the dispersion of the sterile flies and their ratio to wild flies

The project is funded by the Victorian, South Australian and NSW agricultural
departments and the Horticultural Research Development Group.

MEANWHILE, the drought is forcing waves of wasps into urban areas for food and
moisture and their sudden appearance is causing many residents concern.

Enquiries Officer at NSW Agriculture's Resource Centre at Maitland, Bob Swan,
said residents should not be afraid of this influx of insects because
ecologically they are quite harmless and will not attack unless provoked.

"In fact the wasps do good by controlling insect populations and pollinating
flowers."

People who are allergic to bee and wasp stings can use any garden insecticide to
get rid of unwanted wasps.

Wasps paralyse their prey and seal them in their nests as food source for their
emerging young.

Mr Swan emphasised that although people might feel uneasy with the increased
numbers of wasps they are really doing the householder a favour in controlling
spider and other insect populations.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1991 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              911 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 23, 2014 Thursday

Hawaii: Pacific Nations Agree To Tuna Fishery Pact To Protect Local Industries

LENGTH: 637  words

DATELINE: Honolulu


Pacific Islands Development, The State of Hawaii has issued the following news
release:

Pacific Island nations will take more control over the southern albacore tuna
fishery after reaching a historic agreement on joint harvest control measures.

In the past 10 years, an influx of new boats to the albacore fishery, including
large numbers of heavily-subsidised Chinese vessels, have depleted fish stocks
and driven many Pacific-island tuna businesses to the wall.

Officials from the Pacific Forum Fishery Agency (FFA) countries, meeting in
Solomon Islands, have agreed on the text for a framework for managing the
fishery, known as the Tokelau Arrangement for the Management of the South
Pacific Longline Fishery.

The meeting's chair and Samoa's ministry of agriculture and fisheries assistant
chief executive, Joyce Samuelu Ah Leong, said catch limits will be set.

The agreement takes in millions of square kilometres of ocean stretching across
the Pacific from the Cook Islands in the east to Solomon Islands in the west.

"It is quite a huge step for us," Ms Ah Leong said.

"There is sacrifice by Pacific island countries to limit themselves to such
limits.

"We have understood that if we do not fish below the maximum sustainable yield
we will continue to see the decline (in fish stocks) and the most vulnerable
will be our own domestic fleets."

Most fishing is done by powerful distant water fishing nations (DWFNs) such as
China, Japan and South Korea, under licence from the Pacific nations.

Members of the Forum Fisheries Agency have put the DWFNs on notice.

"We will simply say, 'Well, we have this amount for this year as soon as that
limit is reached then fishing needs to stop'," Ms Ah Leong said.

Power imbalance in fishing deals

In the past cash-strapped Pacific countries have found it hard to say no to
lucrative fishing licence deals.

In a straight-talking address at the beginning of the meeting Forum Fisheries
director general James Movich told delegates they have bargaining chips.

"You have the advantage of owning the home ground - you control the majority of
the area where long-line fishing occurs," he said.

"And you have the advantage of a proven capacity and tradition to cooperate.

"Small countries, fast on their feet, working together as a team, can achieve
tuna management outcomes that are difficult for large nations, desperate to
maintain their individual market share."

The urgency of problems in the southern albacore fishery has forced Pacific
nations to act quickly but it did not leave time to ensure the Tokelau
Arrangement would be binding on all parties.

"Ideally it would have been," Ms Ah Leong said.

Mr Movick said even though the arrangement is not binding "it is very important
that we each have a clear understanding that the decisions that will be taken by
the participants must be adhered to".

The Tokelau Arrangement comes into effect as it is signed by the parties.

Potential parties within the FFA include Australia, New Zealand, Cook Islands,
Fiji, Niue, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

Non-FFA Pacific territories such as New Caledonia, French Polynesia, Wallis and
Futuna and American Samoa are also considering becoming parties to the Tokelau
Arrangement.

The Tokelau Arrangement will only apply in the 200-mile exclusive economic zones
of its parties.

To address issues in international waters the officials at the Honiara meeting
approved a new conservation and management measure (CMM) for southern albacore
tuna that they plan put to the December meeting of the Western and Central
Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC).

The WCPFC brings the distant water fishing nations together with the Pacific
nations to decide on fisheries management issues.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              912 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            January 24, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Board says crows need to go

BYLINE: By Holly Hewitt - CHAUTAUQUA CORRESPONDENT

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 233 words

DATELINE: FREDONIA


Wanted: determined scarecrow.

Apply: Fredonia Village Board.

During a workshop meeting of the Fredonia Village Board on Monday night, Deputy
Mayor Susan Westling wasn't exactly crowing about a village population boom --
an unwanted influx of crows.

Westling said she hopes to scare the birds away and plans to determine if the
community qualifies for the state Department of Agriculture's Bird Frightening
Program -- a method of chasing away the unwanted guests using a variety of
means, including loud noises.

Westling said the crow infestation isn't just limited to the village. It affects
communities throughout the state.

Trustees took no action on the issue.

The board also:

* Discussed whether the village should extend water service to areas outside the
village in the future. The board plans to revisit the issue at future meetings.

* Village officials learned a new business, Express Pets, is being established
in Plaza 59 on Route 60.

* Officials announced Monday was the last day for resumes to be submitted for
the village administrator post, currently held by Jim Sedota. Thus far, six to
eight candidates seem to be qualified. Interviews are scheduled to begin soon.

* Trustes also learned that Monday, a sanitary sewer line on Berry Road
collapsed and that 30 feet of line about 12 feet below the surface must be
replaced at a cost of about $7,000. Repairs are expected to take a couple of
days.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Briefs

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2006 The Buffalo News


                              913 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                             Sunday Times (London)

                           November 11, 2001, Sunday

Don't be a goose, take a gander

BYLINE: Peter Irvine

SECTION: Features

LENGTH: 958 words


With the cold winds howling, I have been having thoughts of escaping to
somewhere more clement. However, the wind is useful to some of our overseas
visitors, for whom Scotland is the perfect winter spot. Even with thoughts of
fattening the fowl for the yuletide tables, it could not be a better time for
the colonies of barnacle geese to make the trip from the Arctic. As soon as the
freezing northerly winds are right, these birds head south.

Last weekend, I too headed south to see these geese at Caerlaverock Reserve near
Dumfries. There were thousands of them, big and beautiful. Loads of other geese,
too, and squadrons of swans. What a sunset and what a treat.

Both the Solway Firth and Islay cater for a huge influx of these visitors every
year. Around the last week of September, the entire population from Spitsbergen,
a Norwegian archipelago in the Arctic Ocean, begins to make the 48-hour journey
to Caerlaverock. Meanwhile, the barnacle geese from Greenland wing it to Islay,
where they spend the winter and spring.

It is remarkable that the geese (which often stop off in Iceland or Norway on
their journeys) find their way with such precision to exactly the same spot at
almost the same time every year. When they leave rarely varies by more than a
few days. It is clear that evolution has given these intrepid travellers a
mighty instinct.

Tradition has it that barnacle geese are so named because it was believed that
the birds, who seemed to arrive mysteriously from nowhere in October and left
sometime in spring, were actually hatched from the barnacles (those mini
crustaceans that are the scourge of many a barefoot child) along the seashore.

This tradition became a matter of convenience and spelled disaster for the
birds. At that time, monastic orders were forbidden from eating meat during
Lent. They argued that the barnacle goose could be eaten since it had been born
as a fish. So these unfortunate fowl became a delicacy and were seriously
persecuted, weighing down Christmas tables around the country.

Killed to protect crops, for food and for sport, their numbers dwindled
precariously until, by the 1940s, there were only a few hundred left in the
wild.

Thanks to the pioneering conservation work of people such as the ornithologist,
Sir Peter Scott, these hefty flying machines have landed on their feet again.

European law has now given the barnacle geese protection which extends both to
their summer breeding and wintering grounds. An international agreement protects
them as they fly from Greenland to Scotland. This has been vital to their
survival as the geese feed on grasses, clover and seeds.

Despite the protection of the nature reserves, the geese seem to prefer the
neighbouring farms' winter cereal crops more. Now farmers are compensated for
any losses caused by the huge flocks grazing on their fields.

The Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust has a great setup at Caerlaverock. This estuarine
inlet, with its mud flats, is the perfect spot for the barnacle geese to chomp
their way safely through the winter. They fly to the fields around the reserve
during daylight and back out to the flats at night to seek protection from
predators.

The centre is full of enthusiastic volunteers helping with the daily count,
rushing indefatigably round the hides several times a day, somehow counting the
numbers of these massive flocks.

Watching the barnacle geese and other species of large wildfowl makes one
conscious of their immense resilience. They are huge, like feathery B52s, and on
the ground they just lumber, gobble and honk. But, as they become airborne and
those familiar v-shaped flocks unravel across the winter skies, they are
something to marvel at.

At Caerlaverock there are numerous viewing towers and hides from which you can
watch them in action. There is something quite preternatural about the way they
wheel above, bringing their legs down and coming in to land. It is something
more deft than any technology could dream to provide.

There are two large, sheltered sea lochs on Islay where the barnacle geese
winter, Gruinart and Indaal. Both have extensive tidal flats and provide ideal
roosts for their famous wintering flocks.

There is a visitor centre at Loch Gruinart and a large hide on the reserve
overlooking some flooded fields. However, the best way to see the barnacle geese
and get a sense of their numbers is to park in a lay-by on one of the roads
around the reserve and just watch from the car.

There are many other kinds of geese on their winter holidays around our shores
as well. This yearly immigration is welcome at a time when everything around us
is declining or leaving.

Their spectacular displays, especially in the late afternoon when they move from
their feeding grounds, is one of the best things about autumn - perhaps the next
best thing to taking flight from the elements oneself.

THE TWITCHER'S TRAIL

Caerlaverock Castle, near Dumfries: 17km south by B725. Follow signs for
Wetlands Reserve. Pass road end. 01387 770 244 Caerlaverock Visitor Centre: 17km
south of Dumfries on B725. Oct-April 10am-5pm. 01387 770 200

Comlongon Castle hotel: near Clarencefield, Dumfries. 14km south via A75 turnoff
at Collin. 01387 870 283

Loch Gruinart RSPB reserve: Islay, Loch Indaal. Take A847 at bridge, turning
north and right for Gruinart. 01496 850 505

Port Charlotte hotel: modern with discreet service in a fine whitewashed
village.

Islay. 01496 850 360

Montrose Basin Wildlife Centre: 1.5km south of Montrose. Open all year round.
01674 676 336

Strathbeg Nature Reserve: 12km south of Fraserburgh off main Peterhead road,
signed at Crimond.

01346 532 017

The twitcher's trail


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Scotland the best; Time off

                    Copyright 2001 Times Newspapers Limited


                              914 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 15, 1990

Inquiry into trade in unfit meat

BYLINE: By JAMES ERLICHMAN, Consumer Affairs Correspondent

LENGTH: 440 words


GOVERNMENT veterinarians have begun an investigation into the sale of condemned
meat from diseased animals in butchers and supermarkets.

The inquiry follows the discovery of unfit meat on its way for sale in Somerset,
Scotland, Wales and Smithfield market, London, in the last few months. There is
growing concern in Whitehall that these apparently isolated incidents may be
part of a wider illicit trade. Condemned meat seized in Taunton, Somerset, this
year was traced back to Yorkshire.


Meat trade profits have been hit by EC overproduction, a large influx of animals
from Eastern Europe, and a fall in beef sales over concern about 'mad cow'
disease.

A Ministry of Agriculture spokeswoman confirmed yesterday that an inquiry was
under way. 'We have told the regions to forward any information, including
rumours and suppositions, to our head office,' she said.

Veterinary sources said inquiries would initially focus on Humberside,
Yorkshire, Lancashire and Shropshire.

Diseased meat is virtually indistinguishable from healthy meat once it is cut
into pieces and put on display, according to a senior inspector.

State veterinarians, who inspect EC export abattoirs, say environmental health
officers, who inspect the 90 per cent of abattoirs which have no export licence
and must sell all their meat in the home market, may be reluctant to prosecute
for fear of exposing poor inspection by their officers.

At Smithfield, which has no export licence, some 40 boxes of unfit beef were
seized on August 6. No decision has yet been made to prosecute the alleged
offenders.

The ministry and the Institution of Environmental Health Officers played down
any rift. The institution was considering its own investigation and would
co-operate completely with state vets, Nick Hibbett, chairman of its meat
legislation review group, said. 'No doubt people are being made ill because
unfit meat is finding its way to the market place,' he added. 'The major frauds
are circumventing abattoirs altogether.

'It is fairly easy to tell when a whole carcasse is fevered or discoloured. But
when it is cut up into smaller joints, it is very difficult to tell. We also
know that there are quite a number of fake inspection stamps.'

Mr Hibbett said the condemned meat trade has become a multi-million pound
industry. 'Imagine the profits that can be made from buying a dead animal for
Pounds 25 and selling it on as fit meat worth at least Pounds 600 in the shops,'
he added.

Vets will gradually take over all meat inspection duties from environmental
health officers under EC legislation, phased in from 1992.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                              915 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                           January 14, 2004 Wednesday

Change looms for dairy industry, consultant says ; He says industry will
continue to consolidate

BYLINE: JOHN EVERLY

SECTION: National/World; Pg. a3

LENGTH: 343 words


Of all the uncertainties dairy farmers face, they can depend on one thing:
change.

Monte Hemenover, a consultant with St. Louis-based Avenues for Change, told
dairy producers at the Eastern Iowa Dairy Conference in Dubuque Tuesday to
expect more change.

"We are going to see more change in the next five years than we have seen in the
last 25," Hemenover predicted.

Hemenover said the trend toward industry consolidation will continue, from farm
buyouts to corporate mergers among processors and retailers. There will be more
investor-owned dairies, including farmer-owned operations, he said. More farmers
will set their milk price in advance.

In the increasingly complex market environment, producers will form associations
for mutual support and information sharing, he predicted. Technological
advancements will improve productivity and efficiency. Urban sprawl will
challenge dairy expansions.

Where milk is produced also is changing. Western states are increasing
production while Midwestern milk production has been declining in recent years.

Hemenover rebuffed what he said was a common misconception about dairying in the
Midwest.

"You can't dairy in the northeastern part of Iowa - bunk, you can, and some of
you are proving that you do it very successfully," he said.

Hemenover said local dairies have some advantages over their counterparts in
other areas of the country, including lower feed costs, water availability and
the ability to produce high-quality milk.

Just the same, those advantages probably will not draw an influx of dairy
producers to Iowa, as seen in the West.

"I don't see northeast Iowa recruiting a lot of new dairymen from places like
California. Your growth is in your hands. One of the things that needs to be
done is improve attitudes for investment in future dairy production growth and
processing," he said.

In the short term, Hemenover predicted 2004 will be a good year for dairy
producers. "Not an outstanding year, but a good year," he added. "A year for us
to extract profit."


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Mug - Monte Hemenover

                  Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                              916 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                              July 30, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Erie SPCA extends its Niagara reach;
Director says its help for Niagara office -- like Lockport pet store raid -- is
too much

BYLINE: By Gail Franklin - NEWS NIAGARA BUREAU

SECTION: NIAGARA WEEK; Pg. NC1

LENGTH: 1111 words


The Erie County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals -- which seized
300 animals from a Lockport pet store earlier this month -- is playing an
expanding role in neighboring Niagara County, which one agency official says is
starting to take a toll on its operations.

It was called in after the Niagara County SPCA didn't respond to several
requests by the U.S. Department of Agriculture to look into complaints of animal
cruelty at the wholesale pet store, according to a USDA official who spoke on
condition of anonymity.

Niagara SPCA Executive Director Albert Chille acknowledges that the Erie County
SPCA, which is larger and better financed, was better equipped to conduct the
raid at Pets Plus -- Reptiles and Exotics.

In 2005, Niagara County residents brought more than 1,400 animals to the Erie
County SPCA, according to Executive Director Barbara Carr. She said that
represents about 10 percent of all domesticated animals the animal shelter
received that year and said the influx is taking a toll on its operations.

Also in Niagara County, the Erie County SPCA responded to 29 investigations,
helped the county Sheriff's Department with a foreclosure and responded to three
calls about stray dogs, all in 2005, Carr said.

"All SPCAs exist separately from one another, and all only exist through
donations," said Carr, who only raises funds in Erie County. "We have to do more
[in Niagara County] than I'm happy with." Her organization is not funded by the
Erie County government.

Chille denies being called by the USDA about Pets Plus and points out that three
weeks after the July 11 raid was conducted by the Erie SPCA, no charges have
been filed against the owner.

"I can swear to the fact that I've never gotten a call from the USDA," Chille
said during a recent interview at the shelter in Wheatfield. "I got a call from
the [state] Department of Environmental Conservation four or five days before
the raid, and they said, 'Erie County [SPCA] will come in if you have no
objections.' I said, 'I have no one with expertise in this [exotic pets] field.'
"

But the USDA official said the matter was handed over to the DEC only after the
Niagara SPCA failed to respond to several requests to look into the complaints.
When the DEC gained a search warrant from a Niagara County judge in July, it was
the Erie SPCA that was chosen by the DEC to raid the store and wholesaler.

The wildlife administrator for the Erie SPCA, on Ensminger Road in the Town of
Tonawanda, said unhealthy conditions and animals that are illegal to possess
under state law were found at Pets Plus. The business had thousands of animals
inside with only a few employees to care for them.

Chille said he or one of his employees had visited the store three or four times
in the past year or so but found little amiss. Minor offenses included dirty
cages or empty water cups, he said, which were either addressed that day or the
next day.

"We never found anything to hang our hat on," Chille said. "I'm not sure we were
allowed in every nook and cranny."

Most of the animals that were seized came from a private area in the business's
warehouselike building. Chille said that the Erie SPCA had identified
more-serious offenses possibly because he had viewed only a few of the upstairs
rooms usually off-limits to customers.

Don Pionessa, a veterinary technician from Lancaster who made the initial
complaints to the USDA, doesn't understand why the Niagara SPCA couldn't find
cause for further investigation.

Having heard about Pets Plus from friends, Pionessa visited one day. "I saw 10
or 15 dead lizards in a cage, and they had been there for a long time. Others
were pretty much skin and bones."

Chille said he's OK with the fact that the Erie SPCA was called in to conduct
the raid because he simply doesn't have enough employees or any with background
in reptiles and amphibians. The Niagara SPCA has 11 employees; Erie, about 70.

"We are not in competition," he said. "We have a common interest, which is
taking care of animals."

Carr declined to comment on why her organization was chosen to respond to Pets
Plus but said she keeps records of all the Niagara County animals and calls to
which her organization responds. She believes it's not necessarily fair that an
organization funded by donations raised in Erie County spends so much time
outside of its borders.

Chille said that he had never heard about the number of animals being brought
from Niagara County to the Erie SPCA. He suggested it has to do with the fact
that the Niagara SPCA euthanizes pit bulls more often than the Erie SPCA in
order to protect them from being used as "bait" dogs or fighters in pit bull
fights that Chille says are a problem in the county.

Carr said her organization uses a nationally recognized evaluation test to
determine the healthiness of all dogs it receives and only adopts out pit bulls
that score highest and show no signs that they may turn violent.

Despite a possible difference in philosophy on pit bulls, just 400 of the 1,400
animals that came to the Erie SPCA from Niagara County were dogs, and not all of
them were pit bulls, said Carr. More than 600 cats, as well as many other small
domesticated animals, were surrendered.

The Erie SPCA has a $3 million annual budget compared with the Niagara's
$500,000. But the Erie SPCA also covers a county that is at least twice as
large.

There is no national organization that governs local SPCAs, although the New
York City-based American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals does
post its policies regarding numerous issues on its Web site.

Each nonprofit SPCA is run independently the others, although many share similar
mission statements.

Chille defended his track record, saying he has had people arrested for animal
abuse, closed down a pet store in The Summit in Wheatfield last year because the
owner wouldn't make improvements and has uncovered puppy mills during his 26
years as director.

The former teacher and administrator in Niagara Falls Public Schools said he has
taken the SPCA from a deficit of $19,000 when he took over to an annual
operating budget of $500,000 per year. The Niagara SPCA is funded mostly through
donations, as well as several municipal contracts for dog-catching services.

Chille said he has a good relationship with Carr and would like to expand his
operations in Niagara County but is limited by the county's fiscal condition and
the amount of donations he receives.

"We do dozens of things that never come to light at all, but if there's one
occasion where Erie comes in. . . . We do a lot of things people never hear
about, and Erie County is the same way," he said.

e-mail: gfranklin@buffnews.com

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Harry Scull Jr./Buffalo News Albert Chille, executive director of the
Niagara County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, says his
organization lacks expertise in handling exotic animals, like those seized in a
recent raid on a Lockport pet store. Harry Scull Jr./Buffalo News The Niagara
County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals operates with a smaller
staff and budget than its counterpart in Erie County.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2006 The Buffalo News


                              917 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                             May 28, 2015 Thursday

BJP minister justifies entry tax on sugar

BYLINE: I P Singh

SECTION: LUDHIANA

LENGTH: 400 words


JALANDHAR: A day after Punjab BJP president Kamal Sharma said that his party was
not taken into confidence while levying 11% entry tax on sugar being imported
from other states, industries minister Madan Mohan Mittal has justified the
decision saying that it was done to save both the local sugar industry and
farmers.

"Statutory minimum price for sugarcane is highest in Punjab due to which there
is great influx of sugar from other states. Local sugar mills are unable to sell
their stocks and farmers are also not getting their full payment," said Mittal.

"Agriculture minister Tota Singh had raised the issue and suggested this tax.
Then my department moved the proposal which was tabled in the cabinet," Mittal
told TOI on Tuesday. He also revealed that earlier the tax rate was proposed at
14% but then BJP ministers got it reduced to 11%. "If sugar mills shut down then
it would spell doom for sugarcane growers as well. It is crucial to help both
the mills and cane growers," he said.

When asked whether the issue discussed within BJP as their state president had
said that the party was not consulted, Mittal said he would not say anything
about Sharma's comments and the discussion and decision in BJP legislature group
meeting.

Punjab BJP chief Sharma had claimed that the party was not consulted about the
tax and said they would raise the issue with state government to seek its
waiver.

However, inquiries from within BJP legislature group revealed that as a the bill
for entry tax was proposed to be tabled during the last budget session an
emergency meeting of the party legislature group, in which it was decided that
the proposal should not be tabled and it should be discussed further. "Our MLAs
had then opposed the entry tax on sugar import and then party urged deputy chief
minister Sukhbir Singh Badal to postpone its tabling. Later, the matter was
never discussed in the legislature group and a final decision was not taken on
the issue by the legislature group," revealed a BJP MLA on the condition of
anonymity.

Meanwhile, party leaders said it had become embarrassing for BJP as it had
become clear that though having just 12 MLAs, they could not be unanimous on the
issue. Another BJP minster Anil Joshi had already said all four BJP ministers,
who attended the cabinet meeting on May 20, had supported the proposal to levy
the entry tax on sugar.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              918 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           The Ledger (Lakeland, FL)

                             May 26, 2005, Thursday

FAKE IDS ARE COMMON AMONG ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS

BYLINE: DIANE LACEY ALLEN The Ledger

SECTION: News; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 864 words


In February, at El Tequila Night Club in Winter Haven, Polk County sheriff's Lt.
Paul Kurtzweil questioned a driver who backed over a sign in the parking lot.

The driver, Jario Monroy, told the officer he tried to leave because he was
scared. He did not have a driver license.

But Monroy, a native of Mexico, did produce a resident alien card that Kurtzweil
quickly determined was fake because it had no hologram, the color on the back
was incorrect, the type was too high and another typographical element was
missing from the laminate.

"He admitted that the identification was counterfeit and that he bought it in
Atlanta," Kurtzweil wrote in his report. "He added that he needed it to work."

Although no official numbers exist on how many illegal immigrants are in Polk,
the influx of undocumented workers appears to be on the rise. And with that has
come arrests for fake IDs.

"Probably a rough estimate is 80 percent of the migrants I come in contact with
-- that come here for labor -- tell you they're illegal," said Kurtzweil. "Yet
they have jobs, so they probably have one of those cards."

But while some view having a fake ID as a victimless crime -- particularly when
it is used to gain employment so money can be sent home to Mexico -- the actions
have a ripple effect.

The names or Social Security numbers often belong to innocent people, who find
themselves sorting out problems with the IRS after someone using their name or
Social Security number gets paid for picking fruit.

"They're assuming identities with these numbers ...," Kurtzweil said. "It's not
uncommon to get a call within an hour (that) this person was arrested under a
different name and has warrants in other locations."

Kurtzweil said a recent trend locally is the increased use of fake Mexican
driver licenses. One reason may be the difficulty illegal immigrants now have
getting or renewing a Florida driver license.

Laws passed in 1999 and 2002 require original immigration documents, such as a
permanent resident card (known as a Green Card), which has "severely restricted"
immigrants from getting a license, according to the Florida Immigrant Coalition.

Florida considers Mexican driver licenses legitimate identification and valid
for driving in the state. Bogus ones, however, can be hard for officers to spot.

"It's too easy to check on a United States document ...," Kurtzweil said. "But
most deputies or police (officers) wouldn't have any idea if it's (a Mexican
license) a fraud.

But Kurtzweil is versed in differences between a legitimate license or Social
Security card and a fake. He has helped other deputies learn the telltale signs
and how to pick up on things such as a smudged fingerprint or an incorrect
country code.

A recent bust shed light on how people obtain bogus identification.

In January, Polk County deputies, responding to a domestic violence call, found
a counterfeiting operation in the kitchen of Olivia Hernandez, a 23-year-old
Winter Haven resident.

They found fake Mexican driver licenses and resident alien and Social Security
cards. Hernandez eventually pleaded guilty and received 18 months probation and
100 hours community service.

Hernandez, who reportedly had been making the IDs for about a year, appeared to
use a laminator, cut up photos, school glue and a typewriter.

According to police reports, she was charging about $ 60 for a counterfeit card.

Kurtzweil said it's common to buy a bogus Social Security card and Mexican
driver licenses at the same time. The going rate is $ 100 for both.

The system often works like this: The counterfeiter shows up in a car, lines up
customers for photos, then returns with the finished product. Others are
fabricated on computers.

Deputies often discover bogus cards during traffic stops.

In April 2004, Raul Merino-Martinez was found to be driving without a license in
Haines City. When a deputy checked his identification, he admitted that his
resident alien and Social Security cards were fake.

Merino-Martinez, who was born in Mexico, negotiated a plea with the State
Attorney's Office in July. He was adjudicated guilty, sentenced to 18 months
probation and ordered to maintain full-time employment.

He violated his probation in September, was re-arrested and sentenced to six
months in the Polk County Jail on May 4.

Monroy, who backed over the sign at the Winter Haven club, was arrested for
possessing a fraudulent ID card, a third-degree felony, and driving without a
license, a second-degree misdemeanor. He did not appear for his arraignment on
March 29. A warrant was issued for his arrest.

Diane Lacey Allen can be reached at diane.allen@theledger.com or 863-802-7514.

TOP 10 U.S. JOBS HELD BY FOREIGN-BORN HISPANICS

JOBWORKERS

Maids and housekeeping cleaners444,587

Grounds maintenance workers427,440

Janitors and building cleaners405,232

Construction laborers386,238

Cooks384,287

Carpenters299,145

Driver sales and truck drivers294,655

Agricultural workers270,985

Painters, construction and maintenance211,655

Laborers, freight stock and material movers208,191

SOURCE: Pew Hispanic Center, May 25, 2005


LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CINDY SKOP/The Ledger: Polk County sheriff's deputies display the
makings of counterfeit Social Security and Permanent Resident cards seized
recently. The numbers have been obscured to protect their owners.; The Ledger:
Chart

             Copyright 2005 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation


                              919 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Wiltshire

                               February 20, 2004

Farm sales likely to remain strong

LENGTH: 233 words


DESPITE the complexities of the mid-term review or MTR of the Common
Agricultural Policy farm and estate sales and purchases in the south and
south-west have continued in a strong market say rural business consultants
Strutt & Parker.

Their 2004 Farmland Review shows that transactions completed by Strutt &
Parker's offices in the region amounted to £30 million and more than 5 000 acres
during 2003.

The firm worked closely with sellers and buyers in order to provide solutions to
any potential problems arising from MTR issues.

In some cases premium prices have been achieved for farms despite the effects of
MTR.

It has also been a highly successful year for the estates market.

Residential demand has been strong allowing those farm and estates with
attractive principal houses to sell extremely well.

"A continuing influx of non-farming buyers has been responsible for the purchase
of 75 per cent of farms and estates across the region this year " said Ian
Hepburn at Strutt & Parker's Salisbury office.

"Existing farmers also continue to display a desire to maximise returns by
purchasing larger and better-equipped farms."

The ongoing uncertainty surrounding MTR is expected to restrict the market in
2004.

However Strutt & Parker believes that the market will remain strong with plenty
of buyers who will be prepared with the right advice to purchase.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2004 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                              920 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              North Devon Journal

                               February 19, 2004

STRONGER MARKET FOR FARMS

SECTION: Business; Farm/Food; News; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 229 words


Despite the complexities of the Mid Term Review of the Common Agricultural
Policy, farm and estate sales and purchases in the South and South West have
continued in a strong market, say rural business consultants, Strutt & Parker.
Its 2004 Farmland Review shows that transactions completed by its offices in the
region amounted to more than £30 million and over 5,000 acres during 2003. The
firm worked closely with sellers and buyers to provide solutions to any
potential problems arising from Mid Term Review issues. In some cases, premium
prices were achieved for farms despite the review's effects.

It has also been a highly successful year for the estates market. Residential
demand has been strong, allowing farms and estates with attractive principal
houses to sell extremely well.

"A continuing influx of non-farming buyers has been responsible for the purchase
of 75% of farms and estates across the region this year," said Robin Thomas at
Strutt & Parker's Exeter office. "Existing farmers also continue to display a
desire to maximise returns by purchasing larger and better equipped farms." The
ongoing uncertainty surrounding the Mid Term Review is expected to restrict the
market in 2004. However, Strutt & Parker believes the market will remain strong
with plenty of buyers who will be prepared, with the right advice, to purchase.


LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

                       Copyright 2004 North Devon Journal


                              921 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           February 23, 2010 Tuesday

Indonesian paper warns cheap Chinese goods may "flood" market

LENGTH: 554 words


Text of report in English by influential Indonesian newspaper The Jakarta Post
English-language website on 23 February

[Report by Aditya Suharmoko: "Cheap goods from China may flood RI in second
quarter"]

The Finance Ministry said cheap imported goods from China might begin to flood
Indonesia in the second quarter of this year as a result of the full
implementation of the free trade agreement with the country early in January.

The agreement between China and ASEAN countries (ACFTA) became fully effective
on Jan. 1, when zero tariffs came in on 6,682 tariff positions in 17 sectors
including 12 in manufacturing and five in agriculture, mining and maritime
sectors.

"The [result of the] FTA has yet to be seen. It seems [the imports] will be seen
in the second quarter," Agung Kuswandono, director at the Directorate General of
Customs and Excise, said Monday in a seminar on "Dissecting the 2010 State
Budget".

"It usually takes two or three months to ship goods after preparing all
necessary documents [in early January]. I assume the goods will enter
[Indonesia] in late March [at the fastest]," he further explained to The Jakarta
Post.

Local businesses fear they may lose out on competition with cheaper Chinese
products. Even before the ACFTA, Chinese products have flooded the Indonesian
market, many of them brought in illegally.

"We oversee [the influx of Chinese products] day by day. We hope there will be
no spike," said Agung.

Coordinating Minister for the Economy Hatta Rajasa has said Indonesia has a team
to cushion negative impacts resulting from the full implementation of the ACFTA.

The team's tasks include protecting the domestic market from smuggled goods;
supervising the issuance of import documents; helping to expand export markets;
improving the domestic market; and promoting local products, he said.

Hatta said Indonesia is in preliminary discussions with China and related
parties to possibly delay the full implementation of the zero tariffs on certain
products until as late as 2011 or 2012.

Trade Minister Mari Elka Pangestu, who is in charge of trade discussions, has
repeatedly refused to explain detailed progress on this.

Agung said the Directorate General of Customs and Excise has an early warning
system to detect a spike in imported goods from China. It will control any
influx with measures allowed by the World Trade Organization, which include
safeguard measures, anti-dumping measures and countervailing duties.

Agung also said that in 2010 Indonesia will comply with the ASEAN-Korea FTA,
which applies to 90 per cent of commodities, and in 2013 with the
Indonesia-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement, which applies to 93 per cent of
commodities.

He added there would also follow the Australia-ASEAN-New Zealand FTA, the
ASEAN-Japan Comprehensive Economic Partnership and the ASEAN-India Free Trade
Area.

Agung said the ACFTA would likely reduce net import duties received by the
government.

"But the elimination of import duty because of the ACFTA will reduce costs for
the real sector, which will raise profits that will increase domestic tax
revenue," he said. From early January to Feb. 12 this year import duty dropped
to Rp 2.01 trillion (US$217.08 million), down slightly from Rp 2.03 trillion in
the same period last year.

Source: The Jakarta Post website, Jakarta, in English 23 Feb 10

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2010 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              922 of 997 DOCUMENTS

          The Daily Telegraph (Sydney, Australia) (Sydney, Australia)

                            February 8, 2005 Tuesday

Students see future on the land

SOURCE: MATP

BYLINE: NATALIE WILLIAMS

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 296 words


MORE tertiary students are looking to the land for their livelihoods.

Enrolments at Tocal Agricultural College in the Hunter Valley are the highest in
10 years.

The college has closed some courses early because of the influx of applications.

Principal Cameron Archer said yesterday they had to close applications early for
courses for full-time residential students.

"There are 130 full-time students coming here to study agriculture," he said.

"It goes against the general perception that no-one is interested in agriculture
.

"Our students get the best training in the world. If we keep doing that, the
future of agriculture is strong."

Nineteen-year-old Kayla Mullen's friends thought their "city girl" pal was
"mad".

But the young woman was determined to achieve her dream of running her own farm.

The former St Francis Xavier student from Newcastle will take the first step
toward her goal next week when she begins studies at Tocal.

The move to Tocal, where she will live for the next two years, will be a culture
shock.

"I love the beach and I'm a real city girl," Kayla said.

"So there's no doubt it will be an adjustment for me.

"But I've wanted to be a farmer since I was a little girl when mum and dad had a
dairy farm at Cundletown, near Taree.

"I'm keen to do my diploma at Tocal and I might even go to university after that
to do a specialist degree.

"I'll probably have a year off in between to go to the Northern Territory and
work as a station hand on a big property."

NSW Primary Industries Minister Ian Macdonald said the high enrolment figures
were "an encouraging sign for the future of agriculture in this state".

"They show young people in NSW are very interested in pursuing dynamic careers
in a range of agriculutral fields."

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: DTM

                   Copyright 2005 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              923 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Weekly Times (Australia)

                            April 23, 2008 Wednesday
                               1 - FIRST Edition

Migrants pour into regions

BYLINE: DAVID McKENZIE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 358 words


REGIONAL Victoria has absorbed a massive influx of immigrants since 2000, a new
national analysis shows.

According to the latest Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia, the number
of immigrants settling in Victoria's regional centres between 2001 and 2006 was
47 per cent above the previous five years.

``Victoria's century-old status as a melting pot of cultures continues to grow
as more immigrants establish their families in the state's regional centres,''
said Federal Agriculture Minister Tony Burke, who released the report last week.

The number of new settlers during 2001-2006 as a proportion of total population
in 2006 was just over 1 per cent across rural Victoria.

The largest immigrant arrivals were recorded in Swan Hill-Robinvale (4.5 per
cent of its total population) and around Shepparton (2.4 per cent).

Mr Burke said a key factor in attracting migrants to regional Victoria was the
cost of housing, which was much cheaper in regional centres than in urban areas.

Produced by the Bureau of Rural Sciences, the atlas draws on the results of the
population censuses of 1996, 2001 and 2006.

It shows only one in eight jobs in Victoria's rural communities is now in
primary production (agriculture or mining), as regional centres continue to
expand rapidly and smaller communities lose people.

Areas with the highest concentrations of primary industry employment in 2006
were Loddon North and Moyne-North West (both more than 56 per cent) and West
Wimmera, South Grampians-Wannon and Moyne-North East (50-51 per cent).

Areas with the largest numbers of farmers were Corangamite (1249 farmers),
Mildura (1193) and Gannawarra (1138).

The atlas showed population in Victoria's regional centres jumped by 9 per cent
between 2001 and 2006, even faster than Melbourne (7 per cent) and well above
national regional growth (5.7 per cent).

Small towns around Victoria recorded a 2.1 per cent population growth, while
rural communities lost 1.3 per cent of their people.

The atlas also showed that, of all the states, Victoria had the highest
percentage of 16-year-olds staying in full-time education in regional centres,
small towns and rural areas.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: WKT


                   Copyright 2008 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              924 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stock Journal

                               November 18, 2010

SECTION: CROPPING

LENGTH: 366  words


FEDERAL Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator Joe Ludwig,
has met with Ministers and officials from NSW, South Australia, Victoria and
Queensland to discuss the response to the Australian Plague Locust outbreak and
swarm control measures.

'The collaborative response by federal and state governments to the worst
Australian Plague Locust outbreak in 70 years has been extremely efficient,'
Minister Ludwig said.

'The peak season is now upon us and I have been meeting with my state
counterparts to discuss realistic approaches to swarm control.'

There has been an increase in reports of fledgling (young adult) locusts. Low to
medium density swarms have been observed in South Australia, Victoria and NSW.

There has been a sudden influx of locusts into parts of the Melbourne
metropolitan area. More localised movement will occur in all affected areas
during the coming weeks, before significant long distance swarm migration is
likely to occur.

'The Ministers and I have spoken at length about the critical issue of flying
swarm control which is inefficient, less effective and costly,' Minister Ludwig
said.

'It also poses risks to aerial control staff and landholders because swarms are
moving rapidly in areas where control may not be possible.

'However we recognise the urgency in tackling this problem and treatment of
swarms will be considered in extreme circumstances.

'It is absolutely critical that landholders continue to monitor locust outbreaks
because treatment on the ground before locusts swarm is the most effective
tool.'

Aerial treatment to date has covered in excess of 495,000 hectares. This is in
addition to the significant areas treated by landholders implementing their own
crop and pasture protection. The treatment campaign has been underpinned by over
20 million hectares of aerial surveillance undertaken across four states.

Federal and state governments are working hard to treat public areas, national
parks and help with private land action. Landholders must also be vigilant in
responding to locust outbreaks on their own properties.

Follow locust updates on Twitter: @Locust_APLC or for latest locust forecasts
and information visit  www.daff.gov.au/aplc

LOAD-DATE: March 07, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2010 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              925 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                  Stock & Land

                               November 18, 2010

Ministers meet to discuss locust response and swarm control

SECTION: CROPPING

LENGTH: 366  words


FEDERAL Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator Joe Ludwig,
has met with Ministers and officials from NSW, South Australia, Victoria and
Queensland to discuss the response to the Australian Plague Locust outbreak and
swarm control measures.

'The collaborative response by federal and state governments to the worst
Australian Plague Locust outbreak in 70 years has been extremely efficient,'
Minister Ludwig said.

'The peak season is now upon us and I have been meeting with my state
counterparts to discuss realistic approaches to swarm control.'

There has been an increase in reports of fledgling (young adult) locusts. Low to
medium density swarms have been observed in South Australia, Victoria and NSW.

There has been a sudden influx of locusts into parts of the Melbourne
metropolitan area. More localised movement will occur in all affected areas
during the coming weeks, before significant long distance swarm migration is
likely to occur.

'The Ministers and I have spoken at length about the critical issue of flying
swarm control which is inefficient, less effective and costly,' Minister Ludwig
said.

'It also poses risks to aerial control staff and landholders because swarms are
moving rapidly in areas where control may not be possible.

'However we recognise the urgency in tackling this problem and treatment of
swarms will be considered in extreme circumstances.

'It is absolutely critical that landholders continue to monitor locust outbreaks
because treatment on the ground before locusts swarm is the most effective
tool.'

Aerial treatment to date has covered in excess of 495,000 hectares. This is in
addition to the significant areas treated by landholders implementing their own
crop and pasture protection. The treatment campaign has been underpinned by over
20 million hectares of aerial surveillance undertaken across four states.

Federal and state governments are working hard to treat public areas, national
parks and help with private land action. Landholders must also be vigilant in
responding to locust outbreaks on their own properties.

Follow locust updates on Twitter: @Locust_APLC or for latest locust forecasts
and information visit  www.daff.gov.au/aplc

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2010 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              926 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           The Mercury (South Africa)

                            July 23, 2008 Wednesday
                                   e1 Edition

Van Schalkwyk silent over the fate of Ndumo

BYLINE: TONY CARNIE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 528 words


Environmental affairs and tourism minister Marthinus van Schalkwyk was silent
last night on the eve of a crucial meeting to resolve the Ndumo game reserve
crisis.

Later today, the KwaZulu-Natal cabinet is due to debate several settlement
proposals, including the possible dismemberment of part of the eastern section
of the 10 000ha reserve.

This has raised fears that Ndumo could follow the path of the Dukuduku state
forest, near Lake St Lucia, which has been destroyed gradually by the influx of
displaced subsistence farmers.

The dispute came to a head last month when several people from the neighbouring
Mbangweni and Bhekabantu communities chopped down Ndumo's entire eastern
boundary fence and signalled their intention to occupy the reserve for farming.

Earlier this month, agriculture and environmental affairs MEC Mtholephi
Mthimkhulu said his department was preparing an integrated agricultural plan
which would be presented to the cabinet today.

Mthimkhulu would neither confirm nor deny that one of the proposals was to
deproclaim part of the reserve, although other sources have confirmed that this
proposal will be on the table. The MEC said he had briefed Van Schalkwyk and
land affairs minister Lulu Xingwana.

Invited yesterday by The Mercury to set out his standpoint on the Ndumo dispute,
ministerial spokesman Riaan Aucamp said Van Schalkwyk would not comment until
the KZN cabinet had met. Aucamp said the minister was briefed by Mabuyakhulu
last week and the provincial cabinet would "communicate its decision to the two
(national) ministers".

Wildlife and Environment Society spokesman Bryan Havemann has asked for a
meeting with the MEC and urged him to protect the boundaries of the reserve. "We
are concerned about the precedent this could set for all conservation areas."

Former game reserve chief Paul Dutton also voiced fears that Ndumo could become
"the next Dukuduku".

Dutton, a Ballito-based environmental consultant who was a game ranger and
officer in charge of Ndumo from 1965 to 1972, said there was rarely a time when
KZN game reserves were free from the threat of deproclamation.

"When the National Party was in power there was pressure from white farmers to
deproclaim Mkhuze, Mfolozi and part of St Lucia game reserves to plant
pineapples or rear cattle. There has never been a time when the game reserves
have been safe and we cannot just sit back and watch them all crumble away."

Dutton acknowledged that while hundreds of people were evicted from Ndumo before
his arrival, most had resettled south of the reserve in the Ingwavuma district
and along the Phongolo River. To his knowledge, only one sangoma chose to live
in the Mbangweni corridor during this period because of the fear of being
attacked by elephants.

"It was only when Tembe Game Reserve's western game fence was erected and
Ndumo's fences were reinforced that the Mbangweni area became an elephant-free
corridor."

Mozambicans escaping from the war in their country were given permission by the
Ulundi government to occupy the Mbangweni Corridor, said Dutton, arguing that
leaders calling for the deproclamation of Ndumo did not represent communities
that once lived there.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NM


                 Copyright 2008 Independent News and Media Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              927 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  July 7, 1991, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition

BRAINPOWER HELPS ISRAEL MOVE FORWARD

BYLINE: James Flanigan

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3E

LENGTH: 898 words


TEL AVIV - What will Israel be like in five years?  ''It will be like Europe,
with fashion and style and luxurious goods,'' says the factory manager of a
kibbutz, one of Israel's famed collective societies.  The answer is surprising
because it defies Israel's economic challenges: Unemployment is at 10 percent
and rising, and an influx of immigrants ultimately will require creation of
600,000 jobs - adding one-third to the present work force. Israel has 18 percent
inflation and a $3 billion trade deficit.  Also, the country is in the fourth
year of drought, and water for agriculture has been cut 60 percent in some
places.  How will the country cope? ''I'm not worried,'' says one of Israel's
business leaders, ''I'm sure we'll improvise.'' He could be right. Israelis can
be innovative and ingenious, from the kibbutz farm manager who uses recycled
waste water on his cotton crop to a government project to recycle waste water of
a big city like Tel Aviv for use in agriculture.  Israel has responded before to
chronic water scarcity, by developing drip irrigation and pioneering genetic
agriculture. It is also strong in microelectronics, computers and software and
laser technology - all the advanced industrial categories.  That's the ''First
World'' Israel, the country that is such a sharp contrast to the Third World
Arab nations around it. But there is also a Third World Israel, with a state
bureaucracy resembling the governments of its neighbors Egypt and Syria. The
state owns whole industries, much of Israel's land and all the country's banks.
Like its neighbors, Israel has a high-tax system that encourages evasion.  But
now Israel needs investment to create jobs for its immigrants. So it is trying,
slowly, to sell its state holdings, reform its Third World weaknesses and
emphasize its First World strengths.  On the bright side, Israel could be on the
verge of an entrepreneurial boom. Industry Minister Moshe Nissim beams happily
over a desk piled high with applications for government loan guarantees and
other incentives to set up or expand businesses.  ''We used to average 30 to 40
applications a month, now it is over 100 a month,'' he says.  Israel holds
promise for investors because it capitalized on technological trends that have
transformed the world economy in the last 20 years. Those trends center on
microelectronics, which has put as much power on printed circuit boards - the
heart of all machinery today - as once existed in bulky motors and generators.
Light, wafer-like circuit boards, unlike bulky generators, can be transported
economically by air, which means that distance is less of a factor and that
suppliers no longer have to be close to their customers. That is a great
advantage for Israel, a small state far from world markets and unable to trade
with its hostile neighbors. Israeli firms like Scitex, Elbit Computers, Oprotech
and Orbot could develop innovative products at home and fly them to the United
States, Europe and Asia.  Another trend, the mobility of capital, also favored
Israel. World business today is more than happy to have research done wherever
it can find the brainpower. Israel has won more than its share of brainpower
investments.  That brings up Israel's most interesting lesson for economic
development.  Bright people don't develop knowledge and skills without training;
they must be cultivated like any other resource. Israel understands that
educating its people is the most important investment it can make.  The Israeli
government funds the nation's seven universities and technological centers.
Israel spends pr oportionately more on research and development than any nation,
including Japan and the United States.  That doesn't mean Israel is a business
paradise. On the contrary, ''This is a hard place to do business,'' an Israeli
entrepreneur says. ''If in the United States you need to see three government
agencies to be in business, here you deal with 10.'' There are opportunities for
corruption - bribes, payoffs, influence - wherever governments control licenses
to do business.  Within the vast Israeli government, there's an ample share of
that kind of thing, business people say.  But now such Old World, Third World
practices have to change. Israel's economy must treble its growth rate to 10
percent a year, and increase exports 12 percent a year if it is to absorb the
immigrants and make a productive return on the $20 billion or so it plans to
borrow on world markets in the next five years.  This is a time of reckoning for
an Israeli economy that wants to double in size in this decade and attain, as
the fellow says, that ''European'' standard of living.  If it falters, Israel
will see its new hopes fade as bright Soviet immigrants depart for other places
- Los Angeles and Brooklyn, N.Y., if they can swing it.  More likely, Israel
will ''improvise'' and adapt to the new challenges as it did to the
technological changes that have occurred in the last 20 years.  In the early
1970s, experts predicted that oil riches would make the Arab countries powerful
and countries with few natural resources, such as Japan and Israel, vulnerable.
That hasn't happened. Instead, Japan and Israel have proven that brainpower is
much more important than oil for a nation's economic success. There's a lesson
there for more than the Arab countries.  1991, Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: Photo; PHOTO by AP...Cool Sell...A diver demonstrating a new line of
enriched-oxygen scuba equipment in a tank put up in downtown Tokyo. The cool
view contrasts with the summer heat endured by passers-by.

                  Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                              928 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Cape Times (South Africa)

                            January 18, 2016 Monday
                                   E1 Edition

Africa needs more maize imports

SECTION: BUSINESS REPORT; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 345 words


SOUTHERN Africa, parts of which are experiencing the worst drought in more than
a century, will need to increase grain imports to meet demand as farmers
struggle. Nations in the region, which includes Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Namibia,
Botswana and Swaziland, would need to find 10.9 million tons of grains such as
maize, wheat, and soyabeans, South African Agriculture Minister Senzeni Zokwana
said on Friday. This includes 5 million to 6 million tons of maize for South
Africa, which is usually a net exporter of the commodity and was last a net
importer in the 2008 season.

Agri SA, the country's biggest farmers' organisation, on Friday asked the
minister for interest-rate and credit subsidies, chief executive Omri van Zyl
said. "The reality is we are sitting with a national emergency," he said. "There
will be a severe cash crunch for farmers when the new planting season starts in
June and July. We will only know later this month when the reports come in on
how extensive the subsidy requirement will be."

In the year to April 2015, South Africa's net maize exports reached 1.9 million
tons. The country might run out of white maize by September or October and would
have to source non-genetically modified varieties from Brazil, Mexico, and Black
Sea nations, Jannie de Villiers, chief executive of Grain SA, said on Friday.

While South Africa had the capacity to handle the expected influx of grain
imports, better co-ordination and port utilisation would be needed, Zokwana
said. It would cost the country as much as R20 billion to import 5 million tons
of maize, Grain SA economist Wandile Sihlobo said on January 11.

The Department of Agriculture had redirected R305.5 million from other funds to
provide farmers with drought relief and had committed R66.4m to land-care
programmes together with the Department of Land Reform, Zokwana said. The
drought might boost food inflation, with prices expected to increase by as much
as 25 percent in the year to April 2017, Ronald Ramabulana, the chief executive
of the National Agricultural Marketing Council, said.- Bloomberg

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CT


                Copyright 2016 Independent Newspapers Pty (Ltd)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              929 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                           Manila Times (Philippines)

                           November 26, 2009 Thursday

Arabian sheik eyes multimillion- dollar investment in Sarangani

BYLINE: BY ISAGANI P. PALMA CORRESPONDENT

LENGTH: 528 words


GENERAL SANTOS CITY: Arabian investors are infusing multimillion-dollar worth of
investments in a 50-hectare agricultural land development in the town of
Malungon in this city.

Tommy Ala, Department of Agriculture regional director for Central Mindanao,
said the group of Mohamad Al Raighi, an Arabian sheik and chief executive
officer of Middle East-based Tabuk Agricultural Development Co., visited the
Kalumbarak Skyline Village in Malungon town with the intention of putting up a
multimillion dollar worth investment in the proposed agricultural area.

Agriculture officials said the project would help support and sustain the
country's agricultural produce in typhoon-prone areas in Luzon.

"Our foreign visitors are interested to look into the potentials of Region 12,
particularly its rice, corn, banana and pineapple plantations. They are now here
in Mount Kalunbarak to explore and conduct actual site validation," said Ala in
an exclusive interview with The Manila Times.

The 10-vehicle convoy carrying the Arabian businessmen and local agriculture
officials trooped to the village a thousand feet above sea level, which
overlooks the scenic Mount Matutum in South Cotabato, General Santos City,
Sarangani and parts of Davao del Sur.

The group conducted the on-land assessment survey following an aerial viewing of
the project site in February.

Ala said the Department of Agriculture is now expecting a letter of intent from
the foreign investors.

He said a group of technical people from the Middle East would be arriving by
early next year to facilitate the implementation of the project.

Ala did not disclose the total amount of the investment "pending final
arrangements," but he assured that the project would boost the country's food
supply, which is constantly under threat because of the strong typhoons that hit
Luzon and devastate agricultural lands.

"We have no exact figure yet but I am certain we would be able to determine it
after receiving the letter of intent, which is expected to be forwarded to our
office this week. But, definitely, we are talking here of a multimillion-dollar
worth of project transaction and nothing less," Ala said.

Elsie Sia, the local project counterpart and owner of Davao City-based Elsie
Enterprises, said Raighi also plans to put up a fully equipped tourist hotel in
Kalumbarak as he expects an influx of foreign visitors in the area once the
project materializes.

Malungon town Vice Mayor Benjamin Guilley said Raighi is open to an agreement
with the local government for the maintenance of the access road and security of
project site.

Ala said Tabuk, the mother company of 11 other Arabian business firms, has
chosen the southern part of the region because it is generally peaceful besides
its strategic location.

He said the DA-12 priority program will concentrate on enhancing rice production
to maintain its rank as the Number One rice-producing region in Mindanao. It is
fifth in the entire country.

Ala said Region 12 is also the top corn producer in Mindanao and third
nationwide. It is first in coffee production, second in pineapple, second in
rubber and fourth placer in banana production nationwide.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2009 News Bites Pty Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                               Global News Bites


                              930 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                     Belfast News Letter (Northern Ireland)

                           April 30, 2003, Wednesday

SF TEAM IN TALKS WITH PEARSON

SECTION: FARMING LIFE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 569 words

HIGHLIGHT: CONCERNS: Gerry McHugh, MLA for Fermanagh and South Tyrone and Sinn
Fein agriculture spokesman with colleagues D McGinnity and M Ferguson after a
meeting with Ian Pearson


THE closure of the Over Thirty Months Scheme (OTMS), All Ireland Animal Health
Policy and support for rural communities were three issues raised with a Sinn
Fein delegation and the Northern Ireland Minister for Agriculture at Stormont,
Ian Pearson on Monday.

Led by the party's agriculture spokesman, Fermanagh and South Tyrone MLA Gerry
McHugh, he and Armagh councillor, Pat O'Rawe met with Department of Agriculture
officials.

Mr McHugh said the three issues raised needed urgent attention by the Minister.

He said: "We need to ensure that urgent steps are taken to tackle the problems
with delivering the European Funding that is available to support rural
communities; we need to ensure that the closure of the OTMS is handled better;
and we need to make rapid progress towards an All Ireland Animal Health Policy
to address the problems of animal disease."

He added that the meeting was arranged with Mr Pearson as part of a wider
campaign to address the future of agriculture and rural communities.

"Next Kerry TD Martin Ferris, Cllr Pat O'Rawe and myself will be in Brussels to
engage with European politicians about the future of Irish farming and in
particular to argue for the deadline for PeaceII support for rural communities
to be extended past December 03."

He said DARD had failed to deliver and spend Peace II money that was allocated
to support rural communities in the time available - December 2003.

Sinn Fein want to see this end of year cut off extended by the commission to one
year. Rural communities could not afford to loose the money.

"They are marginalised enough, and have suffered enough from 30 years of
discrimination and starved of inward investment, the loss of this money will add
to that marginalisation, said Mr McHugh.

"The OTMS scheme must be phased out. At a time when incomes are so low any
sudden withdrawal of the scheme will have a serious downward impact on prices.

"A phased withdrawal would also allow time for confidence both within the
industry and for consumers to develop, and for markets to be found.

"This is crucial because of the influx of large amounts of beef to suddenly
appear on the market will seriously reduce prices.

The Sinn Fein MLA said Brid Rogers promised action on the development of and All
Island Animal Health Policy.

"We were told that Ministerial agreement was to be signed by December 2002. In a
joint communique from the North South Ministerial Council dated 15 April 2002 we
were told that "substantial progress is being made in aligning controls", and
that there would be "closer co-operation and/or joint strategies for the
improvement of animal health on both sides of the border by 31 December 2002".

"Yet neither departments, North or South, have delivered. Again we see delay and
no doubt the excuses for a further delay.

"Both Ian Pearson and his predecessor Brid Rodgers, have failed to move the
department along at any speed on these vital issues. Sinn Fein will be asking
both departments why it has taken so long?

"There are nine policy groups working on animal health. But the delay in getting
this established is only adding to duplication and hindering the eradication of
disease on the island."

* Following the meeting the Minister did say he expected a loss of funds.

A Sinn Fein delegation will be going to Brussels to seek an extension from the
commission.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                   Copyright 2003 Century Newspapers Limited


                              931 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (Nairobi)

                             August 21, 2011 Sunday

The Monster That No One Can Fight

BYLINE: Emman Omari and Jacob Ngetich

LENGTH: 747  words


For the people of Garissa, Dadaab refugee camp is a monster which has become an
eyesore.

For 20 years, it has been swelling. Every year, there is an unending influx of
refugees either running away from war or hunger in Somalia.

The question being asked is why the Government cannot ask the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to relocate the camp inside Somalia.

"If the Government closed Ukunda two decades ago and brought them here why can't
it do the same and rid us of this monster?" asked Fatma Mahmoud of the National
Cohesion Commission who comes from the county.

Garissa people have a plethora of complaints against the refugees.

They include environmental degradation; insecurity; pushing up cost of living;
and big business deals that exclude them.

They also complain of jobs being taken up by foreigners.

"These people have overstayed our hospitality and they should be taken back
home," said Mr Mohamed Shidiye, a former Lagdera MP.

Many argue that all UNHCR procurement is done in Nairobi and the people who
benefit from the billions of shillings paid out each year are either foreigners
or businessmen from other communities.

"We only give them sand for building and it is because it cannot be transported
from Nairobi, otherwise they would shamelessly do it," said Mr Shidiye.

They also argue that the Somalis crossing to Kenya were behind security problems
in the county.

Dr Dabar Abdi Maalim, a health specialist and coordinator of the Millennium
Project said that though the refugees should not be condemned, there was more
the government can do for Kenyan Somalis.

"The high cost of living in Garissa is due to the presence of refugees and the
big money that is flowing to maintain them," said Dr Dabar, who comes from Dertu
near the refugee camps.

On the environment, the local community is considering seeking compensation
either through international legal system or local courts.

"It is our environment, the UN or some authority has to compensate us one day,"
said Ms Fatma Mahmoud.

And the local community also fears that non-Kenyan Somalis have been filtering
into the country over the last two decades.

In Lagdera constituency, there are fears that some have acquired national IDs
and will one day seek elective office to dislodge Kenyans.

Indeed, the Government was reluctant to accept the UNHCR's latest request to
open Ifo II, arguing that it would encourage more Somalis to cross to Kenya.

They agreed eventually, but this has not pleased the local community.

The UNHCR is also in a dilemma as opening a refugee camp inside Somalia has
logistical and security problems... and they know it could take at least 10
years before peace returns to Somalia.

But not everybody is complaining.

According to Mr Abdi Bulah, a resident of Fafi constituency currently doing
business in Daadab, the situation has two sides.

"At the moment as a businessman I am enjoying good sales because of the
increased population in the camp. Some refugees have money, good money, and they
buy property here."

The refugees had relatives abroad who send them money and therefore their
presence was good for business.

Mr Nuh Mohamed, a taxi driver at Daadab, said he was comfortable with the
situation because it had brought vibrancy to Daadab and its surroundings.

"We are also benefitting from the influx. I have a booming business here and
sometimes I am overwhelmed."

Mr Ahmed Sugow, Fafi MP, said the population of refugees was becoming an
environmental and security concern.

"The situation on the ground is very serious, the Government is not doing
anything to manage the influx of the refugees in the camps, the end result is,
they come and settle anywhere they deem fit," he said.

The haphazard and uncoordinated settlement meant there was no open place to act
as a buffer zone between the locals and the refugees.

"The population of the residents in Hagadera is not more that 20,000 while the
population of the refugees in the centre is 150,000 -- five times our residents
and these are people who are not guarded, nobody checks how they come, thereby
making them a dangerous lot," said the MP.

Wajir South MP Mohamed Sirat said the refugees were a serious threat to the
environment.

"When the refugees come in here, they need trees to construct houses for
themselves, firewood to cook and fence, and they are depleting our trees," Dr
Sirat said.

Due to the demand for water, the level in 20 boreholes was going down and he
said it would be costly to start digging other boreholes of 250-300ft.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              932 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                Mail & Guardian

                               February 14, 2014

Zim: Industry protectionist policy may backfire on government

BYLINE: Ray Ndlovu

SECTION: AFRICA

LENGTH: 492 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Zimbabwean government has restricted the importation of poultry
and sugar, and banned maize imports.


The government has restricted the importation of poultry and sugar in a bid to
protect the local manufacturing sector, which has been unable to cope with the
competition from the influx of goods from South Africa.

Last week the agriculture ministry banned the importation of maize into the
country and, in the process, gave the state-owned Grain Marketing Board a
monopoly in maize procurement.

The utilisation of factory capacity in the manufacturing sector is just under
39%, according to the latest statistics from the Confederation of Zimbabwe
Industries.

Under-capitalisation, liquidity constraints, high interest rates on short-term
loans and high operational costs have been highlighted by the confederation as
the main factors contributing to the ­continued decline in ­productivity of the
manufacturing sector.

Abigail Shonhiwa, the industry and commerce department's permanent secretary,
said new legislation was designed to manage imports.

"Import licencing is not banning imports, but we would like to manage them so
that we [only] bring into the country what is necessary," she said.

Policy inconsistency
 Vince Musewe, an independent economist in Harare, said the government's move
was muddled by policy inconsistency. He criticised it for not consulting key
stakeholders on the consequences of its actions.

"The banning of imports may be fine and many countries in the world do so to
protect themselves, but first there must be capacity in the local industry," he
said.

"People are not necessarily buying sugar from South Africa because the local
product is expensive; it is because the local industry cannot meet demand."

A better option, Musewe said, would be for the government to increase duty on
the imports, as opposed to outright bans. This would allow consumers to make
their own choices.

"If the situation is not managed properly, we will see the creation of a black
market mushrooming in the near future," Musewe warned.

Allen Hungwe, a political commentator, said protectionist policies would not
work and could backfire on the government.

Increase in corruption tendencies
 "Given the state of the economy and dwindling disposable incomes, the current
price-pegging in Zimbabwe is unaffordable for the ordinary person. What we are
likely to see is more illicit trade in those commodities and an increase in
corruption tendencies to bring them into the country."

Busisa Moyo, the chief executive of United Refineries, applauded the government
for protecting local industry.

"I believe in protection. [It will] allow for competitiveness to return to
industry, as we have not been able to retool ourselves," said Moyo.

"Some degree of protection, say of between five to eight years, would give
industries a chance to re-emerge. But we need to get the balance right in other
areas as well, such as power supply, labour costs and utility bills - if we are
to see tangible results."

Industry and Commerce Minister Michael Bimha did not return calls.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2014 M and G Media (Pty) Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              933 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 BusinessWorld

                            September 7, 2009 Monday

WEALTH MANAGER;
MARKET MONITOR: The perils of agribusiness

BYLINE: J. Albert Gamboa

SECTION: Pg. S4/3

LENGTH: 876 words


We averted recession in the second quarter by the skin of our teeth, thanks to
increased government consumption spending and massive investments in public
construction. Although the 1.5% year-on-year growth may have been artificially
induced, a win is still a win no matter how ugly.

Among the three major production sectors of the economy, only the service sector
entered positive territory due largely to a rebound in real estate and retail
trade. On the other hand, both the agricultural and industrial sectors exhibited
negative growth during the April-June 2009 period. A vast majority of
manufacturing industries posted double-digit contraction, translating to layoffs
and underemployment.

Equally worrisome was the decline in agriculture, the main source of livelihood
for millions of Filipino families, with crops and livestock shrinking by 1.6%.
Farmers have long been suffering from the high cost of farm inputs that
aggravate their perennial weather-related problems. To make matters worse, the
implementation of the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (AFTA) in 2010 is seen to be
detrimental to agribusiness. The rice and sugar industries will be hardest hit
when zero tariffs result in an influx of cheap imports from such countries as
Vietnam and Thailand.

Cheaper farm inputs bill

In Congress, Rep. Rufus Rodriguez has sponsored the Cheaper Farm Inputs Bill
seeking to reduce by 50% the cost of 21 common pesticides, fungicides,
herbicides and fertilizer used by farmers throughout the Philippines. During a
recent visit to Cagayan de Oro City, I learned that this bill was an offshoot of
a meeting early this year between Rep. Rodriguez and his constituents
spearheaded by the Regional Agricultural and Fishery Council of Region 10
(RAFC-X).

According to Leo Relagos, Jaime Destura and Eugenio Tansico, presidents of three
irrigators' associations in Northern Mindanao, the bill will remedy the current
drop in regional rice output. Palay production in the provinces of Misamis
Oriental, Lanao del Norte and Misamis Occidental significantly decreased during
the first quarter of 2009 compared to the same period last year, based on
figures from the National Economic and Development Authority.

But Mr. Relagos said the bill has yet to be calendared at the House of
Representatives. Mr. Destura lamented that "nothing is happening, and it seems
our lawmakers are only good at making promises when they are facing the
oppressed farmers." Mr. Tansico agreed, referring to Rep. Rodriguez's speeches
hinting he might run for the highest office of the land in 2016: "If Rufus is
able to pass this bill and not be distracted with other concerns, then he will
have our support if he runs for president."

Aerial spray bill

Rep. Rodriguez is also the author of House Bill No. 5573, otherwise known as the
Aerial Spray Bill, which proposes a total ban on the use of pesticide sprays,
including agrochemicals utilized by the banana industry that are also being used
by fruit, vegetable and rice growers as preventive agents against destructive
pests and plant diseases.

Meant to stop aerial spraying, HB 5573 seeks to ban farmers' use of dithane, a
fungicide approved by the Fertilizer and Pesticides Authority (FPA) which is
considered the least destructive among pesticide brands. Dithane is known to
break down rapidly in soil, sediment and water while it is poorly absorbed and
rapidly excreted by animals.

Rice farmers, who number in the millions, are concerned that the banning of
dithane will leave their crops defenseless against the virulent tungro disease
adversely affecting 4.8 million hectares of rice lands in the country. In
horticulture, the fungicide is used to shield high-value flowers from black
spots and rust.

Declining yields, arbitrary ban

Farmers groups are raising a howl of protest against HB 5573, with the RAFC-X
and Northern Mindanao Vegetable Producers' Association (NorminVeggies) branding
the ban as arbitrary. RAFC-X chairman Edwin Andot pointed out that Rep.
Rodriguez should be more careful in choosing which agrochemicals to ban instead
of imposing what appears to be a general ban on all chemical sprays.

NorminVeggies president Marcelino Remotique said farmers use low doses of
dithane, noting that "our growers follow the safest agricultural practices and
they use pesticides judiciously. We have no reason to fear least-harmful
chemicals when these are approved by competent authorities and if their use is
regulated. Instead of targeting least-hazardous agrochemicals, Rep. Rodriguez
should instead concentrate on banned and restricted pesticides that still find
their way to farmers who are not authorized by law to handle them."

Messrs. Tansico, Relagos and Destura are worried over the ban's impact on their
harvest and are also baffled why the Aerial Spray Bill is being given priority.
They wondered: "Everyone knows we don't have banana plantations here, so why is
the good congressman focusing on this measure?"

In contrast, they believe "the Cheaper Farm Inputs Bill will help us cope with
the vagaries of farming." Amid declining rice yields, they hope Rep. Rodriguez
prioritizes the passage of this more crucial bill instead of toying with the
idea of banning some agrochemicals that will have a domino effect on their
markets.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2009 BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              934 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                  The State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL)

                           October 15, 2003 Wednesday

LETTERS, FAXES & E-MAIL

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1353 words


Not enough is expected from Palestinians

Dear Editor, Monday's editorial, "Weighing our response in the Mideast," is most
clearly stated in its ninth paragraph. "... unrelenting pressure on the
Palestinians and their Arab supporters to curb the violence that kills not only
the prospect of peace for Palestine but their young, their economy and their
claim to the world's sympathy." In that statement, there is no recognition that,
above all, the violence, which is terrorism, kills Israelis. Innocent young and
old, whole families, American citizens and foreign visitors to Israel.

This failure of the editors to recognize Israeli humanity and agony co-opts any
solution they might put forward.  Consistent with this failure is the
expectation that Israel must continue to cede to Palestinians and unpeaceful
Arab states while nothing is expected from Palestinians but that which will
serve their own self-interest.

When the problem solvers on the editorial board begin to see the full scope and
history of this conflict, their solutions may possibly carry more credibility.

Bob Kaplan

Springfield

Story about ladybugs raises questions

Dear Editor,

Staff writer Doug Pokorski's front-page story on the influx of Asian ladybugs
immediately raised questions in my "spotted-insect-infested mind."

Who was the lamebrain in the Department of Agriculture responsible for his/her
decision to release Asian beetles in America's heartland to allegedly wipe out
soybean aphids? Is he/she still employed in this position?

Not only has this introduction of the Asian beetle made Midwest kids scared to
death of "ladybugs" once adored by all, they are on the verge of wiping out our
sweet little native specie of ladybug (which doesn't bite). Where is the Audubon
Society and Sierra Club when you need them?

The Asian beetle murders our native ladybug in our own country, has made autumn
completely unbearable to enjoy the out of doors by anyone living here, and
caused thousands of homeowners incessant grief within their homes as the little
nasties cover our ceilings, windows and walls.

Yes, they have been introduced several times - by the thousands seeded into
fields by our own government - gee, thanks. I'd like to know if there is truth
to a Minnesota newspaper article that reported that the first drop of these
Asian beetles was in 1994, and that it was actually a mistake! Our own native
ladybugs were supposed to be used to combat the aphids but the Asian beetles
were crated and dropped instead!

And guess what? It has not taken care of the alleged problem. Farmers from here
to Minnesota report that they still must spray for aphids in their soybean and
alfalfa crops! So much for the feel-good approach to natural predator control.
We're experiencing Asian beetle biological warfare. Now all we need is the
answer to how to win this war waged on American soil and destroy the
infiltrators forever!

Stacy Bowman

Pleasant Plains

State can and must do more to help disabled

Dear Editor,

I would like to first thank The State Journal-Register and specifically Mary
Massingale for the excellent and well-balanced recent article on the Lincoln
Developmental Center Additionally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the task force members for their commitment and dedication to a very
difficult and controversial issue.

The Coalition of Citizens with Disabilities in Illinois representing more than
1,500 people with disabilities and family members of people with disabilities
have gone on record in opposition to a long-term, nursing-home-type facility.
History has proven that this type of facility does not meet the needs of people
with disabilities, diminishes their quality of life, takes away their dignity
and is not typically what they would choose if given a choice. Much discussion
has circled around what to call the end product. I have a suggestion. Let's take
the fences down and call it Lincoln, Illinois!

I understand and can appreciate the importance of "firing up" the boilers to
preserve the buildings and grounds and I understand the unions need to advocate
for employment for their members. However, I hope these issues do not push the
state into making a rash decision. Any final resolution for the Lincoln issue
should first weigh what is best for those individuals with disabilities who will
be receiving the services. According to members of the task force, that has
always been the primary goal of this entire process.

Other states have found ways to provide community options to people with
disabilities. Illinois ranks 48th in the nation in regards to
deinstitutionalization. We can do better; we must do better.

Vickie Wilson

Acting executive director

Coalition of Citizens with Disabilities in Illinois

Thanks from Contact Ministries, Friend-in-Deed

Dear Editor,

On behalf of Contact Ministries, I would like to thank everyone who supported
the 13th Annual Golf Outing benefiting Friend-in-Deed and Contact Ministries.
The event was a huge success, raising more than $100,000.

This event was so successful due to the financial support of our hole sponsors,
players and the businesses who donated the prizes and other resources, including
Stout and Lauer Jewelers, Pennzoil-Quaker State Co., NAPA Auto Parts, Brahler
Lube Centers, Golf Discount of Springfield and Bank One.

We would also like to thank the staff of Piper Glen Golf Course for their hard
work and cooperation as well as Mel-O-Cream Donuts, Bunn Capitol Co. and
Hillbilly Catering for providing the food. Thank you to Springfield Pepsi
Bottling Co., 7-Up/American Bottling Co. and House of Brews for providing the
beverages and to Harper On The Way Stores for your continued support. A special
thank you to Dominion Resources for its significant contribution to
Friend-in-Deed.

Thanks to the support we receive from the community, Contact Ministries will
continue to serve those in need by providing emergency shelter for women and
their children, crisis assistance and advocacy, financial assistance for those
at risk of becoming homeless, food, fans, coats, blankets and holiday food and
gifts. Please accept our heartfelt appreciation for your support as we carry out
our mission of "helping people in times of need."

Rita Tarr, executive director

Contact Ministries

Springfield

Long-term cancer survivor offers encouragement

Dear Editor,

I commend reporter Leah Friedman and photographer Kristen Schmid Schurter for
the two-part story on breast cancer. I also thank Mia Ware and Bev Fowler for
sharing their lives over the past nine months. As a long-term and two-time
survivor of this disease, I hope to offer some encouragement to hang in there.
The blue and yellow pin is right - cancer sucks.

I recently marked the two-year anniversary of my last mastectomy; my first one
was in 1990. That was also the year that my mother died from breast cancer. When
I was diagnosed with breast cancer I was 41, and my first panicked thought was
how young my sons were - only 7 and 4. I knew I wanted chemo and to attack the
disease aggressively. I hoped only that I would live long enough to see my
children grow up.

I had a skilled, patient and compassionate surgeon (Donald Ross) and an equally
competent and caring oncologist (Karen Holezer) and "chemo nurse" (Carla
Daniels).

The passing of a close friend from cancer caused me to speed up a medical test.
A biopsy showed a new cancer in my remaining breast. Same surgeon, same
oncologist, same chemo nurse, same friends and support group. I also added yoga
to my life, which made me feel more alive than even before my first encounter
with cancer.

Again, I "got through it," and continue to go through it day by day. Last month,
my younger son turned 18. He is at college and already demonstrating maturity
beyond his years. Next month my older son will turn 21. He is in his third year
of college and settling down quite nicely. My hopes were achieved; I have lived
long enough to see both my boys grow up.

My best wishes to Bev and Mia - may their dreams be realized as well.

Judy Libby

Springfield

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Bev Fowler and Mia Ware greet each other in the chemotherapy room at
St. John's Pavilion. Nurse Diane Clavin is at left.

TYPE: LETTERS

                   Copyright 2003 The State Journal-Register


                              935 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                     Belfast News Letter (Northern Ireland)

                         September 18, 2002, Wednesday

BRID WELCOMES VISITORS TO TRIALS

SECTION: FARMING LIFE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 213 words

HIGHLIGHT: PRIZE WINNER: Brid Rodgers with Winner of The Young Handlers Award;
Gethin Jones, form Wales, and his dog Jill


THE partnership between a shepherd and his dog "is an example to us all in our
approach to achieving results," Brid Rodgers, Minister for Agriculture and Rural
Development, has said.

Welcoming visitors to the first ever international sheep dog trials to held in
Northern Ireland at Seaforde, Co Down - Mrs Rodgers said that it was marvellous
to see the skills of both the dog and the shepherd as they worked together.

And she quoted the Sheep Dog Society's own motto: "There is no good flock
without a good shepherd - and there is no good shepherd without a good dog."

"It is very heartening to see the sport growing from strength to strength in
Ireland," she said. "Sheep dog handling will remain very competitive for many
years to come, with the tremendous influx of so many young people into the
sport."

Highlighting that the number of sheep producers in Northern Ireland was around
10,500, with an average flock size of 240 head, the Minister added: "With such
an important tradition sheep farming, there has also been a great tradition of
sheep dog handling in Northern Ireland, especially in the Mourne Mountains,
Glens of Antrim, and the Sperrins, where around 50 per cent of the Northern
Ireland flock of one and a quarter million ewes are grazed."

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                   Copyright 2002 Century Newspapers Limited


                              936 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                         November 2, 1998, CITY EDITION

Most papers defend protest by farmers

BYLINE: By RODDY O'SULLIVAN

SECTION: HOME NEWS; PAPER ROUND; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 734 words


Urban dwellers might think they are living through an unprecedented economic
boom, but the crisis in farming proves the nation is "sinking alarmingly" into a
"recessionary hole", according to the Northern Standard.

"Owners of small to medium-sized farms, with no financial reserves and who
manage from year to year, are faced with ruin," the paper warns, and local
retailers are "looking forward with anxiety to the Christmas trading period".
"The small holders just don't have the money to spend, and the farmers on the
larger holdings are taking a diminishing return that will make them very
cautious about dipping into their reserves."

The Tuam Herald has even more ominous warnings for Dublin residents who objected
to the inconvenience caused by farmers protesting on the streets of the capital.

"Now that the urban classes are riding on the tiger's back they can sneer, but
they little realise that if things are allowed to continue as they are, their
lives could be disrupted on a more permanent basis by a new influx of people
driven off the land by European agricultural policies that do not reflect the
reality on the ground."

However, the Louth paper, the Argus, takes a different editorial line from most
papers outside the capital. "By taking to the streets, farmers have given more
ammunition to those who maintain they have been feather-bedded for far too long
by EU subsidies."

There has always seemed to be "a reluctance on the part of farmers to pay their
share of the public burden", the paper says. "Greedy" farmers had undermined the
esteem in which their profession is held by "exposing the public to unknown
health risks by feeding growth supplements and other chemicals to their stock".

If farmers are serious about generating public sympathy for their plight they
should "join forces with consumers" and "show greater urgency and desire to
police their own industry", the Argus concludes.

The Kerry Eye ponders the lessons of the controversy over Cork by-election
candidate Sinead Behan's RTE interview and concludes that candidates for the
Dail should be compelled to take an exam to prove their competence in current
affairs.

Padraig Kennelly notes that "to gain United States citizenship, the applicant is
expected to answer questions on the constitution and on the United States itself
to the satisfaction of a judge". He suggests candidates for election to the
Oireachtas attend a course on "taxation, the health services, local authorities,
unemployment and aids for citizens from the State".

This would help remedy a situation where "at present you can become a TD without
any intelligence criteria being met".

The Southern Star's editorial asks whether the Cork South Central by-election
was "really worthwhile". It suggests exploring the option of using designated
substitutes when a Dail vacancy arises, to avoid the need for a "very expensive
exercise" which often makes "no change in the arithmetic of the Dail".

The housing crisis preoccupies many local papers. In the aftermath of the
unsuccessful legal challenge by local couple Stephen and Annette Butler against
the practice of "gazumping", the Kildare Nationalist and its sister newspapers
carry two pages of features on the increase in house prices in the east and the
midlands.

The Nationalist's editorial questions whether the construction industry can be
trusted to regulate itself on gazumping. Instead legislation should be
introduced to outlaw it, which "would give some confidence back to a sector that
is largely honourable but is being brought down in the public mind by quick
profit merchants".

Some light relief from the generally gloomy tone of the local papers this week
is provided by the Longford Leader which reports on the homecoming function for
the "popular Ballinalee heart throb", Mick Cahill (27), who was recently crowned
"King of the Culchies".

Mick, who runs a small farm and works part-time as a milkman to supplement his
income, was given a hero's welcome when he returned to his home town after
opening a new mart in Kiltimagh, Co Mayo.

The Longford News adds that Mr Cahill had to undergo "some arduous tests" on the
road to glory, the most trying of which was to "prove his gender for matchmaker
Biddy Earley".

"She gave me a bit of a rattle to check everything was there," said the
victorious Mick. At least one farmer had something to smile about this week.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1998 The Irish Times


                              937 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                             June 29, 2013 Saturday

Bundh collapse dashes Chorao farmers' hopes

SECTION: GOA

LENGTH: 345 words


PANAJI: Farmers in Ambarim, Chorao, nursed hopes of reviving agricultural
activities after many years, but they have sunk with the collapse and
abandonment of a part of the 1.65km bundh under construction about a month ago.

A 200m stretch of the newly-built embankment along the Mapusa river caved in
during the last week of May. Constructed at a cost of 3.38 crore, 95% of the
work has been completed. The stoppage of the work has left behind a trail of
submerged fields and unhappy farmers.

"A few farmers had tilled their land and some had set up nurseries. Their crops
were damaged and some gave up their plans to raise a crop," a farmer said.
Farming activities of around 135 farmers in the Kator khazan area have been
hampered for many years, as breaches occur regularly every year and influx of
saline waters submerge their fields.

The agriculture department's soil conservation wing had floated the tender to
restore the old bundh, damaged by strong currents along the Mapusa, but as it
neared completion, a small stretch caved in.

The contractor had alleged sabotage and use of explosives by some disgruntled
people. But officials are not willing to confirm it. A farmer pointed out that
the currents are strong in this stretch and breaches occurred routinely. "A
section of the four-metre bundh has sunk in the middle, which shows that it has
collapsed due to the tidal action," he said.

"The restoration of the damaged bundh should be done at the earliest," said
Eknath Mapari, president of Kator khazan tenants association. The members had
complained to the government that the work had not been done properly in the
200m stretch as the bundh borders a deeper part of the river.

An agriculture department official said resumption of the work will be possible
only after the monsoon. "No trucks can ply in the marshy land, but the
contractor has been told to complete it soon after the monsoon," he said.

If the protective bundh had been completed, it would have supported around 100
hectares of paddy fields from saline incursion.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              938 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  Thanet Extra

                                  May 27, 2011

Labour ignored our warnings on immigration

LENGTH: 649 words


IN AUGUST 1997, a very few months after Blair's government took office, I warned
of a pending influx of immigrants from Eastern European countries.

That warning, which was based upon intelligence passed to me by informed
officials, was dismissed at the time by junior Home Office Minister Mike
O'Brien, as "the sort of thing that MPs like Roger Gale say during the 'silly
season'".

Mr O'Brien's view reflected, clearly, the relaxation of the immigration
regulations introduced by Jack Straw in his new capacity as Home Secretary.

When, a month later, Michael Howard and I motored from Kent to London to see Mr
O'Brien and express our concerns, the Tory former Home Secretary's considered,
experienced, and legally qualified opinion was also dismissed with "we're in
government now" arrogance. As we now know, that was a grave mistake.

Why raise this now?

Well, spool forward fourteen years and you find Shadow Home Secretary Yvette
Cooper, on a pre-local government-election campaigning visit to east Kent,
telling us that Prime Minister David Cameron is being "irresponsible" in a
speech promising to cut the number of people entering the United Kingdom from
overseas from "hundreds of thousands to tens of thousands."

It would seem that the ex-Treasury 'deficit deniers' of the last government are
in denial, also, of their appalling inability to control immigration and to
properly differentiate between those whose services and qualifications are
needed, those genuinely seeking asylum from oppressive regimes and those
economic migrants attracted by the promise of life on a generous welfare system.

Britain, rightly, in the light of our location, island status and our porous but
at least legitimate, border controls within the European Union, declined to join
the Schengen "open frontiers" treaty. Derided as anti-European, the British
government of that day has now been proved correct in its policy but that,
sadly, will not be sufficient to protect the UK from a fresh influx of illegal
immigrants as the tide of those fleeing Libya moves north towards our benefit
culture.

I forbore to raise this during the local government campaign because I did not
want this issue of serious national importance to be clouded by accusations of
populism or electioneering. Ms Cooper was, however, profoundly wrong in her
statement and Cameron was right to indicate, clearly, that the cross-channel
gravy train has to be halted.

We need migrants, certainly. Many of our public services would grind to a halt
without the skills and endeavour of those who come to our shores from overseas.
We must welcome overseas university students, also, and we must recognise that
those who apply for visas to study English before moving on to Further or Higher
education need to be granted the necessary permits. These are the seed corn, our
foreign business partners and tourists, of tomorrow.

In east Kent, agriculture has, traditionally, engaged migrant temporary labour
and will continue to do so. And we have, over centuries, proudly and honourably,
offered safe haven to those fleeing for their lives or in fear of persecution
from totalitarian regimes and dictatorships.

What we cannot do is absorb those leaving other countries - whether within or
without the EU - who seek to exploit our welfare and housing provisions while
contributing little or nothing in terms of tax or skill or labour. To try to do
so will push a generally generous and tolerant population beyond the boiling
point.

This is not "xenophobia" or "racism." It is a recognition that, as a small
island that is itself trying to address a grim economic legacy, we have to place
and enforce limits upon those who wish to enjoy and not to abuse our
hospitality. That is the point that Ms Cooper has sought to avoid, that is the
point that David Cameron was making in his speech and that is the policy that we
now have to resolutely impose and enforce.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Kent Messenger Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              939 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 3, 2016 Saturday

Washington: Southern Landowners Want to Help At-Risk Wildlife Species

LENGTH: 467  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: United States Department of Agriculture  has issued the following
news release:



 Amid rising numbers of at-risk wildlife in the South, a new report from the
American Forest Foundation (AFF) revealed private and family landowners in the
South offer a solution to help at-risk wildlife species.





 Southern forests rank at the top in terms of biodiversity when measured by the
number of wildlife and plant species. But, due to a variety of reasons, a
significant number of the South's wildlife species are at risk. The reasons
include: forest conversion to non-forest uses such as strip malls and commercial
expansion; fragmented waterways; natural fire suppression; and an influx of
invasive species.



 Currently, there are 224 forest-dependent species listed as endangered or
threatened. And an additional 293 species could be listed in the near future
through a candidate and petitioned process.



 At the same time, these Southern forests are some of the most productive,
supplying raw material for consumer wood products worldwide. They also supply
nearly 1.1 million people in rural communities with jobs.



 According to the report, Southern Wildlife at Risk: Family Forest Owners Offer
a Solution, family landowners, who own more than 58 percent of forests in the
South, are key to providing forested habitat for at-risk species while
continuing to fuel the South's forest economy.



 Almost 90 percent of southern landowners say protecting and improving wildlife
habitat is the top reason they own land. In addition, 73 percent state they want
to do more on their land for wildlife in the future. Landowners cite an
uncertainty about whether they are doing right by their land, difficulty finding
support and the cost of management, as barriers.



 The AFF report highlights it is possible to both protect at-risk wildlife and
continue to meet the demands for wood from family lands. The report also found,
through a spatial analysis, 35 million areas across the South, where an increase
in family and private landowners managing could help protect at-risk species,
while providing sustainable wood supplies.



 Already projects in these key acre areas are getting started, with a variety of
partners, including the American Forest Foundation and the U.S. Forest Service,
collaborating. Together the partnerships are conducting outreach to landowners
and helping them to connect with trusted resources like foresters and get
started managing for wildlife.



 According to the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, these partnerships have
prevented the need to protect more than 70 species across the Southeast. They
have also led to improved status or delisting of another dozen species.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              940 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 3, 2016 Saturday

Washington: Southern Landowners Want to Help At-Risk Wildlife Species

LENGTH: 467  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: United States Department of Agriculture  has issued the following
news release:



 Amid rising numbers of at-risk wildlife in the South, a new report from the
American Forest Foundation (AFF) revealed private and family landowners in the
South offer a solution to help at-risk wildlife species.





 Southern forests rank at the top in terms of biodiversity when measured by the
number of wildlife and plant species. But, due to a variety of reasons, a
significant number of the South's wildlife species are at risk. The reasons
include: forest conversion to non-forest uses such as strip malls and commercial
expansion; fragmented waterways; natural fire suppression; and an influx of
invasive species.



 Currently, there are 224 forest-dependent species listed as endangered or
threatened. And an additional 293 species could be listed in the near future
through a candidate and petitioned process.



 At the same time, these Southern forests are some of the most productive,
supplying raw material for consumer wood products worldwide. They also supply
nearly 1.1 million people in rural communities with jobs.



 According to the report, Southern Wildlife at Risk: Family Forest Owners Offer
a Solution, family landowners, who own more than 58 percent of forests in the
South, are key to providing forested habitat for at-risk species while
continuing to fuel the South's forest economy.



 Almost 90 percent of southern landowners say protecting and improving wildlife
habitat is the top reason they own land. In addition, 73 percent state they want
to do more on their land for wildlife in the future. Landowners cite an
uncertainty about whether they are doing right by their land, difficulty finding
support and the cost of management, as barriers.



 The AFF report highlights it is possible to both protect at-risk wildlife and
continue to meet the demands for wood from family lands. The report also found,
through a spatial analysis, 35 million areas across the South, where an increase
in family and private landowners managing could help protect at-risk species,
while providing sustainable wood supplies.



 Already projects in these key acre areas are getting started, with a variety of
partners, including the American Forest Foundation and the U.S. Forest Service,
collaborating. Together the partnerships are conducting outreach to landowners
and helping them to connect with trusted resources like foresters and get
started managing for wildlife.



 According to the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, these partnerships have
prevented the need to protect more than 70 species across the Southeast. They
have also led to improved status or delisting of another dozen species.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              941 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Kalgoorlie Miner (Western Australia)

                             April 27, 2015 Monday
                                 First Edition

Camel shoot culls 1800 feral beasts

SECTION: KAL; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 314  words


A cohort of shooters with semi-automatic weapons has finalised a 10-day feral
camel shoot in the northern Goldfields, culling more than 1800 beasts.

The shoot, undertaken by Department of Agriculture and Food staffers, covered an
area described by Goldfields Nullarbor Rangelands Biosecurity Association chief
executive Ross Wood as the pastoral interface surrounding Wiluna.

The operation was jointly funded by the Shire of Wiluna and the GNRBA to combat
problems associated with an influx of feral camels, which have been guzzling
water supplies on properties such as Carnegie, Wongawol, Granite Peak and the
383,510ha Prenti Downs.

Despite labelling the shoot a success, Mr Wood renewed calls for State and
Federal Governments to take control of the camel situation on unmanaged crown
land.

Next time it's a bit drier in the interior we will have to start filling back
into the stations and we will have to keep going, he said.

What we really need to have happen is for the Government to take responsibility
for unmanaged crown land and to control the wild animals in UCL so they don't
continually keep spilling into pastoral properties, because the pastoralists are
having to deal with these invasions from UCL.

The camels are left to drop and rot upon shooting, as a lack of roads makes any
other option unviable.

With current camel stocks, the GNRBA is trying to undertake two camel shoots a
year, but is only  covering about one fifth of the area that needs to be
surveyed.

We extend right out to the border and these camels impact on everything, Mr Wood
said.

And they move in and out according to the conditions on the inland areas.

There has been an enormous amount of camels around Laverton  we were lucky to
catch the animals that we did up around Wiluna because they hadn't moved as much
as we anticipated.

The shoot cost around $70,000, and used five staff and a helicopter.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2015 West Australian NewsPapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              942 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      Kalgoorlie Miner (Western Australia)

                             April 27, 2015 Monday
                                 First Edition

Camel shoot culls 1800 feral beasts

SECTION: KAL; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 314  words


A cohort of shooters with semi-automatic weapons has finalised a 10-day feral
camel shoot in the northern Goldfields, culling more than 1800 beasts.

The shoot, undertaken by Department of Agriculture and Food staffers, covered an
area described by Goldfields Nullarbor Rangelands Biosecurity Association chief
executive Ross Wood as the pastoral interface surrounding Wiluna.

The operation was jointly funded by the Shire of Wiluna and the GNRBA to combat
problems associated with an influx of feral camels, which have been guzzling
water supplies on properties such as Carnegie, Wongawol, Granite Peak and the
383,510ha Prenti Downs.

Despite labelling the shoot a success, Mr Wood renewed calls for State and
Federal Governments to take control of the camel situation on unmanaged crown
land.

Next time it's a bit drier in the interior we will have to start filling back
into the stations and we will have to keep going, he said.

What we really need to have happen is for the Government to take responsibility
for unmanaged crown land and to control the wild animals in UCL so they don't
continually keep spilling into pastoral properties, because the pastoralists are
having to deal with these invasions from UCL.

The camels are left to drop and rot upon shooting, as a lack of roads makes any
other option unviable.

With current camel stocks, the GNRBA is trying to undertake two camel shoots a
year, but is only  covering about one fifth of the area that needs to be
surveyed.

We extend right out to the border and these camels impact on everything, Mr Wood
said.

And they move in and out according to the conditions on the inland areas.

There has been an enormous amount of camels around Laverton  we were lucky to
catch the animals that we did up around Wiluna because they hadn't moved as much
as we anticipated.

The shoot cost around $70,000, and used five staff and a helicopter.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2015 West Australian NewsPapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              943 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          Huddersfield Daily Examiner

                             March 23, 2009 Monday
                                  1ST Edition

An end to cramped housing

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 124 words


COUNCILS could be given new powers to stop homes on quiet streets being
converted into cramped accommodation for migrant families, it has been revealed.

Ministers are considering extending licensing laws designed to cover large,
three storey buildings in urban areas to include smaller properties in rural
towns and villages.

The move comes amid concerns unscrupulous landlords are avoiding laws on Houses
of Multiple Occupation (HMOs) by cramming workers into smaller semi-detached
houses. An influx of agriculture workers to Breckland in Norfolk saw the number
of HMOs go from four to 480 in four years.

Communities Secretary Hazel Blears said the definition of HMOs was "quite fine"
and warned "smaller properties" were being transformed.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2009 MGN Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              944 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 30, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

County May Buy Development Rights to Land;
Stafford Looks to Slow Growth

BYLINE: Steven Ginsberg, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 457 words


Stafford County officials are considering a plan to preserve undeveloped land
into perpetuity, marking the latest attempt by planners to stem the heavy influx
of new residents.

Under the plan, the county would buy development rights from landowners, who
would agree not to develop the land. Instead, landowners would continue to use
their property for agricultural, logging or other means that would ensure it is
not developed. Thus, landowners would retain control and ownership of the land,
but the county would hold the right to develop it.

"For anybody that wants to keep their land, this is a pretty good deal," said
Lee Simmons, chairman of the Agriculture Commission, which will forward a
recommendation on the proposal to the Board of Supervisors next month. "You
could never develop it unless the county gave you permission to develop it."

Presumably, that would not happen. Over the last decade, Stafford has added more
than 30,000 residents, reshaping it from a nondescript community between
Richmond and Washington to a booming bedroom suburb of both cities. With the new
residents has come new pressures, including strained roads, crowded schools and
taxed services.

During that expansion, county leaders did not seek to temper growth. In recent
years, as many services have reached their breaking point and as real estate
taxes have risen to one of the highest levels in the state, officials have
sought new ways to slow the population surge.

Earlier this year, officials slowed growth by approving a revision of the
county's home inspection practices that reduced the number of new houses that
could be inspected each day.

Another plan under consideration is a transportation impact fee, a slow-growth
tool approved by the state but untested in localities. Under the fee plan,
developers would be charged a specified amount to aid road construction. County
officials are unsure whether they would ultimately lose money because of
obligations attached to the fees.

Funding for the preservation plan would work like this: The county would take
out a special loan, called a Treasury Strip, for 25 years. The county would pay
some interest on the loan each year, but the bulk would come in a balloon
payment at the end of the 25-year term. At the same time, the county would pay
an agreed-upon percentage, based on interest rates, to landowners for their
development rights. The county doesn't know how much the program would cost.

If a landowner dies, the agreement would be passed on to the estate, and if a
landowner sells the land, the buyer would also be bound to the deal.

There is little arable land left in Stafford, but there are many large, wooded
plots that could be preserved under the proposal, officials said.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post


                              945 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 30, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

County May Buy Development Rights to Stem Growth

BYLINE: Steven Ginsberg, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: PRINCE WILLIAM EXTRA; Pg. T04

LENGTH: 457 words


Stafford County officials are considering a plan to preserve undeveloped land
into perpetuity, marking the latest attempt by planners to stem the heavy influx
of new residents.

Under the plan, the county would buy development rights from landowners, who
would agree not to develop the land. Instead, landowners would continue to use
their property for agricultural, logging or other means that would ensure it is
not developed. Thus, landowners would retain control and ownership of the land,
but the county would hold the right to develop it.

"For anybody that wants to keep their land, this is a pretty good deal," said
Lee Simmons, chairman of the Agriculture Commission, which will forward a
recommendation on the proposal to the Board of Supervisors next month. "You
could never develop it unless the county gave you permission to develop it."

Presumably, that would not happen. Over the last decade, Stafford has added more
than 30,000 residents, reshaping it from a nondescript community between
Richmond and Washington to a booming bedroom suburb of both cities. With the new
residents has come new pressures, including strained roads, crowded schools and
taxed services.

During that expansion, county leaders did not seek to temper growth. In recent
years, as many services have reached their breaking point and as real estate
taxes have risen to one of the highest levels in the state, officials have
sought new ways to slow the population surge.

Earlier this year, officials slowed growth by approving a revision of the
county's home inspection practices that reduced the number of new houses that
could be inspected each day.

Another plan under consideration is a transportation impact fee, a slow-growth
tool approved by the state but untested in localities. Under the fee plan,
developers would be charged a specified amount to aid road construction. County
officials are unsure whether they would ultimately lose money because of
obligations attached to the fees.

Funding for the preservation plan would work like this: The county would take
out a special loan, called a Treasury Strip, for 25 years. The county would pay
some interest on the loan each year, but the bulk would come in a balloon
payment at the end of the 25-year term. At the same time, the county would pay
an agreed-upon percentage, based on interest rates, to landowners for their
development rights. The county doesn't know how much the program would cost.

If a landowner dies, the agreement would be passed on to the estate, and if a
landowner sells the land, the buyer would also be bound to the deal.

There is little arable land left in Stafford, but there are many large, wooded
plots that could be preserved under the proposal, officials said.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post


                              946 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          Harden Murrumburrah Express

                                 March 9, 2016

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 578  words


What a disgusting, inaccurate and totally uncalled for letter Jock Munro had
published last week about Bill Heffernan. Senator Bill has been probably the
best representative of country people, and particularly farmers we have ever
had. Perhaps he didn't give a lot of support to the AWB retaining the "iconic"
single desk but not many did.

AWB was certainly "iconic" in that  it was the corrupt actions of some of the
directors and senior staff, as found by the Cole Royal Commission into their
activities, that caused the loss of the single desk, certainly not Bill
Heffernan. Bribes totalling at least $180 million were soon discovered. Quite a
number were found guilty and pleaded as so and were convicted. A couple more are
to stand trial soon I understand. AWB self destructed. They considered
themselves above the law.

Bill has a wonderful record of achievement. Jock's only claim to fame is in
leading the Flat Earth Society to their doom.

One of the primary aims of the Cunningham Valley Action Group Inc (CVAG) is to
help ensure that the community is accurately informed about Blantyre Farms
proposed mega-piggery.

With that in mind we'd like to respond to some statements ' some of which are
accurate, some of which are not ' that have been circulating in the community.

It has been accurately stated that a major issue with the mega-piggery proposal
is the 'potential risk of run-off into the creek from freak weather events. This
has to be mitigated against'. Agreed.

The Environmental Impact Statement submitted by Blantyre Farms, although
required to do so, did not submit the required information and analysis to show
how such an event would be mitigated against.

Some have questioned our statement in the letter to the editor (February 4,
2016) in which we indicated the Harden Shire Council is not prepared for an
influx of intensive agriculture.

Other than to define the term 'intensive livestock agriculture' and state that
intensive livestock agriculture is prohibited in Zone RU4 Rural Small Holdings,
the Harden Environmental Plan 2011 does not specifically address intensive
livestock agriculture and which areas of the shire are capable of sustaining
activities that pose a threat to vulnerable groundwater and drinking water
catchment areas.

In contrast to the proposed mega-piggery, the recently established intensive
duck farm is not located in a vulnerable groundwater zone.

We have also made it known via our website, cunninghamvalleyag.com, that the
council is faced with a critical decision because, if the proposed mega-piggery
goes ahead it would be the first intensive agriculture of its kind to be
situated in the Cunningham Creek Valley.

Some have questioned if it is the first example as intensive feedlots exist in
the valley already. We would like to be clear about what constitutes Cunningham
Valley. Cunningham Creek begins in the vicinity of Frank Cullen Bridge, 'Four
Mile', and winds east, south-east and south to meet the Jugiong Creek, north of
Jugiong.

It is a sensitive drinking water catchment area. Although there is at least one
intensive feedlot south of the Harden township, to our knowledge, there is not
currently an example of intensive livestock agriculture in the Cunningham Creek
Valley.

Ross Flanery has publicly questioned how Cunningham Valley Action Group knew
'what questions were posed to Blantyre Farms''.  CVAG obtained a copy of the
letter under the Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009 (GIPA Act).

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              947 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Greeley Tribune (Colorado)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              July 19, 2013 Friday

USDA purchasing lamb to help struggling industry

BYLINE: Eric Brown, Greeley Tribune, Colo.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 453 words


July 19--The federal government announced Thursday it will make available as
much as $5 million for purchasing lamb to help an industry challenged with
oversupply, low prices and high feed costs.

It came as welcome news in Weld County. The county is ranked No. 1 in the nation
for value and number of sheep and lamb, according to the most recent U.S. Census
of Agriculture.

"You really hate to rely on the government, but that's the position we're in
now," said Mike Harper, owner of Harper's Feedlot near Eaton, which has a
capacity to feed about 65,000 lambs, and altogether sees about 200,000 head go
through its facility during the course of a year.

A news release from the U.S. Department of Agriculture stated the lamb products
purchased by the federal government will go toward food nutrition assistance
programs, including food banks.

Going back a couple years, the demand for U.S.-produced lamb increased -- as
drought in other lamb-producing parts of the world caused a shortage in supply
-- and prices hit historic highs.

It was great at the time, but Harper, along with ag economists, say the industry
priced itself out of the market.

Once lamb prices got too high at the grocery store, consumers started buying
less.

Adding to the trouble, the U.S. market has recently seen an influx of lamb
coming in from other countries, and the ongoing, widespread U.S. drought and the
high feed costs that came with it have made things even worse.

Harper said he's now selling his fed lambs to meat packers -- JBS USA in Greeley
and Superior in Denver -- for about half of what he was two years ago.

And because the demand is low, he's had to keep lambs in his feedlot so long
that some are weighing over 200 pounds -- much heavier than the 145- to
160-pound lambs packers want.

Harper said, though, he now sees "a light at the end of the tunnel," adding that
he might get rid of his last overweight lambs sometime next month.

The federal government purchasing $5 million in meat will hopefully help move
along the recovery process, he added.

Last summer, the federal government announced its intentions to purchase up to
$170 million of lamb, pork, chicken and catfish to help relieve pressure on
livestock producers during the drought and bring the nation's meat supply in
line with demand.

Also, the struggles in the lamb industry last year also led some to push for an
investigation into the sheep procurement practices of meatpackers. However,
Harper, ag economists and others said the investigation was unnecessary -- the
low prices were simply the free market at work.

___ (c)2013 the Greeley Tribune (Greeley, Colo.) Visit the Greeley Tribune
(Greeley, Colo.) at www.greeleytribune.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20130719-GY-USDA-purchasing-lamb-to-help-struggling-industry-0719-20130719

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GY


                         Copyright 2013 Greeley Tribune


                              948 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                    The Daily Telegraph (Sydney, Australia)

                            January 26, 2001, Friday

Floor price will ease the burden

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 336 words


THE economic theory behind deregulation in any industry is to produce lower
prices for the consumer through greater efficiency and competition.

However, with the deregulation of milk -- despite a 6c reduction in the retail
price -- federal

and State governments have created a Frankenstein monster.

With price deregulation in 1998, the retail price of milk went up -- not down --
by as much as 24c in a seemingly never-ending series of increases.

Now, six months after deregulation at the farm gate, our dairy farmers -- and
ultimately the State economy -- are paying a much higher price.

More than 300 dairy farmers have been forced out of the business because of the
influx of cheaper milk from Victoria, a State that controls 60 per cent of the
Australian industry.

The availability of the Victorian milk to local producers has forced the farm
gate price from more than 50c to around 26c a litre. The only option for many
growers is to sell at a loss at the lowered price or throw out the milk and get
out of the industry.

Estimates are that this is what half of the

State's farmers will be forced to do, resulting in the loss of 6000 jobs and
diminished wealth in rural communities.

The irony is that all States except Victoria were against deregulation of the
industry; their support was essentially bought by the offer of a $1.7billion
federal government assistance package, which has proved to be insufficient.

State Agriculture Minister Richard Amery argued that the Federal Government
should institute a national floor price for milk because of the dominance of
Victoria.

It was an incongruous argument at the time when the goal was to deregulate the
industry -- however, in the light of the fallout, a floor price or a price to
producers averaged between the States, would lessen the brutal impact on NSW
growers.

There can be no argument of the benefit of deregulation to consumers, but in
this case, for the saving of a few miserable cents, it hardly seems worthwhile.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: DTM

                   Copyright 2001 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              949 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                           October 19, 2016 Wednesday

3-day "Book Fair" begins at MNSUA

LENGTH: 271  words

DATELINE: New York


New York, Oct. 19 -- A three-day "Book Fair" of Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University
of Agriculture (MNSUA) began here on Monday.

As many as 150 stalls have been set up by publishers where books on various
topics were put on display. On the first day huge influx of visitors
particularly students from different schools, colleges and universities were
witnessed.

MNSUA Vice Chancellor Prof Dr Professor Asif Ali inaugurated the Book Fair.
Director Mango Research Institute (MRI) Hameedullah was chief guest in the
opening ceremony.

Speaking on the occasion, Vice Chancellor Dr Asif urged the students to pay
immense focus on books reading for knowledge. He visited different stalls and
appreciated publishers for putting books related to almost all disciplines in
the fair.

There are nearly 150,000 books in the Fair. The books on Agronomy, Entomology,
Soil Sciences, Plant Breeding and Genetics, Horticulture, Food Sciences,
Literature, History, Arts, Sports have been displayed in the Fair, said Public
Relations Officer (PRO) MNSUA Muhammad Ali Raza. He informed that there was 27
concession on sale of these books. Similarly, five deserving students would be
given syllabus books free of cost, on last day of the fair. He observed that the
university had invited heads of schools and colleges, local politicians and many
others. He also appreciated keen interest taken by students and other citizens
on first day of the book fair

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              950 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          THE JOURNAL (Newcastle, UK)

                      January 5, 2006, Thursday Edition 1

Waiting farmers borrow more

BYLINE: By The Journal

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 34

LENGTH: 368 words


   Farmers are increasing the amount of money they borrow while they wait for
their Single Payment to arrive, according to lending data released from
Barclays.

According to the bank's figures, the beef and sheep sector was the first to show
a significant change in borrowing trend, with farmers needing an influx of cash
to help them pay for things such as flock and herd replacements.

Until this year, sheep producers received the Sheep Annual Premium Scheme
payment in October. Consequently, as farmers had less need to borrow during the
month of October 2004 Barclays lending to the sector reduced by 8%.

However, during October this year lending increased slightly lending at the end
of the month was 19% higher than at the same time last year.

A similar pattern emerged in the arable sector.

During November this year Barclays saw no change in lending to the sector,
whereas last year receipt of Arable Area Aid Payment cheques reduced debt during
the month by 7%.

Lending balances to the arable sector at the end of November 2005 were 21%
higher than at the same point last year.

However, not all the increases in lending are due to delayed Single Payments.
Increases to both sectors have been seen throughout the year, driven by low
commodity prices, higher costs and a degree of restructuring in the industry.

Commenting on the data, Euryn Jones, agricultural policy director at Barclays,
said: "These figures provide a clear indication of the support that Barclays is
providing its customers to enable them to continue trading whilst they await
receipt of the first payment under the Single Payment Scheme.

"Whilst the majority of our customers in Wales and Scotland will have received
their payments by the end of December, farming businesses in England are
unlikely to receive any payment until March, and even then it's doubtful whether
the total payment will be paid."

Barclays estimated that even if the whole Single Payment was received in March,
the total cost to the English farming industry in increased borrowing and
reduced credit balances would be 25m if only half the payment is received in
March with the balance paid in June, this cost could rise to 38m.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2006 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd


                              951 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             April 3, 2008 Thursday

Six billion reasons why immigrants matter

BYLINE: WIKTOR MOSZCZYNSKI

SECTION: FEATURES; Comment; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 842 words


Their lordships have spoken. Their 82-page report on the economic impact of
immigration claims to cover all aspects of the influx into Britain, from the New
Commonwealth to the New Europe. But searching through the morass of graphs and
witness statements, I failed to find proper recognition of the current status of
the ever-visible Polish workers within British society.

Perhaps this was because, of those 76 witnesses, not one was a Pole or a Central
European. In fact, there was not a single expert witness from any of the new
immigrant communities, many of whom have eminent scholars in economics and
sociology who could have contributed. Not for the first time, Poles experience a
déjà vu of the "Yalta syndrome'', so called after the 1945 summit between
Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin that carved up eastern Europe.

Some of the report's conclusions are predictable. The Federation of Poles in
Britain, for which I am spokesman, has long been badgering ministers and MPs
about the abysmal lack of reliable statistics for the population here; the
resentment felt by those on low incomes or unemployed at the new influx of
hard-working Poles; the ruthless exploitation of some of the immigrant workers;
the lack of school place provision for the families of new workers locally; and
the need to intensify the free English lessons programme.

While we supported the Government's controversial decision in 2004 to allow
citizens of the new EU states to work in Britain, we were concerned at the lack
of foresight regarding the social problems that would accompany such a large
influx. Only 13,000 would come every year, said the Government. One of the
funniest pages in the report was the appendix that recounted how German social
scientists advising the Government got this prediction so terribly wrong.

The House of Lords committee report acknowledged that immigrants contributed
some pounds 6 billion annually into the economy, but then made the astounding
statement that this "was irrelevant''. Since when has GDP been irrelevant? It is
always an important factor in the measure of any economy.

Instead, their lordships stated that this increase should be measured on income
per head of each indigenous resident, and on that basis they concluded that the
benefits for these residents "were small''. The main beneficiaries, the report
claims, are large-scale employers and the immigrants themselves; the losers are
those on low incomes, which is then averaged out to mean nearly everybody.

The Little Englanders who have consistently opposed immigration took no time to
say "I told you so!'' and, inevitably, the growing number of "hate crimes''
against Poles in rural areas will increase as a result. One could see similar
outbursts of rage when earlier immigration of Flemings in the 14th century and
Huguenots in the 17th century enriched the English economy, but left a large
proportion of the population feeling resentful and destitute. Again, the same
happened with the advent of industrialisation, and when the labour market was
opened to women. These pockets of resentment occur because the economic gains of
society have never been evenly distributed among the population and also because
the welfare system no longer encourages many indigenous residents to seek work.
This is hardly the fault of the immigrant.

The million or so Poles who have come here in the past five years definitely
came to work. They are three times more likely to be law-abiding than the
average British resident, and the 134 Polish Catholic churches are packed. The
most dreaded words for a Polish priest are not "mortal sin'', but "fire
regulations''.

True, many Poles now go to school here, are treated by the NHS and some receive
child benefit, but only three per cent are eligible for other subsidies. There
is an extra burden on local health and education authorities and police
associations: many of these social costs however are covered by their pounds 1.9
billion a year contribution to the Exchequer in income tax and national
insurance, and that figure does not include their contribution to council tax.

Their presence has been hugely popular among the middle classes, who needed
plumbers and nannies, and welcomed by the catering and construction industries,
local public transport and by Scottish agriculture, which they have saved from
extinction. Trade unions seek to recruit them. So does the Army. Their work
ethic has been praised by employers, customers and fellow workers alike. It is
resented, however, by those who feel that the crowded labour market for the
unskilled and lowly paid is no longer a level playing field. The report will
encourage them to say: "Poles go home''.

And what if they do leave? Stories that many Poles may be returning to a now
more prosperous Poland are a little exaggerated, but have raised panic among
employers, particularly in the rural industries. Those who were once belabouring
the Poles consistently for their presence will now call them "deserters'' for
threatening to leave. If only Britain could make up its mind.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              952 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Trust (Abuja)

                                October 24, 2014

Herders/Farmers Crises - FG Moves to Ban Cattle Movement

BYLINE: Isiaka Wakili

LENGTH: 387 words


The Federal Government has decided to ban the movement of cattle to solve
perennial clashes between herdsmen and farmers in the country.

The decision was taken at the Presidential Villa in Abuja yesterday during the
National Economic Council (NEC) meeting chaired by Vice President Mohammed
Namadi Sambo.

Those at the meeting included Secretary to the Government of the Federation
Anyim Pius Anyim, the governors of Adamawa, Anambra, Bayelsa, Benue, Bauchi,
Borno, Cross River, Ebonyi, Kaduna, Kebbi, Ondo, Niger, Plateau States as well
as the acting governor of Taraba State and the deputy governors of Kogi and Abia
States.

Addressing journalists after the three-hour closed-door meeting, Benue State
Governor Gabriel Suswam said the council resolved to phase out cattle movement
because of the security problems it had created in some states.

He said the council agreed that the Federal Ministries of Agriculture and
National Planning would go round the six geo-political zones to sensitize
farmers and herdsmen on the need to stop cattle movement.

Suswam said a committee he chaired, in its report urged the council to look into
such critical issues as struggle for land and water resources by herdsmen and
farmers, uncontrolled influx of nomadic farmers into Nigeria and issues on
grazing reserves in states.

He said the committee recommended the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) should
provide seed funding of N100 billion to help states establish mini modern
ranches across the federation.

Suswam said the committee also recommended that considering the present
realities, all grazing reserves/cattle routes already gazetted and encroached
upon should be recovered and improved upon.

The governor said the committee also suggested that ranching and modern
technologies of livestock production such as meat processing and packaging be
established.

The committee, Suswam added, also recommended that the National Orientation
Agency (NOA) and relevant ministries, departments and agencies of government
(MDAs) should organise sensitisation and education workshops for herdsmen and
farmers to build trust and confidence between both parties.

He said the council appointed him as well as the Ministers of National Planning
and Agriculture to come up with the final framework for the approval and
implementation of the recommendations.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              953 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                          November 19, 2008 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

NDP queries moving expenses

BYLINE: James Wood, Saskatchewan News Network

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 452  words


The Saskatchewan Party is touting the influx of people back into the province
but the Opposition NDP said Tuesday the government's political staffers have
some added incentive to come to Saskatchewan.

According to answers provided to a written question by the NDP, the province has
shelled out nearly $200,000 for moving expenses from out-of-province of 12
executive council and ministerial employees.

Queries to the premier's and ministerial offices showed the government paid
$35,000 for the relocation costs from Manitoba of one communications operative
in media services and $20,000 for the agriculture minister's chief of staff to
move from Alberta.

"That is outrageous," said NDP deputy leader Pat Atkinson to reporters after
raising the issue in question period.

"It's surprising that political staffers are having their moving expenses paid
for. That's point number one. Point number two is the amount. $35,000, if in
fact it is to move from Brandon, Man., I say, rent a U-Haul and make the journey
across Highway Number One to Regina. $35,000, it sounds like they're moving from
Dubai or Pakistan, India or China."

But the government argued it is simply following public service commission
guidelines and that the former NDP government had also paid relocation expenses
for political staffers.

"There are costs of doing business," said deputy premier Ken Krawetz.

"There are costs of a government applying the guidelines of the public service
commission in a fair and equitable fashion. So that's what we did."

The Sask. Party provided details of an $8,200 payment of moving expenses for an
employee of the Saskatoon cabinet office in 2002 and $2,600 for another employee
moved from Assiniboia to Regina for a job with executive council in 2000 under
the NDP administration. Some employees of executive council's planning and
priorities secretariat, a mixture of civil servants and political staffers, had
moving expenses of up to $28,000 paid in the 1990s.

But Atkinson said it was not universal for the NDP government to pick up the
moving costs of political staff, including, for example, an employee who had
moved from Alberta to take the same media services job in the NDP's last term.

At the least, the government should consider putting a cap on moving expenses,
she said.

Krawetz agreed that it should be reviewed.

He said the $35,000 expense included such items as real estate fees and
temporary accommodation while searching for a new home, which add up quickly.

The government said that legislation mandates that public service commission
guidelines must be applied to those who work directly for the premier and
cabinet ministers but the NDP argues that the law cited applies only to
ministerial assistants.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2008 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              954 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               Belfast Telegraph

                               February 26, 2001

Fortress Ulster;
 Farmers close gates against disease fears

BYLINE: By Desmond McCartan and Michael Drake

LENGTH: 432 words


NORTHERN Ireland adopted a fortress mentality today to keep the province free
from the foot-and-mouth plague spreading across the UK.

Farmers were allowing in only essential callers. Postmen, milkmen and others are
being told, if possible, to leave their supplies outside.

Over 100 Department of Agriculture vets and ancillary personnel are inspecting
farms in restricted areas.

And security was stepped up at the airports.

At Belfast International Airport a spokesman said: "We are making regular
announcements to travellers advising them to report to the Department of
Agriculture's veterinary staff if they have visited farms.

"From today there will be signs placed at strategic points throughout the
airport advising travellers what to do."

The Republic's government, in addition to strengthening the Garda presence along
the border, has also placed disinfectant mats at some 30 border crossing points
to treat vehicles travelling both ways.

There are fears a worsening foot-and-mouth situation in Britian could have
widespread implications, affecting horse racing and international rugby.

Race meetings, including next month's three-day Cheltenham Festival, could be
cancelled. Officials are looking at the big rugby matches to see what must be
done to stop travelling fans spreading the disease.

It is believed Irish fans travelling to the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff for
Ireland v Wales may have to cross special disinfection stations. No decision has
been taken about the influx of English fans to Dublin next month.

An IRFU spokesman played down reports that the matches were under threat.

"We have heard nothing to date. Race meetings may be hit obviously, but that's
because of the movement of horses rather than the actual movement of people.

"At present though, we have heard nothing official or otherwise about the
England game from this side."

A Dublin government spokesman said today: "We are treating things on a day to
day basis.

"The Minister, Joe Walsh, is a great Cheltenham fan and he will continue to
review the situation."

In England, hunting has been banned for seven days and it is possible this will
be extended.

The Jockey Club has also cancelled a point-to-point event near the Essex
abattoir where the outbreak was first noticed.

The Cheltenham meeting, one of the most prestigious events in the racing
calendar, is a huge favourite with Irish race-goers.

Although horses are not affected by the disease, they can carry it. There are
just 15 days to go to the Cheltenham meeting.


LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

TYPE: Paper

                Copyright 2001 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd.


                              955 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                 The Daily News (Jacksonville, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           October 25, 2012 Thursday

Planning for the far future

BYLINE: Lindell Kay, The Daily News, Jacksonville, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 749 words


Oct. 25--Regional leaders used Lego blocks Wednesday to build their vision of
the future.

During the planning event in Trenton on Wednesday, 300 delegates were asked to
map out their mental imagery of what the region will look like in 2050, to
include more than a million new people moving into Southeastern North Carolina
in the next four decades. The delegates spent hours mapping out where they
wanted to see new roads, railroads, people, green spaces and jobs, which were
represented by different colored yarn and Lego blocks.

Thirty groups were formed and asked to suggest alternative scenarios to
accommodate growth through the year 2050. The different maps are being
calculated, and a report of the findings is expected to be available within
three months.

A computerized survey of participants conducted by organizers showed that the
top priority for the area over the next century should protection of
agriculture, military and tourism with a secondary priority of protecting open
spaces and natural resources.

The delegates agreed education and leadership were necessary to maintaining a
high quality of life with an influx of new residents. Creating multiple growth
centers also scored high as a way to manage such a large population.

"We're going to need railroads," Jacksonville developer Cliff Ray said. "We need
that connection for residential and commercial growth."

Ray was one of 300 representatives with various backgrounds including business,
development, community, government, environmental, academic and military
attending from Onslow, Carteret, Craven, Duplin, Jones, Lenoir, Pamlico and
Wayne counties.

Spearheading the move to be prepared for the future is Mark Sutherland,
executive director of N.C. Eastern Region-PlanIt EAST.

His organization has conducted a comparative community analysis to learn from
other regions that went through unplanned growth. That analysis found the
establishment of super highways to be starting point of a population explosion.
Southeastern North Carolina is seeing the beginnings of that with the near
completion of the expansions of both U.S. 70 and 17.

"We are looking at what was done right and what was done wrong," Sutherland
said, adding that 30 years ago the nine county Southeastern North Carolina
region was mostly farm land with low density housing and similar incomes. That's
changed and will change even more.

"We found that there is no turning back," he said. "The tipping point for
massive growth was always improved access."

Sutherland said the growth is a regional issue because many residents will be
living in one county but working and playing in another.

Communities that didn't plan for change lost their agribusiness and military
capacity due to housing encroachment.

Inherent in all the planning must be a consensus to preserve military training
space, or area Marine bases might have to relocate, said Retired Maj. Gen. Carl
Jensen, former commanding general of Marine Corps Installations East.

"There's a lot of changes in store for out region," Sutherland said. "Jones and
Pamlico are going to lose population but also be the recipients of workers in
Onslow and Carteret needing an affordable place to live."

Sutherland said it's a regional problem to determine where these one million new
people will live and where the estimated 400,000 new homes will go without
consuming 225,000 acres of farmland in Onslow, Carteret and the other counties.

"We have to grow by choice, not by chance," Sutherland said. "What we do here
today will equip decision makers 20 years from now."

The event was conducted by Reality Check, a collaborative regional visioning
process of the Urban Land Institute. Planning sessions have been held previously
in the Triangle area, Charleston, S.C., Hampton Roads, Va., and eight other
areas. Named EnvisionEAST-2050, Wednesday's event is one of about a dozen that
have been conducted across the country since 2005.

The $500,000 project was conducted by PlanIt EAST, which is a private-public
partnership headed by N.C. Eastern Region with additional funding from the
Defense Department's Office of Economic Adjustment, the State of North Carolina,
each of the nine member counties and several private donors.

Contact Daily News Senior Reporter Lindell Kay at 910-219-8455 or
lindell.kay@jdnews.com Follow him on Twitter and friend him on Facebook @
1lindell.

___ (c)2012 The Daily News (Jacksonville, N.C.) Visit The Daily News
(Jacksonville, N.C.) at www.jdnews.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121025-JN-Planning-for-the-far-future-1025-20121025

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JN


                         Copyright 2012 The Daily News


                              956 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  Belfast News

                            October 8, 2009 Thursday

Dog owner's fear over licence fee

LENGTH: 169 words



HIGHLIGHT: PROPOSALS to increase the cost of dog licences in Northern Ireland
from £5 to £50, as well as a raft of other tough new measures, will help stamp
out irresponsible dog owners, it has been claimed.


Fears have been raised, however, that the dramatic 1,000 per cent hike in the
licence fee could lead to more dogs being abandoned by already cash-strapped
Ulster owners.

Earlier this week the Department of Agriculture released their proposed new
changes to the laws surrounding dogs, which could also see the creation of a new
offence covering dog attacks on other dogs

Additionally, all dogs will have be micro-chipped to be licensed under the new
regulations.

Ballymena's Dog Warden Nigel Devine said changes to the law were overdue.

The Dogs Trust in Co Antrim which re-homes abandoned and stray dogs, fear the
proposals could see an influx of unaffordable pets to their kennels.

Gina Fox from Co Antrim, a proud owner of two German Shepherds, a Boxer and a
Doberman, faces combined licence fees of £200, if the proposals are approved.

"I accept that there has to be something done, but I think we are being unfairly
punished for the actions of the guilty dog owners, namely those who have
dangerous dogs," said Gina.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BELF


                       Copyright 2009 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              957 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 BusinessWorld

                             October 2, 2006 Monday

Zamboanga anti-avian flu unit mobilized

BYLINE: Darwin T. Wee

SECTION: Pg. S1/11

LENGTH: 273 words


Zamboanga City - Authorities have mobilized the anti-avian influenza task force
to prevent the entry of the deadly virus as the migration season of birds
starts.

The Task Force Wild Bird was convened last Friday to respond to bird flu issues
in the region, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR)
regional office said.

"The Task Force Wild Bird is an ad-hoc group to assist the region's National
Avian Influenza Task Force primarily to reinforce the monitoring of the
government's anti-bird flu program, following the expected influx of migratory
birds this year as the winter season takes in the northern and southern part of
the world," said Eduardo M. Bisquera, Jr., regional technical director of the
DENR's Protected Areas, Wildlife and Coastal Zone Management Service.

He said the task force - composed of representatives from law enforcement
agencies, academe, environmental groups, city and provincial veterinarian and
agriculture units, medical and media practitioners - would keep a close watch on
the region's more than 10 identified wetlands.

The group will set measures to prevent local fowls and even humans from
venturing into wading areas of migratory birds. It is tasked to draw information
and monitoring drives for towns near wet and marshlands that become temporary
homes of birds.

Zamboanga Peninsula is among the 20 areas being monitored by the avian flu task
force, said Dr. Leo P. Galicia, the regional veterinarian of the Agriculture
department. He said Zamboanga is a "vulnerable spot" for the H5N1 (avian) virus
because of its closeness to Malaysia and Indonesia, where avian flu cases were
documented.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2006 BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              958 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                            July 31, 2008, Thursday

DNR suggests incentives for allowing hunting

BYLINE: Tom Searls, Staff writer

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P1C

LENGTH: 455 words


West Virginia's hunting and fishing will be highlighted in advertising in
surrounding states this year in an effort to bring more tourist dollars into the
state.

"The secret is having places for people to go," said Frank Jezioro, state
Division of Natural Resources commissioner.

Jezioro spoke to members of the legislative interim Agriculture and
Agri-Business Committee about incentives for landowners who allow hunting, and
in some cases fishing, on their property.

"What all states have found is there must be an incentive and generally the
incentive is money," Jezioro said.

A number of communities around the state have huge influxes of hunters during
deer and turkey seasons mainly.

"The hunting and fishing activities in West Virginia encompass a billion dollars
a year," the commissioner said.

With the number of hunters in the state shrinking, Jezioro has been looking for
incentives that would boost those numbers. During that search, he has discovered
that many private owners have closed their land to public hunting and in some
cases leased their land to private hunting clubs.

One reason, he believes, is the possibility of being liable for someone's
injuries that occur on a person's, or company's, land.

"In today's environment they're afraid of being sued if something happens on
their land," he said.

"Wyoming has a deal that I like and this may work in West Virginia, or parts of
it," he told committee members.

That state has local convention and visitors' bureaus maintaining a list of
landowners willing to allow others to hunt on their property. Those groups refer
hunters to the landowners.

"It generates tourism dollars for those areas," Jezioro said.

Michigan gives owners a tax break for allowing public access.

"You can't expect [property owners] to lose money," the commissioner said,
adding the tax break money will come "back two or three times as tourism
dollars."

Delegate Randy Swartzmiller, D-Hancock, inquired if DNR would repay counties for
property tax breaks.

"It sounds like the incentive you're trying to give is on the backs of counties
and schoolchildren," the delegate said.

Jezioro said that was an idea from another state and West Virginia may have to
offer various types of incentives in different sections of the state.

Delegate Bill Stemple, D-Calhoun and committee chairman, said the issue is one
that needs additional study time.

"I think it's going to be an issue that comes back," he said.

Jezioro also announced the DNR is increasing bag limits on bear and deer in
certain parts of the state.

Delegate Bob Tabb, D-Jefferson, hopes DNR increases the deer bag limit in his
county, where he said the animals have been nibbling away at his crops.

Reach Tom Searls at tomsearls@wvgazette.com or 348-5198.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers


                              959 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                 Employers Law

                               December 12, 2007

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 174 words


Unemployment in Eurozone at record low

- Eurostat data released in October 2007 shows that the unemployment rate in the
13 European countries that have adopted the Euro hit a record low of 7.3% in
September 2007 - a sharp fall compared to the 8.1% registered in September 2006.
This is the lowest rate since 1993.

www.europa.eu

The UK keeps limits on Bulgarian and Romanian workers

- In an attempt to avoid an influx of workers from former Soviet bloc countries,
restrictions on Romanian and Bulgarian citizens mean they will be allowed to
work in Britain only if self-employed, highly skilled or employed in the food
and agriculture industries. Companies employing illegal Bulgarian and Romanian
workers could be fined £5,000. The policy will be reviewed on a yearly basis.

Luxembourg removes dual employees' status

- The government has introduced a Bill that will eliminate the legal distinction
between white-collar and blue-collar workers by 1 January 2009, in an attempt to
modernise the labour market and to reduce employers' administrative burden.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2007 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              960 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                 Employers Law

                               December 12, 2007

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 174 words


Unemployment in Eurozone at record low

- Eurostat data released in October 2007 shows that the unemployment rate in the
13 European countries that have adopted the Euro hit a record low of 7.3% in
September 2007 - a sharp fall compared to the 8.1% registered in September 2006.
This is the lowest rate since 1993.

www.europa.eu

The UK keeps limits on Bulgarian and Romanian workers

- In an attempt to avoid an influx of workers from former Soviet bloc countries,
restrictions on Romanian and Bulgarian citizens mean they will be allowed to
work in Britain only if self-employed, highly skilled or employed in the food
and agriculture industries. Companies employing illegal Bulgarian and Romanian
workers could be fined £5,000. The policy will be reviewed on a yearly basis.

Luxembourg removes dual employees' status

- The government has introduced a Bill that will eliminate the legal distinction
between white-collar and blue-collar workers by 1 January 2009, in an attempt to
modernise the labour market and to reduce employers' administrative burden.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2007 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              961 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                            March 11, 2004, Thursday

Regions rub their hands at prospect of relocation

BYLINE: Sam Coates

SECTION: Home news; 4

LENGTH: 472 words


LOCAL authorities are ready to mount an aggressive lobbying campaign to try to
attract the thousands of Civil Service jobs being relocated outside the capital.

Councils and regional development agencies are eagerly awaiting the report by
Sir Michael Lyons, who is expected to recommend that at least 20,000 government
jobs leave London.

The moment he publishes his findings, the Treasury will become the focus of a
big public relations exercise involving local politicians, agencies and
businessmen hoping that their areas will benefit. The local authorities know
that if they are selected and a government department appears within their
boundaries, the benefits will be enormous.

They can expect to see the kick-starting of local economies, unemployment
falling sharply and an influx of middle-class, well-paid, well-educated people.

Alan Clarke, chief executive of One NorthEast, the regional development agency,
has seen the benefits that relocation can bring. "I remember when the then
Ministry of Agriculture Intervention Board was moved from Reading to Newcastle
in the early 1990s," he said. "Before, unemployment was running in the area at
around 15 per cent. Then the ministry relocated its department.

"Although some of the staff moved from Reading, most chose to stay. This brought
500 well-paid, well-trained jobs to the area. The benefits were immediately
obvious."

More recently, the North East has benefited from the arrival of the Passport
Office, which was relocated to Durham. "That, too, seems to have gone really
well," Mr Clarke said.

He said that his organisation was enthusiastic about the opportunities expected
to be offered by the Lyons review. "The basic experience of government when it
has moved to the North East has been a success," he said. "I think it's a very
good thing."

In his interim report, Sir Michael said there was evidence that civil servants
outside the capital were happier than those in London.

"For many public sector employees, considerations of purchasing power, quality
of life and work/life balance might make relocation out of London and its
surrounds a very attractive proposition," he said. "Indeed, the quality of life
improvements enjoyed by staff who move are a consistent feature of earlier
relocations." The North East will focus on attracting those parts of the Civil
Service dedicated to technology policy areas.

Mr Clarke said that relocation would bring clear benefits for London and the
country as a whole.

"I think it's a good thing for the capital because at the moment civil servants
are occupying a lot of space in the heart of London. Yet London is a world
financial centre and surely it would be far more efficient to free up some space
for private sector employment. This will be good for the national economy."


LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2004 Times Newspapers Limited


                              962 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                          THE JOURNAL (Newcastle, UK)

                       August 5, 2003, Tuesday Edition 1

'Townies' invasion

BYLINE: By The Journal

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL, Pg. 14

LENGTH: 830 words


   City slickers like To The Manor Born's Richard de Vere are undermining North
rural communities by buying up farmland, it was warned last night.

Peter Bowles played the businessman-turned-country gent in the popular 80s
sitcom but now a new report suggests town-dwellers are taking over the
countryside for real.

The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors said nearly half of people now
buying farms were non-farmers who often had no intention of working the land
themselves.

And the Countryside Alliance warned that the trend was breaking up communities,
costing jobs in rural areas and could result in the countryside becoming "one
great manicured lawn".

Richard Dodd, North-East regional director of the Countryside Alliance, said:
"Farming has been in decline for a number of years and the small family farm
will soon be a thing of the past.

"Even a 300-acre farm can only bring in about 15,000 a year in land rent, but
the alternative is to sell the farmhouse for about 450,000, the farm cottage for
about 200,000, and the farm buildings for development into three houses for
500,000. It's not a hard financial decision.

"However, it is having a knock-on effect. The land is being taken up by
neighbouring farmers as agriculture embraces the 'big is beautiful' philosophy,
and we're seeing townspeople moving into the countryside, which is changing its
appearance and structure."

As well as pushing up house prices, because city wages enabled townspeople to
take out larger mortgages. Mr Dodd pointed out that many of them continue to use
services such as shops next to their place of work, which would harm village
life.

And an Alliance spokeswoman added: "It is quite terrifying to think of rural
Britain being one great manicured lawn. It will end up breaking up the
countryside. If people only come down for the weekend there will be ghost
towns."

The report found that 44pc of people who bought a farm between April and the end
of June were non-farmers. It said they generally bought the farm for the house,
sometimes reaching an agreement with a local farmer to manage the land for them.

Agricultural estate agents in the North East said smaller farms, up to 100 acres
or so, were being bought by non-farmers, with neighbouring farmers then buying
or renting the land.

Richard Shield, from Smiths Gore in Corbridge, said: "One has been bought by
someone from London, while another was split up and the farmhouse and some land
went to a person with an interest in countryside pursuits. Often the farms are
split up into lots, with the farmhouse going to a non-farmer and much of the
land going to existing farmers."

George White, from George F White in Alnwick, said current agricultural incomes
meant farmers couldn't afford to buy a huge farmhouse if it had less than 100
acres with it. He said: "Someone living in an affluent area like Darras Hall can
sell up their home, sometimes for round about 1m, and then buy a farm, which has
the benefits of a rural setting and often comes with farm buildings or separate
cottages.

"They can keep a few acres for the horses or to create a huge garden and then
rent the rest of the land out to a neighbouring farmer to manage."

Paul Millard, of the Country Land [CLA], said a huge proportion of agricultural
jobs had disappeared from the industry, adding: "We need action to ensure the
traditional workforce can afford to stay in traditional areas."

NFU: 'No harm done'

Farming leaders last night denied that the new breed of rural landowner was
harming the countryside.

As farmers decide to leave the land because of the economic problems facing
agriculture, their places are being taken by city folk searching for a rural
idyll.

But the National Farmers Union said that this did not mean that the land that
went with these steadings was not being farmed, with the new owners renting or
selling the acres to neighbouring farmers, or getting in contractors to do the
work.

A spokesman for the NFU said: "This trend does not mean that the land is not
farmed.

"On the contrary, a lot of the land will be bought up by other farmers or will
be contracted to other farmers to work. There's no evidence that farmland is
becoming derelict."

He added that the influx of townspeople brought much-needed capital to farming,
supported the price of farmhouses and helped to create a diverse countryside.

But he said: "However, it does keep up rural house prices, making it more
difficult for people from the countryside to stay there."

Last night, one leading North businessman also defended the influx of
townspeople to the countryside as a positive move for the environment.

Ho Sanderson and business partner Edward Aitchison bought the Grade II
architecturally listed Hartford Hall, near Morpeth, and the land surrounding it,
for residential use.

Mr Sanderson said: "There used to be a vibrant farming community here many years
ago and now we are restoring it with another community."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2003 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd


                              963 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                    August 14, 2002 Wednesday Final Edition

Eastern hay will rot unless cash is found to move it: 500 railcar loads
available for bailing, shipping costs

SOURCE: Southam Newspapers; Ottawa Citizen

BYLINE: Peter Zimonjic

SECTION: Alberta; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 337 words

DATELINE: Ottawa

More than 30,000 bales of hay will rot in the fields and another 12,000 will
waste in barns, instead of helping drought-stricken western farmers, unless the
Hay West campaign gets a large influx of cash soon.

Organizers say they have filled the 187 rail cars donated by the CPR and CN
railways and can fill another 200 with hay that's been donated.

Farmers in Ontario and Quebec have also offered the contents of their hayfields
for the campaign, but it will take $200,000 to harvest and bail it. And that
doesn't take into account the cost of the 500 rail cars needed to ship it.

Alberta Premier Ralph Klein suggested his government might be willing to foot
the $200,000 bill to cover the costs of baling the hay if that is what it would
take to help farmers.

Alberta Minister of Agriculture Shirley McClellan is looking into whether the
Alberta government will contribute to the Hay West campaign, but even if it
does, the money will not help cover the costs of shipping.

Ottawa Coun. Phil McNeely, who is co-organizing Hay West, says he welcomes
Klein's offer, but remains concerned about how he's going to get the additional
rail cars. "Somebody has to step up to the plate soon," McNeely says. "Maybe the
hay won't solve the problem, but if we can get another 700 cars out there it
will make a difference."

McNeely says he had hoped corporate sponsors would have offered some funding to
match about $40,000 donated by people and businesses from the Ottawa area, but
corporations have not been forthcoming.

McNeely estimates the cost of obtaining the rail cars will be $2 million to $3
million, if the railways don't help reduce the cost. If the additional cars were
promised, or someone offered the money to pay for them, Hay West organizers
would start baling.

Ottawa's Central Canada Exhibition announced Monday it will set up a display to
inform people about the drought. Visitors can donate money and sign a wrapped
bale of hay that will be shipped West at the end of the Ex.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Business

               Copyright 2002 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              964 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           February 5, 2015 Thursday
                                  Main Edition

GUEST COLUMN;
Charting a course with Cuba

BYLINE: David Scott; For the AJC

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 588 words


President Barack Obama recently set a new course by opening relations with Cuba.
The changes will allow more travel for Americans to Cuba and allow Americans to
bring back more goods from their visits. Cuban-Americans will be able to send
more money back to relatives. In addition, businesses will be able to have
easier financing for trade.

While full diplomatic relations are not restored, these changes will make it
easier for Georgians to conduct business in the Cuban marketplace. Georgia
businesses have new opportunities, such as poultry exports and tourist flights
from the airport. Cuba is only 621 miles from the Port of Savannah. It imports
roughly 80 percent of its food and products from as far away as New Zealand.

Even with the embargo, the United States has been Cuba's fifth-largest trading
partner since 2007. This was boosted in part by President George W. Bush's
decision in 2003 to authorize exports of U.S. agricultural products to the
island. However, no export assistance or credit guarantees were made available.
Exporters were denied access to U.S. private commercial financing, and all
transactions had to be conducted in cash in advance or with financing from
businesses in third countries.

A 2009 study by the U.S. International Trade Commission found that without
financing restrictions for agriculture exports to Cuba, trade would have
increased from 38 percent to as much as 64 percent. Among U.S. agricultural
products that could have benefited most were wheat, rice, beef, pork, processed
foods and fish. Now that such restrictions are set to be eased, Georgia
agriculture is poised to grow.

Agriculture employs roughly one of six Georgians. It contributes roughly $72.5
billion annually to our state's $786.5 billion economy.

Georgia leads the United States in the production of peanuts, pecans, watermelon
and broilers and is a top producer of peaches and blueberries. Each day, the
state's poultry industry creates roughly 29 million pounds of chicken, 6.3
million table eggs and 5.5 million hatching eggs. This industry has the most
potential to grow, since Cuba already is Georgia's sixth-largest poultry export
market.

Beyond the dollar impact an expansion of Georgia's goods into Cuba would bring,
we must also recognize that renewed ties between the United States and Cuba
would increase our standing and influence in the region and the world. An influx
of American travelers and increased trade will further expose the Cuban people
to free enterprise and American ideals. The regime will not change overnight,
but that has not stopped the U.S. from being a strong trading partner with China
and Vietnam. President Raul Castro can no longer blame the embargo for all of
Cuba's ills.

We need to move beyond the Cold War mentality so we can focus on terrorism and
other modern threats. Governments antagonistic to U.S. interests have long used
Cuba as a foreign policy tool in America's backyard. With the Russian and
Venezuelan economies faltering, Cuba will need to find a new economic partner.
What better way to push Vladimir Putin away from the Caribbean than to bring
Cuba into our orbit?

With greater inter-American cooperation and trade come greater access to our
culture of democracy and values. We must shine our light on places where human
rights issues need improvement. We must stand with our Georgia businesses and
farmers to ensure they are in as advantageous a position as possible on the
global stage. Now is the time to turn the page on the United States' foreign
policy with Cuba.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Scott, a Democrat, is U.S. representative for Georgia's
13th Congressional District./ImageData*

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2015 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                              965 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                             May 10, 2012 Thursday

PRIME Minister Julia Gillard declared last

SECTION: LETTERS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 374 words


PRIME Minister Julia Gillard declared last week Australia "could be" a food
superpower ? a great provider of reliable, quality food to meet Asia's growing
needs; pointing to food processing and strengthening irrigation to value-add.

She is either disingenuous or napve, because federal government policies ?
including the carbon tax and the Murray-Darling Basin Plan in its current form ?
stand in stark contrast to her blithe remarks.

Moreover, while the Federal Budget is an eminently practical budget that will
continue to ensure the nation is well-armoured against global economic woes,
fiscal constraint does not create the environment from which agriculture can go
forth and fully grasp emerging opportunities in Asia.

Ms Gillard has waxed lyrical about what many of us are already aware ? we are a
well-established food superpower, we have world's best practice, and we can
withstand challenges such as the high Aussie dollar and influx of cheap imports.

Rising standards of living in Asia means in coming decades there will be
enormous scope for growth ? but agriculture, like any industry, needs policy
that enables that growth, rather than constraining it.

There is no doubt the Budget is overtly a political manoeuvre ahead of the 2013
federal election, with savvy Treasurer Wayne Swan positioning himself as Robin
Hood.

His theme ? that largesse from the mining boom should be equitably shared ? will
resonate with many, but it hasn't translated to significant capital expenditure
in NSW.

Delivering the first surplus since 1990, the government has clawed back money
from high income earners, in favour of bolstering services and handing cash to
average income earners.

Agriculture leaders have welcomed spending on biosecurity and lamented the
demise of the Farm Ready program ? another tool for farmers to position
themselves to manage risk and capitalise on growth opportunities.

Rural communities will welcome almost $20 billion for public hospitals, the
implementation of the National Disability Insurance Scheme and incentives to get
dentists to the bush.

The Budget is stolid and sensible, but does not position Australian agriculture
? or other industries ? to fully explore the new El Dorado that Asian market
opportunities could create.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              966 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Daily Independent (Lagos)

                                 June 01, 2015

Govt Business Must Involve Professionals to Succeed, Ad. Agencies Tell FG

LENGTH: 1059 words


As the nation begins on a new journey, stakeholders in the marketing
communication industry are demanding the engagement of professionals in the
business of governance among other expectations. Olamide Bakare writes.

Among the different sectors of the economy, if there is one area which seems to
lack attention in terms of generating fund for the government, it is the
integrated marketing communication (IMC) sector.

Unlike commerce and oil sectors, the IMC remains one huge area aside agriculture
and tourism which have been left untapped. While the blame could not be largely
be placed on government, the level of ignorance appears to have also contributed
a bit.

No doubt, the last 16 years of democracy in marketing communication in Nigeria
has had its fair share of successes and contribution to the growth of the
nation's economy. Despite this, the last two years remained the toughest as
industry became enmeshed in crisis which almost crippled businesses for
practitioners.

However, prior to the resolution of the crisis emanating from the appointment of
the new APCON chairman following the expiration of the out gone president, Lolu
Akinwunmi, the sectoral bodies remain adamant in their resolve not to recognise
the new appointee whose appointment they said contravened the act that set up
the council.

Not too long ago, the issue was laid to rest when the Federal Government opted
to go along with the position of stakeholders by appointing Udeme Ufot. The rest
they say is history. Now that the new government has taken over, practitioners
are hopeful that it would be a new dawn for the sector.

Speaking in separate interviews with our correspondent, stakeholders in the
marketing communication business expressed their views on their expectations,
even as they remained hopeful that things would take a new turn for the business
of marketing communication.

The Chief Executive Officer of Noah Ark Advertising, Mr. Lanre Adisa, while
speaking on the policy framework needed by the industry from the new
administration, said government would do well by initiating policies that would
support the engagement of professionals in its activities.

He said: "One would love to see someone who is a visionary lead the sector. By
that, I mean someone that can take us further not just play politics without
portfolio. That is a very important thing so that whatever it is that we have as
a community, we can make it at the other end. But more importantly, government
is a big spender anywhere in the world. So, we would love government to allow
for a playing ground where professionals are consulted on areas that have to do
with the issue of communication not only in campaigns alone. All the parastatals
and government agencies have need for communication. So, it is important that
there is government policies that allow professional organisations or agencies
to manage government communication in whatever sphere."

To the publisher of Marketing Edge, Mr. John Ajayi, the coming government has a
responsibility to do more in strengthening institutions and implementing
policies that prevent influx of foreign products.

He said:"There are so many ways in which the new government of change can help
the growth of the IMC in Nigeria. One of it is by creating an enabling
environment for business operation generally such that there is strict
regulation on the unbridled influx of foreign products into the country so that
manufacturers in different sectors of the economy can attain maximum capacity
utilisation, to the extent that they can be able to sell their products in level
playing field".

"We need policies that will enhance the growth of the manufacturing sector. If
we take samples, we will notice that the business owners and operators are
groaning over this influx because some of these products don't even go through
normal regulatory processes. They don't pay tariff, requisite excise duty and
when they come into the market through the porous borders. They are offered at
relatively cheap prices thereby inadvertently or advertently killing the
manufacturing sectors. So, if manufacturers can operate in a level playing
environment with market opportunities, it then presupposes that they would have
money to promote their goods, creating branding opportunities. I think, by so
doing, they would request the services of marketing professionals who will now
have the opportunity to showcase their creativity, thereby creating unique
identity for the product. Besides, it would also stimulate local competition.
People want to ensure that they produce quality product to meet the expectations
of Nigerian consumers. Presently, production capacity is low and it is affecting
opportunity for hiring the service of IMC professionals", he added.

On his own part, principal consultant, Indigo Communication, Bolaji Abimbola,
said besides the engagement of professional in the activities and business of
government, stakeholders in the industry must see Nigeria as a big project which
needed to be rescued as contributing its quota would not be considered out of
place.

He said: "The major task for the new government is to formulate policies that
will put the nation back on the right track to project strong positive
perception of the country within and outside the country such that it would
attract foreign investment and create enabling environment for business to
thrive. It is only when businesses are successful that marketing communication
industry can actually thrive".

"In other markets, there is a lot of attention being given to marketing
communication. But this is not so in the case in Nigeria. If you ask yourself,
"how many of the Federal Government, state government ministries, MDAs have
marketing professionals handling their campaigns. I would think the incoming
administration should see the engagement of marketing professionals as a matter
of life and death if they have to deliver on the electoral promises. In that
wise, the engagement of professionals is quite imperative. Not only about the
promises, professionals could help them work through the proposals and ideas. I
think government will do well by making it a priority for its ministries,
parastatals, MDAs to patronise Nigeria marketing communication professionals.
Unlike the out gone administration who went abroad shopping for a PR firm, I
think we need to look inward.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              967 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            December 1, 2013 Sunday
                                 FOURTH EDITION

NATION DIGEST

BYLINE:  From news services

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 763 words


Plane crash in Alaska kills 4

A mother on board a small plane that crashed in remote southwestern Alaska made
a frantic phone call for help resuscitating her 5-month-old baby, then left the
fatally injured boy to lead searchers hampered by cold and fog to the crash
site. Melanie Coffee, 25, of Mountain Village, walked nearly a mile toward
lights in the village of St. Marys to meet rescuers Friday night.

The Hageland Aviation Cessna 208 turboprop left Bethel at 5:40 p.m. on a
scheduled flight for Mountain Village and eventually St. Marys. The airplane
never reached Mountain Village. It crashed around 6:30 p.m. four miles from St.
Marys, said Clint Johnson, head of the National Transportation Safety Board in
Alaska.

Pilot Terry Hansen, 68, passengers Rose Polty, 57, Richard Polty, 65, and the
infant, Wyatt Coffee, died in the crash. The survivors included Melanie Coffee,
Pauline Johnson, 37, Kylan Johnson, 14, Tanya Lawrence, 35, Garrett Moses, 30,
and Shannon Lawrence. All were seriously injured, and four were in critical
condition, Lamont said. All but Hansen and Shannon Lawrence are from Mountain
Village, troopers said. Hansen was from Bethel, according to troopers. No more
information was available about Lawrence.

Farming may attract young people o Agriculture economists have long warned that
aging farmers are staying on their land longer, delaying turnover to a younger
generation. But Ohio State University agriculture economist Carl Zulauf says the
fears have been overstated.

Zulauf said in a report last month that history shows there's an influx of young
farmers when it's possible to earn a good living. Farm income will probably
reach a record $131 billion this year.

Thanksgiving snub leads to threat o Authorities say a man in northern New Jersey
man used a machete to threaten a family who excluded him and his son from their
Thanksgiving Day celebrations. New Milford, N.J., police tell NJ.com that Joseph
Hoo, 48, of Upper Montclair, was charged with weapons offenses and making
terroristic threats. Police responding to the family's home about 2 p.m.
Thursday stopped a van leaving the residence. Police say Hoo and his son, 18,
were in the vehicle, and officers soon found an 18-inch machete and two baseball
bats inside the van.

Vehicle strikes Amish buggy; 2 killed, 1 seriously injured o Authorities say a
vehicle crashed into a horse-drawn Amish buggy in western Pennsylvania, killing
two people in the buggy and injuring a third. Lawrence County emergency
dispatchers say the accident occurred about 5:30 p.m. Saturday on a Mercer
County road, about 60 miles northwest of Pittsburgh. Lawrence County rescuers
were called to assist. Officials said the injured person in the buggy suffered
serious injuries and was flown to St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Youngstown, Ohio.

Montana asks court to toss lenient sentence for rapist teacher o The Montana
attorney general's office asked the state Supreme Court on Friday to throw out a
30-day sentence given to a teacher who raped a 14-year-old girl, saying the
punishment was illegally lenient. The state formally filed its arguments in the
appeal of the highly criticized sentence for Stacey Rambold, who was released
from Montana State Prison in September. District Judge G. Todd Baugh sparked
outrage when he commented in August that victim Cherice Moralez was "older than
her chronological age." Moralez killed herself before the case went to trial.

Hot sauce factory undergoes sniff test o After a judge ordered the partial
shutdown of the Sriracha hot sauce plant in Irwindale, Calif., experts must now
determine which parts of the factory's operation cause odors - a decision that
could affect next year's sauce supply. Sauce maker Huy Fong Foods has already
ground all the chiles for next year's supply of Sriracha hot sauce. The raw
materials for its three sauces, Sambal Oelek, Sriracha and Chili Garlic, are
created during a three-month harvesting and production cycle that concluded
earlier this month.

But the sauce must still be mixed, poured, bottled and boxed, and so far, the
city and the factory have not been able to agree on where the smell is coming
from or how to mitigate it.

Prison riot at Rikers injures guards, inmates o A late-night brawl that erupted
at the Rikers Island jail complex in New York City has left four guards and
several inmates injured. A Correction Department spokesman says the fracas at
the George Vierno Center started late Friday. Four correction officers were
treated for exposure to an unknown chemical agent. Several inmates also suffered
minor injuries.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Photo by Alaska State Troopers - This single-engine turboprop Cessna
208 crashed Friday near St. Marys, Alaska. The pilot and three passengers,
including a 5-month-old baby, were killed; six passengers were injured.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              968 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                           November 20, 2008 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Gov't staff rack up big moving bills; Cost of relocating one person to Regina
from Manitoba $35,000

BYLINE: James Wood, The StarPhoenix

SECTION: THIRD PAGE; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 457  words

DATELINE: REGINA


REGINA -- The Saskatchewan Party is touting the influx of people back into the
province but the Opposition NDP said this week the government's political
staffers have had some added incentive to come to Saskatchewan.

According to answers provided to a written question by the NDP, the province has
shelled out nearly $200,000 for moving expenses to Regina from out of province
for 12 executive council and ministerial employees.

Queries to the premier's and ministerial offices showed the government paid
$35,000 for the relocation from Manitoba of one communications operative in
media services and $20,000 for the agriculture minister's chief of staff to move
from Alberta.

"That is outrageous," NDP deputy leader Pat Atkinson said to reporters Tuesday
after raising the issue in question period.

"It's surprising that political staffers are having their moving expenses paid
for. That's point No. 1. Point No. 2 is the amount, $35,000. If in fact it is to
move from Brandon, Man., I say, rent a U-Haul and make the journey across
Highway No. 1 to Regina; (with) $35,000, it sounds like they're moving from
Dubai or Pakistan, India or China."

But the government argued it is simply following public service commission
guidelines and that the former NDP government had also paid relocation expenses
for political staffers.

"There are costs of doing business," said deputy premier Ken Krawetz.

"There are costs of a government applying the guidelines of the public service
commission in a fair and equitable fashion. So that's what we did."

The Sask. Party provided details of an $8,200 payment of moving expenses for an
employee of the Saskatoon cabinet office in 2002 and $2,600 for another employee
who moved from Assiniboia to Regina for a job with executive council in 2000
under the NDP administration. Some employees of executive council's planning and
priorities secretariat, a mixture of civil servants and political staffers, had
moving expenses of up to $28,000 paid in the 1990s.

But Atkinson said it was not universal for the NDP government to pick up the
moving costs of political staff, including, for example, an employee who had
moved from Alberta to take the same media services job in the NDP's last term.

The government should at least consider putting a cap on moving expenses, she
said.

Krawetz agreed it should be reviewed.

He said the $35,000 expense included such items as real estate fees and
temporary accommodations while searching for a new home, which add up quickly.

The government said legislation mandates that public service commission
guidelines must be applied to those who work directly for the premier and
cabinet ministers, but the NDP argues the law cited applies only to ministerial
assistants.

jwood@sp.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 The Star Phoenix, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              969 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                The Jordan Times

                            August 27, 2015 Thursday

Jordan's agricultural exports key victim of Syria crisis

LENGTH: 745  words


By Raed Omari - Aug 27,2015 - Last updated at Aug 27,2015

Jordanian agricultural exports sector is a major victim of the Syrian crisis,
recording huge losses since the war started in Syria, sector leaders and
officials say (Photo by Osama Aqarbeh)

AMMAN -- The Syrian crisis has had its deep negative impact on Jordan in many
aspects as the country struggles with the seemingly non-stop refugee influx.

A major victim of the five-year-old crisis is the agricultural exports sector,
which has seen "catastrophic" developments as a result of the bloody war in the
northern neighbour, a key importer and a corridor to other markets.

Analysts and agriculture sector representatives argued that the economic losses
Jordan has been incurring since the outbreak of the Syrian war in 2011 "equal if
not surpass", those brought on by the refugee crisis.

"Jordan's agricultural losses as a result of the war in Syria are rarely
highlighted by the government or in the press," political analyst Adnan Abu Odeh
said, adding, "the stress is always placed on the refugee crisis and its impact
on Jordan."

For Abu Odeh, a former Royal Court chief: "The Syrian war has deprived Jordan of
its distinctive quality as a vegetables producer during winter."

Before the Syrian crisis, Jordan used to export large amounts of fruits and
vegetables to Syria, Turkey and Eastern Europe, using the same land route.

Abu Odeh also explained that, with agriculture being a major pillar of the
Kingdom's economy and with the Syrian refugees' unprecedented pressure on the
country's infrastructure and limited resources, Jordan can be said to be "victim
No.1 of the Syrian war".

Agriculture Ministry Spokesperson Nimer Haddadin said that the government has
had to open new markets for the Jordanian fruits and vegetables after the
closure of borders with Syria.

"Nowadays, Jordanian fruits and vegetables are sold to more than 50 countries.
In 2013 and 2014, Jordan exported around 800,000 and 900,000 tonnes of
agricultural produce respectively."

Haddadin added that the volume of exports to the Gulf States and Lebanon is
"relatively high but still less than as it was to Syria and Eastern Europe".

"The land exports to Iraq through Kuwait and then to Turkey are expensive and
subject to everyday security developments," he said, adding: "In June and July,
Jordan exported around 500,000 tonnes of fruits and vegetables to Europe through
the Iraq-Turkey route."

The official also said that Jordanian trucks, up to February 2015, had used to
travel to Syria and then to Turkey but had to stop due to the security
escalation in the war-torn northern neigbour.

In April this year, Jordan closed its border with Syria for security reasons.
Passenger and cargo traffic was halted as a result of the escalating violence in
the Syrian town of Nasib, just across the border station, some 80km north of
Amman.

"To find an alternative for the Syria-Turkey land route, an attempt is in the
making now to send Jordanian fruits and vegetables to Russia via sea and from
there to Eastern Europe. But it will be costly," the official said.

Zuhair Jweihan, president of the Jordan Exporters and Producers Association for
Fruits and Vegetables, told The Jordan Times over the phone Thursday that
exports through Syria have completely stopped.

"Before the war, Jordan used to export more than 250,000 tonnes of fruits and
vegetables every year to Syria and Europe. After the war started, the largest
amount of agricultural produce never exceeded around 60,000 tonnes," the sector
leader said.

"We worked hard on building contractual relationships with Romanian and
Hungarian traders to sell them Jordanian products at good prices. All of this
has gone after the war."

He said that farmers in the Jordan Valley are "perplexed, uncertain and
confused", unable to decide which product to grow, "all because of the
uncertainty over Syria".

Asked whether the exports to the Gulf countries could make up for the losses
incurred after the closure of the Syria-Turkey route, he said: "Yes, but only in
summer."

"The problem is where to export the fruits and vegetables which we produce
during winter. Jordan's annual production of fruits and vegetables stands at
around 2.5 million tonnes, 75 per cent of which is produced in winter and half
of that is destined for exporting."

"Syria used to be Jordan's commercial and agricultural 'lung'. The large-scale
suffering of the Jordanian farmers and traders equals that caused by the Syrian
refugee burden."

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 62


                        Copyright 2015 The Jordan Times.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              970 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                              July 14, 2006 Friday
                                  All Editions

Crews check extent of ash borer influx

BYLINE: Tona Kunz, Daily Herald Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 327 words


Illinois Department of Agriculture crews were scouring Wilmette on Thursday, a
day after a U.S. Department of Agriculture laboratory confirmed the state's
second emerald ash borer infestation.

A homeowner in the North suburb reported the metallic green, half-inch beetles
to authorities. So far, 16 trees within a five- block area have been identified
as infected with beetles or larvae.

"Over the next several weeks we will have to conduct further investigations to
determine the extent of the infestation," said Jeff Squibb, spokesman for the
Illinois Department of Agriculture.

The beetle was first confirmed in Illinois June 9 in Campton Township west of
St. Charles in Kane County. The infestation there is confined to 21 trees in one
neighborhood.

Although the state has been inundated with calls about possible sightings of the
emerald ash borer, no other infestations have been confirmed, Squibb said.

Because of the infestations in Wilmette and Campton Township, the areas will be
quarantined and all ash trees within a half-mile of the infestation likely will
be cut down. A public hearing July 17 in Geneva will determine the extent of
tree removal in Kane County.

The beetle first was spotted outside Detroit in July 2002. It is thought to have
migrated to America on shipping crates from Asia. The beetles have killed nearly
20 million ash trees in Michigan, Ohio, Indiana, Maryland and Virginia and
Ontario.

Illinois has about 131 million ash trees. Five varieties of cheap, fast-growing
ash trees account for about 20 percent of all parkway trees in the North
suburbs, and one-fifth of all Chicago- area trees.

The beetles are first spotted feasting on leaves. The larva later burrows
through the trunk, stopping the flow of nutrients, which leads to the death of
the tree within about two years.

State officials continue to ask homeowners to report suspected beetle sightings
and sick ash trees to the Illinois Department of Agriculture at (800) 641-3934.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              971 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                Vanguard (Lagos)

                               September 14, 2016

Govt Moves to Protect Local Fishermen

BYLINE: Samuel Oyadongha

LENGTH: 374 words


Hard time awaits foreign fishing trawlers operating illegally on Nigeria
territorial waters as the Federal Government has ordered the Nigerian Navy to
put a stop to their activities.

The move is to protect the country's local fishermen from being pushed out of
business by the more sophisticated foreign fishing trawlers operating illegally
on the nation's territory waters.

Minister of State for Agriculture and Rural Development, Senator Heineken
Lokpobiri stated this in Yenagoa, Bayelsa State, during his meeting with farmers
and other stakeholders in the agricultural sector.

He said that the influx of foreign trawlers into Nigeria's territorial waters
through the coast to fish without the permission of the Federal Government would
no longer be accepted.

According to him, "As Nigerians, we have not tapped up to two percent of our
fish resources, we still have 98 per cent untapped."

The Presidency, he noted, had directed the Chief of Naval Staff to look into the
matter with immediate effect.

He said: "These foreign trawlers coming right in front of our territorial water
in the Niger Delta sometimes, their type of fishing is so dangerous that the
fishing nets of our people are damaged.

"If you complain, they kill you. We have raised the issue with Mr. President and
the President directed the Chief of Naval Staff to look into the matter. Also,
recently, the Chief of Defence Staff came to Rivers State to launch the new
boats that will patrol the whole of our territory. Something is being done to
ensure that these people who are coming do not come beyond the international
water into our territorial water.

"We are taking it very seriously and that is why we have been holding meetings
with Nigeria Navy and Ministry of Defence to see how we can protect our
territorial waters.

The minister also enjoined indigenes of Bayelsa and other states of the region
to embrace peace as the Federal Government continue to explore ways of boosting
the economy.

He expressed concern about pipeline destructions by youths in the region, urging
them to go into agriculture.

Senator Lokpobiri also advised the people of the Niger Delta region to invest in
farming as loans would be provided for them by Bank of Industry and Agricultural
Development Bank.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              972 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Hill

                             July 29, 2014 Tuesday

REG WATCH: Bankers ask for relief from regs

BYLINE: By Ben Goad and Tim Devaney

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 665 words


The nation's community bankers launched a petition Monday calling for relief
from quarterly reporting regulations they say are needlessly onerous.

The Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) are targeting requirements
related to "call reports" that must be submitted to regulators four times a
year.

Increasing layers of red tape associated with the reports have expanded the
report to 80 pages that must be completed, along with 670 pages of related
instructions, said ICBA Senior Executive Vice President and Chief of Staff Terry
J. Jorde.

"The call report is one piece of the overall regulatory tsunami that needs to be
addressed before community banks are swept off the face of America's banking
landscape," he said.

Community banks, along with credit unions, have complained that an influx of
financial regulations imposed in response to the 2008 economic crisis have
disproportionately hit the smaller institutions, which have fewer compliance
officials, than the Wall Street giants seen as the real targets of the new
rules.

The petition to the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and
other regulators follows a survey of community banks, which concluded that costs
of preparing the call report have spiked by 86 percent over the last decade.
Banks are spending hundreds of hours and thousands of dollars to comply.

And the regulatory burden is expected to increase with additional reporting
requirements proposed under a set of international standards known as Basel III.

The banks are pressing for revised rules that would relax requirements for
certain highly rated and well-capitalized banks. Under the proposal, those banks
would be allowed to submit a short-form call report in the first and third
quarters of a year.

"This streamlined report would provide sufficient information for regulators to
monitor safety and soundness while being significantly less burdensome to
prepare, allowing community banks to focus more resources on their customers and
communities, the group said.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

The Department of Agriculture is looking to relax the import restrictions on
Mexican pork that comes from areas of the country where some pigs might have
swine flu.

The USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) said Monday it is
considering new rules that would provide a pathway for Mexican pork to enter the
U.S., as long as farmers followed a stringent set of rules intended to prevent
healthy pigs from interacting with those that may have the disease.

The USDA is also looking to relax the import restrictions on Korean oranges, the
agency said Monday.

The USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service is considering new rules
that would allow two types of Unshu oranges from Korea to be imported into the
U.S., reversing an existing prohibition on the citrus fruit.

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY. The Department of Energy is withdrawing portions of energy
conservation rules.

The Energy Department's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
announced Monday it is vacating parts of two rules that were overturned in
federal court. The first rule governed non-weatherized gas furnaces, such as
mobile home furnaces, which were part of a larger standard for residential
furnaces.

The second rule governed vented hearth heaters. The changes go into effect
immediately.

FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) is looking to relax the requirements for natural gas pipeline companies,
the agency said Monday.

Natural gas pipeline companies would no longer be required to send FERC updated
maps after they have made major changes to the pipeline system. Instead, these
companies would post the updates on their own websites.

NASA. NASA is moving forward with new whistleblower protections for the
employees of the agency's contractors and subcontractors, it said Monday.

The new rules would protect employees who warn about problems with a government
contract from being fired or demoted, NASA said.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright  2014 Capitol Hill Publishing Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              973 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Post-Star (Glens Falls, New York)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            August 13, 2016 Saturday

Moreau may add agricultural conservation zone

BYLINE: Kathleen Moore, The Post-Star, Glens Falls, N.Y.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 340 words


Aug. 13--MOREAU -- Moreau may add a conservation zone to its agricultural
district, which is about half of the town's acreage.

The town's Agricultural and Farmland Protection Plan was just approved by the
state. The approval letter included a recommendation that the town add a
conservation zone to help farmers more.

The conservation zone would be within the agricultural district, which is
bounded by Route 9 and Route 32.

Inside the conservation zone, farmers could sell their development rights to the
state in return for money to enhance their business. In each case, the town
would have to agree. The state buys development rights through the state
Environmental Protection Fund.

"Development rights are forever removed from the land," Town Board member and
tree farmer Todd Kusnierz said. "The farmer gets an influx of cash."

The money could allow the farmer to significantly improve the farm by purchasing
more efficient equipment or equipment that allows the farmer to get more out of
the land. Irrigation equipment and solar panels are prime examples.

"He puts that money into this business. That in itself inherently strengthens
the ag district," Kusnierz said.

He's hoping the board will approve the zone.

Even non-farmers benefit from the agricultural district, he said, because it
doesn't use as much taxpayer money as more developed areas.

"Cows don't go to school," he said.

It also protects land that people love, he added.

"You have the rolling hills, the different colors, the openness, which people
like to see," he said. "And the town doesn't need to expend the same level of
funds."

The town also received $18,000 from the state with the state's approval of the
protection plan. That's the amount of money that the town spent to develop the
plan.

You can reach Kathleen Moore at 742-3247 or kmoore@poststar.com Follow her on
Twitter @ByKathleenMoore or at her blog on www.poststar.com.

___ (c)2016 The Post Star (Glens Falls, N.Y.) Visit The Post Star (Glens Falls,
N.Y.) at www.poststar.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160813-GN-Moreau-may-add-agricultural-conservation-zone-20160813

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GN


                          Copyright 2016 The Post-Star


                              974 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                            i-Independent Print Ltd

                                 March 3, 2015
                                 First Edition

Syria war is the first to be attributed to global warming;
CLIMATE

BYLINE: Tom Bawden ENVIRONMENT EDITOR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 113 words


Climate change was a key driver of the Syrian uprising, according to research
which warns that global warming is likely to unleash more wars in the coming
decades.

Experts have long predicted that climate change will be a major source of
conflict as drought and rising temperatures hurt agriculture, but the Syria
conflict is the first war that scientists have explicitly linked to global
warming.

Researchers say it intensified the region's worst-ever drought, pushing the
country into civil war by destroying agriculture and forcing an exodus to cities
already straining from poverty and an influx of refugees from wartorn Iraq,
finds the report from Columbia University in New York.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: III


                    Copyright 2015 Independent Print Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              975 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                        Townsville Bulletin (Australia)

                           September 27, 2013 Friday
                                  1 - Edition

Chinese beefs over safety cause a chill

BYLINE: John McCarthy

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 419  words


A QUEENSLAND minister has flown into a diplomatic brawl with China after the
country slapped a temporary ban of Australia's chilled beef exports over claims
of food safety.

Agriculture Minister John McVeigh has been touring the country this week with a
trade mission, following a visit there from Premier Campbell Newman.

The ban affects about 20 per cent of Queensland's beef exports to China and
Australian trade officials have been scrambling to resolve the issue which is
understood to be more about a massive influx of Australian beef rather than any
food safety standards.

However, at risk is a massive market that has grown at triple digit rates over
the past year.

Mr McVeigh said it was not a ban but China had stopped issuing import permits on
chilled beef and he was now working closely with the Federal Government and key
trade officials.

He has invited China's key agency, the Administration of Quality Supervision,
Inspection and Quarantine (AQISQ), to Brisbane for meetings as soon as possible
to study its systems.

Rolleston cattle farmer Howard Smith said the temporary ban would have an impact
on the industry, but not on the same scale as the live export ban which left the
industry reeling.

``It's another thing we don't need,'' Mr Smith said, citing the crippling
drought in the north and west of the state.

``It (China) has been a fantastic market and it has mitigated some of the losses
and other problems and if we didn't have them I don't know what we would have
done.''

The brawl also erupted as Australia attempts to find a way towards a free-trade
agreement with China and officials are having to tread warily over the issue
rather than threaten other products.

Trade Minister Andrew Robb said the Australian Government was working closely
with Chinese authorities to maintain access for meat and other commodities.

``Our trading partners occasionally seek further information about the
commodities we export to them,'' Mr Robb said. ``This is the case regarding
recent queries from China about our system for the production of chilled meat.

``Australia has a reputation second to none in the standards we adhere to.''

State Deputy Opposition Leader Tim Mulherin said it was embarrassing for the
freeze to hit while trade missions were under way, ``but it is more embarrassing
if Mr Newman and Mr McVeigh took no action when they had the ear of Chinese
authorities''.

``They should both explain to Queensland producers what specific steps they have
taken to help resolve this issue,'' Mr Mulherin said.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BUL


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              976 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Times (Kigali)

                                 April 27, 2015

Number of Burundian Refugees Soar to 20000

BYLINE: James Karuhanga

LENGTH: 621 words


Some Rwandans have approached the Rwandan Embassy in Burundi seeking papers to
facilitate their return home following the unrest that has for the past few
weeks rocked the country, according to the diplomatic mission.

Speaking to The New Times, yesterday, Rwanda's ambassador to Burundi, Amandin
Rugira, said Rwandans mainly approached the embassy ahead of the congress by the
ruling party CNDD/FDD, which convened on Saturday, and confirmed President
Pierre Nkurunziza as its flag bearer.

"So far, we do not have any Rwandan case in trouble except some calls that have
come through from people who need travel documents to be able to go to Rwanda,"
said Amb. Rugira.

According to Rugira, there is an estimated 6,000 documented Rwandans living in
Burundi.

Riots rocked the country, yesterday, with video footage showing police in
running battles with rioters. A rioter and a police officer were shot dead,
media reports said.

Following the unrest that escalated over the weekend, the number of refugees
that have crossed into Rwanda has since increased to over 20,000, according to
the Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs.

Fredric Nyawukuriryayo, the communications officer at the ministry, told this
newspaper that by Saturday evening, they had registered over 17,700, while
yesterday at least 3,000 new arrivals were reported in Bugesera District but the
counting was still underway.

"On Saturday, 852 refugees were relocated from Nyanza and Bugesera to Mahama
Camp in Kirehe District," Ntawukuriryayo said.

Several top government officials met yesterday to consider how to manage the
increasing refugee influx, he said, adding that the meeting was under the
auspices of the national disaster management executive committee.

The national disaster management executive committee comprises the Ministries of
Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs, Local Government, Health, Defence,
Agriculture, East African Community (EAC) Affairs, Foreign Affairs,
Infrastructure, and Finance, with the military and Police institutions joining
in.

On Friday, government announced a decision granting the Burundian refugees a
prima facie refugee status, citing standard procedure in case of massive refugee
'invasions' as per the Rwandan law relating to refugees and the 1951 Convention
relating to refugees.

The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees is the key legal
international document in defining who is a refugee, their rights and the legal
obligations of states.

The Minister for Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs, Seraphine Mukantabana,
said the decision to grant the Burundians prima facie status was taken
considering the overwhelming number of Burundians who continue to trek into the
country seeking refuge.

The government and the UNHCR are reportedly increasing the capacity to evacuate
big numbers from the transit centres to the new permanent base of Mahama, in
Kirehe.

Mahama camp, which is on a 50-hectare surface, can accommodate 50,000 people,
according to officials from the ministry.

It is located about 160 kilometres from the Rwanda-Burundi border.

Mukantabana said given the continuing influx, government asked partners such as
UNHCR to be prepared should the numbers close to 50,000 which would be beyond
Rwanda's holding capacity.

Martina Pomeroy, UNHCR-Rwanda external relations officer, on Saturday, said that
given the nature of the current "emergency situation," contingency planning is
not on the cards anymore.

"A contingency plan is really not the issue anymore. Now, it is about taking
action," Pomeroy said.

Over 3,000 Burundian refugees have reportedly gone into the DR Congo.

Rwanda is already home to more than 73,000 Congolese refugees settled in five
camps in various parts of the country.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              977 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                     Belfast News Letter (Northern Ireland)

                           October 28, 1999, Thursday

BLAIR RULES OUT WAR OVER BEEF

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 438 words


TONY Blair yesterday insisted he would not take Britain into a "tit for tat war"
with France over British beef, warning that such a conflict would be illegal and
could jeopardise a massively profitable trade in food and drink.

In heated Prime Minister's Questions exchanges with Conservative leader William
Hague in the Commons, Mr Blair accused Tories of putting forward "immature
nonsense" by advocating a ban on some French meat products.

He was responding to Mr Hague's charge that the Government had failed to act to
protect the public from French products in the light of the sewage in feed
scandal.

The Tory leader said the Government had known in June about the contamination of
French animal feeds, and scientists were now warning French meat could pose
dangers to the public.

He taunted Mr Blair that when it came to Government ministers, "it is not just
the dead cows which have had their spines taken out".

The Prime Minister retorted that a ban on French products would be "illegal" and
"stupid", as the UK did pounds 320 million worth of trade every day through
Europe.

The exchanges came shortly after Agriculture Minister Nick Brown tried to
appease farmers with the publication of new food labelling guidelines, designed
to ensure shoppers can tell if products they are buying are British.

He said the "British Food Kitemark" should prevent food products made with
foreign ingredients being passed off as British.

He made his announcement at conference in London alongside National Farmers'
Union president Ben Gill, who warned that the influx of cheap imports
masquerading as British was creating a financial crisis in UK agriculture.

However, the minister found himself under fire after he admitted that he had not
spoken directly to his French counterpart, Jean Glavany, in more than a week,
despite the deepening crisis.

The Tories said it was an "extraordinary admission" that there had been no
direct contact with Mr Glavany.

Earlier, Mr Brown issued a fresh call for Brussels to act swiftly against France
if EU scientists give British beef the all-clear.

The European Commission's Scientific Steering Committee begins its crucial two
-day meeting today to consider French claims that the meat could still carry the
risk of BSE contamination.

Although ministers are confident that the committee, chaired by a Frenchman,
will give the all-clear, there are fears that a split decision could undermine
any legal action to force France to end its ban.

But Mr Brown insisted the Commission must enforce the committee's ruling through
the European courts.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                   Copyright 1999 Century Newspapers Limited


                              978 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 28, 2016 Monday

Keeping Control of Geese, Acquiring Property and Addition of New Police Officer
Part of Council Agenda

LENGTH: 454  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Bridgeport has issued the following news release:



 The problems created by a huge influx of geese at Hinkle and Deegan Lakes as
well as several other areas within the municipal limits have been curtailed
greatly thanks to a program initiated more than a year ago between the City of
Bridgeport and the United States Department of Agriculture.


 Now, City Council has to officially decide to continue the program. It's one of
the key topics that is part of a relatively light post-Thanksgiving Bridgeport
City Council meeting agenda.



 The Council will meet at 7 p.m. tonight at the Bridgeport Municipal Complex.
There is no work session scheduled.



 At the Nov. 14 meeting, USDA officials were on hand to discuss the program that
handled the overpopulation of the geese in the city limits, which many in the
community did not have issue with. However, the program eliminated the overflow
of geese - primarily at the lakes - and the mess created primarily from their
droppings in areas frequented by many, including youth.



 This evening, City Manager Kim Haws will be asked to enter into a Cooperative
Service Agreement with the USDA to continue the program. The USDA is responsible
for running it.



 "When (the USDA) first arrived, I believe the number they gave was 1,300 geese
and that was considered overpopulation by a substantial margin. At the
presentation (at the last Council
 meeting), they told us the number now is down to about 30," said City Clerk
Andrea Kerr.



 As for unfinished business Monday, Council will be asked to approve an
ordinance allowing for the purchase of .19 acres of right of way from the
Bridgeport Church of Christ and .175 acres Mark and Judy Bonamico near Center
Street. The land is being utilized for the new parking lot just off Center
Street and behind several Main Street businesses.



 As for new business beyond the USDA agreement, Council will have two additional
items to address. One involves the swearing in of new Bridgeport Police Officer
Jeffrey Bartlett and the second matter involves combining the December
Bridgeport City Council meetings into just one meeting Dec. 19 due to the
holiday season.



 There will also be a pair of proclamations presented by Mayor Robert "Bob"
Greer. The Bridgeport Middle School Cross Country team and the BMS Cheerleading
squad will both be honored for winning Harrison County championships.



 The meeting will also have a public forum near the start of the meeting for
anyone wishing to address the city's governing body. Haws and Greer will also
have reports.



 Tonight's Council session is open to the public.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              979 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 25, 2016 Friday

Council to Consider Continuing Program Aimed at Keeping Control of City's Geese
Population Monday

LENGTH: 453  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Bridgeport has issued the following news release:



  The problems created by a huge influx of geese at Hinkle and Deegan Lakes as
well as several other areas within the municipal limits have been curtailed
greatly thanks to a program initiated more than a year ago between the City of
Bridgeport and the United States Department of Agriculture.





 Now, City Council has to officially decide to continue the program. It's one of
the key topics that is part of a relatively light post-Thanksgiving Bridgeport
City Council meeting agenda.
 The Council will meet at 7 p.m. Monday at the Bridgeport Municipal Complex.
There is no work session scheduled.



 At the Nov. 14 meeting, USDA officials were on hand to discuss the program that
handled the overpopulation of the geese in the city limits, which many in the
community did not have issue with. However, the program eliminated the overflow
of geese - primarily at the lakes - and the mess created primarily from their
droppings in areas frequented by many, including youth.



 On Monday, City Manager Kim Haws will be asked to enter into a Cooperative
Service Agreement with the USDA to continue the program. The USDA is responsible
for running it.



 "When (the USDA) first arrived, I believe the number they gave was 1,300 geese
and that was considered overpopulation by a substantial margin. At the
presentation (at the last Council
 meeting), they told us the number now is down to about 30," said City Clerk
Andrea Kerr.



 As for unfinished business Monday, Council will be asked to approve an
ordinance allowing for the purchase of .19 acres of right of way from the
Bridgeport Church of Christ and .175 acres Mark and Judy Bonamico near Center
Street. The land is being utilized for the new parking lot just off Center
Street and behind several Main Street businesses.



 As for new business beyond the USDA agreement, Council will have two additional
items to address. One involves the swearing in of new Bridgeport Police Officer
Jeffrey Bartlett and the second matter involves combining the December
Bridgeport City Council meetings into just one meeting Dec. 19 due to the
holiday season.



 There will also be a pair of proclamations presented by Mayor Robert "Bob"
Greer. The Bridgeport Middle School Cross Country team and the BMS Cheerleading
squad will both be honored for winning Harrison County championships.



 The meeting will also have a public forum near the start of the meeting for
anyone wishing to address the city's governing body. Haws and Greer will also
have reports.



 Monday's Council session is open to the public.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              980 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 25, 2016 Friday

Council to Consider Continuing Program Aimed at Keeping Control of City's Geese
Population Monday

LENGTH: 453  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Bridgeport has issued the following news release:



  The problems created by a huge influx of geese at Hinkle and Deegan Lakes as
well as several other areas within the municipal limits have been curtailed
greatly thanks to a program initiated more than a year ago between the City of
Bridgeport and the United States Department of Agriculture.





 Now, City Council has to officially decide to continue the program. It's one of
the key topics that is part of a relatively light post-Thanksgiving Bridgeport
City Council meeting agenda.
 The Council will meet at 7 p.m. Monday at the Bridgeport Municipal Complex.
There is no work session scheduled.



 At the Nov. 14 meeting, USDA officials were on hand to discuss the program that
handled the overpopulation of the geese in the city limits, which many in the
community did not have issue with. However, the program eliminated the overflow
of geese - primarily at the lakes - and the mess created primarily from their
droppings in areas frequented by many, including youth.



 On Monday, City Manager Kim Haws will be asked to enter into a Cooperative
Service Agreement with the USDA to continue the program. The USDA is responsible
for running it.



 "When (the USDA) first arrived, I believe the number they gave was 1,300 geese
and that was considered overpopulation by a substantial margin. At the
presentation (at the last Council
 meeting), they told us the number now is down to about 30," said City Clerk
Andrea Kerr.



 As for unfinished business Monday, Council will be asked to approve an
ordinance allowing for the purchase of .19 acres of right of way from the
Bridgeport Church of Christ and .175 acres Mark and Judy Bonamico near Center
Street. The land is being utilized for the new parking lot just off Center
Street and behind several Main Street businesses.



 As for new business beyond the USDA agreement, Council will have two additional
items to address. One involves the swearing in of new Bridgeport Police Officer
Jeffrey Bartlett and the second matter involves combining the December
Bridgeport City Council meetings into just one meeting Dec. 19 due to the
holiday season.



 There will also be a pair of proclamations presented by Mayor Robert "Bob"
Greer. The Bridgeport Middle School Cross Country team and the BMS Cheerleading
squad will both be honored for winning Harrison County championships.



 The meeting will also have a public forum near the start of the meeting for
anyone wishing to address the city's governing body. Haws and Greer will also
have reports.



 Monday's Council session is open to the public.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              981 of 997 DOCUMENTS



                                  Diss Express

                            October 14, 2016 Friday

Bressingham opposition forces re-think on £10m grain facility plans

LENGTH: 594  words


Opponents of a controversial plan for major building works at a Bressingham
agricultural site say they are happy their voices have been heard, after
persuading planners to carry out a site review.

South Norfolk Council's Development Management Committee was due to vote on
Wednesday on an application by Openfield Agriculture, to demolish five buildings
and construct more than 30 new facilities, including 27 silos, at Harvest House
in Low Road.

But following an influx of public objections, a parish council refusal
recommendation and the warning of a possible judicial review, the committee said
it is deferring a decision until members had visited the site to assess the
proposal's potential impacts.

Businessman Mervyn Lambert, who helped lead the village opposition of the plans,
told the Diss Express: "We are pleased that South Norfolk Council has listened
to the people of Bressingham.

"The members voted to do a site meeting. They will be able to see for
themselves.

"It would be a complete carbuncle on the landscape."

If the proposal was green lit, it would see the addition 17 storage silos, 10
intake silos, six load hoppers, three grain driers, a machinery building and a
dust box at the site.

The applicant claims this £10 million upgrade will lead to six new direct jobs
and "many indirect jobs", and also secure the current Harvest House workforce.

However, after residents complained via a solicitor they had not been properly
informed about the plans, a new public consultation period was launched.

Chief among the concerns raised during this consultation were that the rise in
HGV traffic would cause significant congestion and safety issues, while the
noise and visual impacts of the silos would be a detriment to businesses, the
local heritage and tourism.

In addition, Bressingham and Fersfield Parish Council recommended refusal on the
plans, reversing its prior vote of approval in August, on the grounds it did not
have the required details at that time.

One of the local objectors -  Chris Lantsbury, of Fen Street - said he had
written two letters to South Norfolk MP Richard Bacon, and was "hugely
disappointed" he had not obtained a response.

"The vast height of the 27 silos is totally out of proportion for such a site,
sitting as they do in the open countryside," Mr Lantsbury stated.

"The noise will be a great annoyance bearing in mind the setting.

"The head of the Waveney is nearby and you can hear a pin drop at night."

Another opponent, Claire Porter, told the Diss Express she and her husband
Mervyn had happily lived by the facility for 11 years with no issues, but they
felt the site would be "totally overdeveloped".

"A local estate agent has estimated this development will reduce the value of
our property by £100,000. It will also impact many of our neighbours," she said.

Prior to Wednesday's planning meeting, however, South Norfolk planning inspector
Chris Watts gave a recommendation for approval, subject to various conditions.

He wrote: "Whilst some adverse landscape impact would occur as a result of this
scheme, the level of harm is not considered to represent a significant adverse
impact.

"Therefore, in balancing the impacts, against the clear economic benefits, it is
considered that the application is, on balance, acceptable."

Openfield, which has run the site since 1999, says the proposed improvements are
needed to keep pace with modern farming advances and food storage regulations.

The company insists environmental and traffic impacts can be mitigated, and
believes the investment will make the site fiscally solvent.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MDEP


                       Copyright 2016 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              982 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                             April 12, 2011 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Inmates aid in cleanup of beach

BYLINE: By Susan Chiappone - CHAUTAUQUA CORRESPONDENT

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 300 words

DATELINE: SILVER CREEK


Preparations for the summer season at the Hanover Town Beach and Boat Launch got
a boost Monday from a group of inmates from the Lakeview Shock Incarceration
Facility in Brocton.

Highway Superintendent Steve D'Angelo told the Town Board about 20 laborers
helped with shoveling sand off of walkways, picking up debris and general
cleanup duties in the Sunset Bay area of the town. D'Angelo said the workers
made a difference on the appearance of the beach area.

Sunset Bay will start seeing an influx of seasonal visitors and residents in
May. D'Angelo said he will begin hauling some items that were damaged in this
winter's floods. He asked that residents separate items into three categories:
furniture, metal, and brush and limbs.

Highway crews have been working on storm drainage systems along roadways in the
Sunset Bay, Hanford Bay and Irving areas.

Town Supervisor Kathy Tampio said applications will be accepted for seasonal
positions including lifeguards and employees at the town's boat launch facility.
Applications are available in the Town Clerk's Office.

Also Monday, Tampio announced a new initiative to start an agricultural support
group to promote agri-businesses and economic development centered around
farming. She will speak on the topic at the Chautauqua County Planning Board and
will encourage the formation of a Regional Agricultural Council.

In other matters, the Town Board:

*Authorized the purchase of a three-quarter-ton pick up truck from Robert Basil
Chevrolet of Fredonia at a cost of $24,634.

*Decided to purchase 100 dozen American flags for Memorial Day Services at a
cost of $792.

*Voted unanimously to spend $3,700 for solar-powered safety lights to be
installed on Angell Road near the Hanover Road intersection as a warning device
to motorists to reduce speed in that area.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              983 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                              Western Daily Press

                                  May 13, 2004

Migrant Army Is On Its Way West

SECTION: News; Other; Others; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 572 words


Officials are powerless to stop the first of 1,000 migrant fruit pickers
descending on a Herefordshire hamlet on Monday, it was revealed yesterday.
Residents, including TV gardener Monty Don, were celebrating yesterday after
local councillors threw out plans to create a massive village to house the
influx of strawberry pickers from eastern Europe.

But their joy was short lived as developers S&A Produce immediately announced
the workers will start arriving next week as planned and the authorities can do
nothing to stop them.

And as they sat down with lawyers to prepare an appeal, the leader of
Herefordshire Council called on the Government to act to protect the British
countryside from 21st century-style industrial agriculture.

Cllr Roger Phillips told councillors on the planning committee that the eyes of
the nation were on them because their final decision over the former hop farm at
Brierley Court could have a profound impact on the British landscape for years
to come.

"It is a very grey area full of loopholes which needs greater clarity," he
explained after councillors rejected an application for 300 caravans and
permanent buildings to create the biggest agri- village in Britain.

"We need to consider our next move but personally I think it's about time the
Government had the guts to deal this with issue because this is not just about
Herefordshire, this is something that could impact on the whole of rural
Britain.

"The law has not kept pace with the changes in agricultural development. It's
Brierley Court today, it could be anywhere tomorrow." And residents, including
leading campaigner Aubrey Green, said they feared for the future as 1,000
workers set up an unregulated camp on their doorstep.

During a heated meeting S&A Produce came under repeated attack for deliberately
exploiting loopholes in the planning process and forging ahead without
permission.

Councillors were shown pictures which clearly illustrated how the caravans are
already on site and building work is well under way. Supporters told the council
the company should be applauded for giving the local economy a boost while
adopting a professional approach and protecting local residents.

They said providing facilities such as a swimming pool, football pitches,
volleyball courts, cinema and three buses a day for workers from abroad would
mean less impact on the local area.

But critics lined up to claim the company was ruthlessly using outdated
legislation to set up an industrial development on farming land and Gardener's
World presenter Monty Don branded them "agri-bullies" and "berry barons".

Former council leader Terry James led calls for councillors to reject the advice
of officers, who wanted them to give the green light in a bid to regulate the
caravan development.

Mr James accused the company of being a "a gangmaster's organisation" and said:
"It is a very sad day because we are being told that our hands are tied, but
this will have a detrimental effect on the most beautiful county in England." He
was "appalled" that this was seen as the way forward for the county's economy.

Afterwards Graham Neal, S&A managing director, said there was nothing to stop
the company putting the workers in the caravans on site.

"I accept people have the right to speak but I was disappointed because a lot of
what was said today was not factually correct," he said.


LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004 1305WESTDP233migra

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                      Copyright 2004 Bristol United Press


                              984 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                     March 9, 2004 Tuesday Ontario Edition

Countryside alliance formed

BYLINE: MIKE FUNSTON, Toronto Star

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 448 words

HIGHLIGHT:
Mayors of rural and semi-rural GTA join forces Will push for stronger voice at
Queen's Park


Power to the pasturelands.

Mayors of 13 rural and semi-rural municipalities in Greater Toronto formed an
alliance in Caledon yesterday to barnstorm Queen's Park on issues of special
concern to them, such as protecting green space and preserving agriculture in
the face of mounting development pressure.

The mayors, whose municipalities represent 60 per cent of the land mass in the
GTA, met at the request of Caledon Mayor Marolyn Morrison and King Mayor
Margaret Black. They unanimously supported formation of the Greater Toronto
Mayors Countryside Alliance.

"There are many issues that we share. We believe we need a united voice to be
heard at Queen's Park," Morrison said in an interview. "There's no time to
waste. We have too many issues on our plate."

Rural areas have seen an influx of new residents, their roads becoming commuter
routes, their infrastructure aging while they receive little or no funding from
the province, she said.

Morrison initially sought the advice of former Ontario premier David Peterson on
how to best be heard at Queen's Park, and he suggested forming the rural mayors'
lobby. Peterson, a resident of Caledon, was guest speaker yesterday.

"What you're starting here is quite remarkable. You could make yourselves an
extremely effective force at Queen's Park," Peterson said. He suggested the
mayors enlist support from like-minded citizen, environmental and agricultural
groups and "make this a people's alliance."

Peterson urged the mayors to stand firm against "the extraordinary pressures of
growth" - not to stop development but to regulate and restrict it to protect
green space and the character of rural villages such as Belfountain, with its
general store.

"Preserve everything you possibly can," even it means higher property taxes, he
said.

"Once you build on it, you can never turn the clock back."

Some mayors didn't waste any time pitching manure, figuratively speaking, at the
province for ignoring rural areas.

The 13-member task force appointed by the province to study greenbelt protection
in the Golden Horseshoe, including much of the rural GTA, doesn't include any
representatives from the alliance, said Uxbridge Mayor Geri Lynn O'Connor.

"It's a travesty," she said.

The mayors expressed some collective frustration with the province for
introducing legislation that affects their municipalities without consultation.
Other members are: Keith Shier, Brock; John Mutton, Clarington; Robert Grossi,
Georgina; James Young, East Gwillimbury; Rick Bonnette, Halton Hills; Gordon
Krantz, Milton; Tom Taylor, Newmarket; Marilyn Pearce, Scugog; Sue Sherban,
Whitchurch-Stouffville; and Tim Jones, Aurora.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              985 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                Kashmir Observer

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

Government for developing infrastructure at tourist destinations

LENGTH: 292  words


SRINAGAR:  The Government has initiated various steps for providing the best
possible services to the tourists visiting the State by developing tourism
related infrastructure at the tourist destinations of the State.

Minister for Tourism Ghulam Ahmad Mir said this while addressing a meeting
convened to review the functioning of Gulmarg Development Authority (GDA) here
today.

Minister for Agriculture Ghulam Hassan Mir was also present in the meeting.

The Minister said that the result of measures taken for creation and
up-gradation of tourism infrastructure have increased the influx of tourists in
the state. He said tourism being the mainstay of state's economy needs to be
promoted both nationally and internationally adding that this would go a long
way in providing employment opportunities to youth in the State.

The Tourism Minister asked the tourism related service providers to extend
better services to the tourists visiting the State making their stay comfortable
and enjoyable.

Threadbare discussion was held on various issues including the developmental
activities being carried out under the jurisdiction of GDA, soft-loan policy for
hoteliers, guest house owners and other tourism related services providers,
registration and issuance of computerized cards to ponny-walas, guides and
helpers working at GDA.

The meeting was informed that there are 1771 registered ponny-walas operating
within the GDA jurisdiction.

The financial and physical targets of the JKSCCC were also discussed in the
meeting.

Among others, Secretary Tourism Zaffar Ahmad Bhat, Director Tourism, Kashmir, MD
JKTDC, MD JK State Cable Car Corporation, Chief Executive Officer Gulmarg
Development Authority, besides other officers of Tourism and GDA attended the
meeting.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2014 Kashmir Observer, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              986 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                             Kashmir Images (India)

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

Mir assures developing infrastructure at tourist destinations

LENGTH: 328 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, May 23 -- The Government has initiated various steps for providing the
best possible services to the tourists visiting the State by developing tourism
related infrastructure at the tourist destinations of the State.

The Minister for Tourism Ghulam Ahmad Mir said this while addressing a meeting
convened to review the functioning of Gulmarg Development Authority (GDA) here
today.

The Minister for Agriculture Ghulam Hassan Mir was also present in the meeting.

The Minister said that the result of measures taken for creation and
up-gradation of tourism infrastructure have increased the influx of tourists in
the state. He said tourism being the mainstay of state's economy needs to be
promoted both nationally and internationally adding that this would go a long
way in providing employment opportunities to youth in the State.

The Tourism Minister asked the tourism related service providers to extend
better services to the tourists visiting the State making their stay comfortable
and enjoyable.

Threadbare discussion was held on various issues including the developmental
activities being carried out under the jurisdiction of GDA, soft-loan policy for
hoteliers, guest house owners and other tourism related services providers,
registration and issuance of computerized cards to ponny-walas, guides and
helpers working at GDA.

The meeting was informed that there are 1771 registered ponny-walas operating
within the GDA jurisdiction.

The financial and physical targets of the JKSCCC were also discussed in the
meeting.

Among others, Secretary Tourism Zaffar Ahmad Bhat, Director Tourism, Kashmir, MD
JKTDC, MD JK State Cable Car Corporation, Chief Executive Officer Gulmarg
Development Authority, besides other officers of Tourism and GDA attended the
meeting.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Kashmir Images. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 Kashmir Images
                              All Rights Reserved


                              987 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                       The Financial Express (Bangladesh)

                           September 14, 2012 Friday

Substandard fertilisers impact soil fertility in N-region

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: Bangladesh


Bangladesh, Sept. 14 -- Influx of low-quality smuggled fertilisers and unabated
operation of a number of counterfeit fertiliser-producing factories in the
country's north and north-western regions are gradually destroying the fertility
of arable land, thus putting farming at stake.

At a meeting of a task force at the office of Divisional Commissioner, Rajshahi
last month, the authorities concerned stated that they had a stock of about 0.2
million kgs of seized fertilisers at their godowns.

The office of the Divisional Commissioner was also informed that about two
dozens of fertiliser manufacturing companies launched their operation in
different districts of the region during the last couple of years. Such
companies are allegedly supplying sub-standard fertilisers by mixing different
harmful ingredients with original fertilisers, those who attended the meeting
said.

During the meeting, Divisional Commissioner of Rajshai Abdul Mannan said they
had a stock of 194,439 kgs of muriate of potash (MoP) fertiliser, seized by the
law-enforcing agencies and customs authorities over the last two years.

The commissioner's office, meanwhile, sought opinions from the ministry of
agriculture and the ministry of environment about whether to destroy the seized
fertilisers or distribute those among farmers, if proved worthy for use.

Dipak Ranjan Datta, director (commercial) of the Bangladesh Chemical Industries
Corporation (BCIC), said a section of unscrupulous traders smuggle a significant
quantity of counterfeit fertilisers to the region, the use of which adversely
impacts the fertility of land for crop.

The divisional commissioner said the authorities concerned have received from
the BCIC a list of fertiliser manufacturing factories operating in the region.
They have decided to launch drives through mobile courts to stop production of
fake fertilisers in those factories.

A high official of the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) said a total
of 0.615 million hectares of land are brought under production every year in the
16 districts of Rajshahi and Rangpur divisions.

The overall requirement for mixed and MoP fertilisers in such districts is
estimated at 0.35 million tonnes, but according to the DAE sources, the quantity
of formal supply of fertilisers are about 0.30 million tonnes.

Sources said local farmers have a tendency to use indiscriminately more mixed
fertilisers and MoP to increase crop production without considering the actual
need for such products and their harmful impact on arable land.

The import costs of MoP and other mixed fertilisers have significantly increased
during the last couple of years. It was also identified as a cause behind the
rise in smuggling and production of 'fake' fertilisers, the DAE official said.

As the demand of the fertilisers is very high due to their inadequate
availability, the unscrupulous traders are producing as well as smuggling such
fertilisers to make some windfall profit by supplying those low-quality products
among the local farmers, he added. Published by HT Syndication with permission
from The Financial Express. For any query with respect to this article or any
other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 The Financial Express
                              All Rights Reserved


                              988 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            October 29, 2007 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1B-6B

LENGTH: 870 words


LANGDON (AP) - Beleaguered Cavalier County literally has the wind at its back.

The northern-border county has experienced a population drain since 1960. But
2007 has brought hope - in the form of the state's largest wind farm - that the
population leak can be plugged.

For long-term jobs, the 106-turbine Langdon Wind Energy Center won't be the boom
that the antiballistic missile site brought in the early 1970s. But it won't be
something else, either - the bust that quickly followed that boom.

"We're happy the wind farm coincided with a good year in agriculture, too," said
Carol Goodman, the county's economic development director. "We know that there
will be corrections in agriculture earnings.

"But it's nice to know the benefits from the wind farm will be here for a long,
long time."

The benefits will last a minimum of 25 years, the length of the lease with
landowners to place the turbines on their land.

After construction is complete, jobs likely will number only 12. But the influx
of money will continue.

The $250 million construction project should be done in late December.
Florida-based FPL Energy recently received approval to build another 27 turbines
next year. That expansion represents an additional $73 million investment.

The short-term economic benefits come from the project's 200-plus jobs and the
goods and services purchased locally.

Some workers travel from as far away as Grand Forks. Motels and every
rent-worthy property are occupied. Restaurants, grocery stores and service
businesses are bustling.

Local farmer Keith Lorenz said N.D. Highway 66, home to the construction
headquarters and center of the project, "looks like I-29."

"If nothing else, it's so exciting to see all this activity again," Goodman
said.

Lorenz has five towers on his land. He will receive $3,900 for each one in the
first year, or $19,500 total. The rent increases 2 percent each year of the
25-year lease.

"It would be tough to make money any easier than that," he said. "That's nice
security."

There is a cost to the landowners. Between the turbine and the road leading to
it, each site takes 1 to 1.5 acres of farmland. More worrisome is how it might
affect farm operations.

"The flip side is that I like my land and don't like to see it messed up,"
Lorenz said. "I'm worried about the road stopping water drainage. Hopefully, the
road level will be the same height as the field to allow drainage.

"We work our whole life around here to get rid of water. I'll know more how I
like it next spring when I see how many puddles it creates," he said.

About 45 landowners have turbines in the project area, which measures 10 miles
north to south and five miles east to west.

With 106 turbines, leases will attract more than $400,000 in payments the first
year alone. With the 27 to be added in 2008, the amount exceeds $500,000. Unlike
pipeline projects that have one-time payments up front, rents come every year.

"That lease money is a huge deal, especially when you use the multiplier effect
of four," Goodman said. "And the property taxes will be a nice shot in the arm,
too."

With the 27-unit addition, annual property taxes will approach $600,000,
according to the North Dakota Public Service Commission .

"Just think of what $250,000 or more a year is going to do for our school," said
Lorenz, whose wife, Kathy, is a teacher in the system. "It also should lower the
mills others will have to pay."

Landowners also receive one-time payments for underground cables between the
turbines and for overhead transmission lines. Minnkota Power Cooperative and
Otter Tail Power Co. are combining for a $10 million upgrade of 35 miles of
transmission lines.

Lorenz said a meteorological tower to gather wind data also is being built on
his land. "A worker said they're looking at putting up another 38 towers in that
area," he said.

Official word of 27 more turbines in 2008 and unofficial word of another 38 is
why locals are hopeful the project can bring stability.

"I've heard that this could be a 400-turbine wind farm some day," Lorenz said.

Wind energy is fairly new. "If you've been in it for 10 years, you're a
pioneer," said Dick Rausch, FPL Energy construction manager.

And the wind energy explosion is very new. "President Bush didn't even use the
phrase 'renewable energy' in his State of the Union address until 2006," Goodman
said.

Cavalier County was ahead of the president. The county's economic development
board took local resident Hans Reinhardt's advice in the spring of 2005 to
pursue a wind farm. Locals knew the landscape was windy but needed data to prove
it. So, the county split the $20,000 cost of a wind-monitoring tower with the
state Department of Commerce.

"That was a big decision because the $10,000 was one-fifth of our entire yearly
budget," Goodman said.

The entire county's population is 4,099, according to 2006 census estimates. The
county lost 40 percent of its population between the 1980 and 2000 censuses, and
estimates say it's lost another 15 percent since 2000.

The wind farm should help turn that around - beyond the construction boom,
beyond the dozen permanent jobs and beyond the annual $1 million in lease
payments and property taxes.

Cavalier County officials hope the wind will boost population

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2007 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              989 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                     The Sunday Independent (South Africa)

                                 March 22, 2015
                                   E1 Edition

Bombshell before Nigerian polls

SECTION: DISPATCHES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1799 words


Nigerians go to the polls again on March 28 for elections postponed from
February 14 due to the uncertainty posed by Boko Haram. The military said
plainly back then: we cannot guarantee the safety of the voters and election
officials.

Now, with the new date looming nigh, the military has made a shocking discovery.

Four bomb factories had been uncovered, said director of defence information
Major-General Chris Olukolade. Four soldiers died while clearing a bomb factory
of improvised explosive devices in Buni-Yadi, a town in the Gujba local
government area of Yobe State.

The devices were obviously intended for use in the build-up to the elections.

The military believes the find will deter further attacks and break the back of
Boko Haram, at least in the week leading up to the elections.

We have not heard reports of any attacks since the discovery, but after the
February turmoil in which suicide bombers - intriguingly female - were hitting
spots at random, I remain cautiously optimistic. The elections will happen, and
a civilian government will be installed.

Nigeria is far too important to Africa and way too far down its path of
reconstruction to be permanently derailed by Boko Haram.

Interesting headlines have caught my attention about the sector most crucial to
the rebirth of this West African giant, namely financial services.

The international Finance Corporation of the World Bank Group announced a $175
million (about R2.1 billion) loan to one of the surviving banks from the
consolidation exercise of the past decade, the Guaranty Trust Bank. Nigeria used
to have more than 50 banks, when it was synonymous with 419 scams.

The road to the consolidated banking sector was long and bloody. Several bankers
were arrested and sentenced for fiduciary impropriety, the tenure of banking
chief executives was capped at a maximum of 10 years and those banks left
standing - such as Access, Zenith, UBA and the First Bank of Nigeria - have
expanded beyond their home country to east Africa, southern Africa and the UK.

Proof of the confidence in the banking sector of Nigeria can also be found in
how the volume of transactions effected through point- of-sale devices rose from
just under 100 million naira in 2012 to 2.4 billion naira last year.

Anyone who went to Nigeria when cash was the only king will appreciate the
significance of this shift. We all need to celebrate and encourage the soundness
of Nigerian banks because, as Africa's largest economy, there cannot be chaos in
the very sector that is the lifeblood of trade and investment.

That is why the more I see Nigerian banks, such as the Guaranty Trust Bank,
strengthen their loan book, the more optimistic I am about the prospects of this
continent.

Nigeria is also the hub of west and west central Africa, meaning its influence
ripples into neighbouring countries.

There is no doubt in my mind, therefore, that a lot of Nigerian insights will be
shared at the conference to be held in Brazzaville, in the Republic of Congo
tomorrow, co-hosted by the Central Bank of Central African States and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF).

Much as there is room for international agencies such as the IMF to advise or
facilitate discourse, Africans would do better to learn from one another instead
of looking elsewhere in the world.

This conference will examine the prospects and policy options for promoting
financial inclusion in central Africa.

Financial inclusion is known to drive growth and reduce poverty. Developing a
robust regional financial services industry would boost the integration of
central African states, such as Chad, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and Congo-Brazzaville.

The organisers impressively invited the east African contingent to the event,
including Kevin Kavugizo, the director of microfinance supervision for the
National Bank of Rwanda. Another link to east Africa is one of the speakers,
Felix Kamenga, director of M-Pesa for Vodafone, DRC.

That takes me to some of the highlights of east Africa. Tanzania - what's the
deal?

I felt like tweeting President Jakaya Kikwete to ask him about a headline on
Tanzania passing a law restricting the hiring of foreigners. Members of
parliament have passed the Non-Citizens Employment Regulation Bill, and
President Kikwete is expected to sign it into law so that it would come into
effect on July 1.

Why the sudden flip in policy when the East African Community, of which Tanzania
is a member, is working so hard to eliminate non-trade and trade barriers? One
line has the answer: the influx of Chinese workers!

An MP, Esther Bulaya, was reported to have said she could not make sense of
having a Chinese bus driver in Tanzania. Well, Mr President, I have witnessed
Tanzania becoming pretty cosy with the Chinese over the past five years.

China's premier has visited Tanzania a couple of times. I even recall reading
about Tanzanian television and film producers receiving training from Chinese
counterparts.

Why would your MPs now deem it necessary to curb the influx of Chinese workers
into Tanzania? Did you not expect this spin-off?

Of course, the bill is a logical way to make sure that, where non-Tanzanian
professionals are hired, the firm employing them should have a succession plan
for the natives of Tanzania to take over eventually. This is pretty standard in
many African countries.

However, commentators - and I cannot disagree with them - argue that this bill,
once passed into law, will do more harm to the integration of East African
countries than good in containing the influx of Chinese workers into Tanzania.

Chinese companies hire Chinese professionals to run projects that are commonly
funded by Chinese banks or financiers.

It is hard to see how a resource-rich country such as Tanzania cannot simply
harden its negotiations stance in accepting Chinese investments, instead of
passing laws that will have unintended consequences.

As it is, there have been reports questioning whether tour operators in Tanzania
and Kenya would be able to run shuttle services for tourists from each other's
airports.

China has a role to play in Africa's renaissance, but it has to be on Africa's
terms.

Although I respect the rights of Tanzanians to pass laws to protect whatever
they hold dear to their economic well-being, it would be more helpful to look at
the bigger picture to ensure better movement among the east African economies.

As for the Chinese problem, each project has to be negotiated with the interests
of Tanzania in balance with those of China.

The terms of agreement should include enforceable provisions to protect jobs,
such as those of the Tanzanian bus driver. The laws passed after the act will
not cut it.

Diluting the preponderance of Chinese in East Africa

On the question of the Chinese, I was heartened to see that the Japanese were
also investing in key projects in East Africa, especially Kenya and Tanzania.

The Japan International Co-operation Agency had approved $200 million (R2.4
billion) to support agricultural and industrial sectors in Tanzania in this
fiscal year, its Africa division director, Hajime Iwama, said.

Agriculture is the mainstay of Tanzania's economy, and the government policy
known as Kilimo Kwanza is pro-agriculture. This is the kind of support Africa
needs - aligned with the policies of the country receiving the investment.

Tanzania's neighbour and fellow East African Community member, Kenya, also
received some attention from the Japanese support.

Following the announcement by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of a range of
initiatives, including the $33m facility for President Uhuru Kenyatta's flagship
universal health care plan, it is worth noting that Japan is more involved in
African investments than we perhaps give it credit for.

It is involved in a $200m initiative to assist countries affected by terrorism
in the Middle East and Africa, it has financed the 140MW geothermal power
project in Olkaria 1, which President Kenyatta commissioned last month.

Although I would rather have African investors dominating the action, the
capital requirements of Africa's reconstruction are just too great to be left to
Africans alone - or to the Chinese alone. The more diversified the sources of
finance, the better for Africa, as no one country or multinational would be able
to dictate the fate of Africans.

Business Partners - my toast of the week

Southern Africa left me with mixed feelings this week, but my life mission as an
Afro-optimist is to find positive stories to back the Africa Rising narrative.

Zimbabwe reported that Virginia tobacco exports had earned $211.9m for the
country. This gives one hope that Zimbabwe will return to its rightful status as
a regional powerhouse one day. It is languishing in its inability to resolve its
political stagnation, with the IMF urging it to "pay back the billions" it owes
the Bretton Woods institutions.

Eskom, Africa's largest power utility, has been slapped with another downgrade -
to junk status! Funny that my toast of the week will be linked to this last
point.

Business Partners, specialist risk financier of SMEs, has offered what could be
the silver lining to the power crisis that South Africa faces.

It announced this week that it would be giving clients the finances to purchase
generators.

I was lucky to interview Business Partners' executive director, Gerrie van
Biljon, on my radio show on Tuesday. With a passion I haven't heard in a long
time, he told me that the company expected the power crisis to continue to
affect smaller rather than large businesses; hence the decision to provide
additional finance for clients to buy generators, which could cost anything from
R50 000 for a small enterprise.

I am excited by any African who finds a solution to a crisis instead of harping
on about it. South Africa will finally overcome this power crisis, although all
indications are to the contrary.

Kudos, therefore, to Business Partners for finding a way to keep the SME economy
ticking, if only for their clients.

Lest we forget: snippets of African history and a focus on icons for inspiration

South Africa commemorated the 1960 Sharpeville massacre yesterday, while
independence day was celebrated in Tunisia on Friday and in Namibia yesterday.

For South Africans, although March 21 is now called Human Rights Day, it would
be folly to forget that a peaceful protest against pass laws ended with harmless
citizens losing their lives on March 21, 1960, most of them shot in the back.
All of us enjoying the freedoms bestowed on us by the new constitution owe a
debt of more than gratitude to these martyrs.

n Kgomoeswana is author of Africa is Open for Business, anchor of CNBC Africa's
weekly show Africa Business News, and anchor of the daily show Power Hour on
PowerFM. He writes in his personal capacity.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SI


                Copyright 2015 Independent Newspapers Pty (Ltd)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              990 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                         Business Mirror (Philippines)

                             March 24, 2014 Monday

DA rejects Neda's proposal to drop rice QR talks

BYLINE:  Alladin S. Diega

LENGTH: 696  words


AGRICULTURE Secretary Proceso J. Alcala said on Friday the Department of
Agriculture (DA) rejected the National Economic Development Authority's (Neda)
proposal to drop negotiations for the extension of the country's quantitative
restriction (QR) on rice and replace it with an equivalent tariff.

The DA chief told reporters on March 22 that they are holding back on
discussions over the proposed trade policy reform, saying that their main focus
is to get the extension for the special treatment on rice to protect local palay
farmers from the influx of cheaper grains and ensure the government will meet
rice self-sufficiency by end of 2015.

"We are on a wait-and-see posture, especially now that we are so close in
securing the nod for our QR extension," Alcala said.

The DA chief was reacting to Neda's push for the shift to tariff as instrument
of protection to local farmers.

Neda Director General Arsenio M. Balisacan made public the proposal on trade
policy reform on Friday during a forum keynoted by Larry Wong, an expert in rice
trade.

According to Balisacan, "the 'tariffication' of rice can alternatively replace
QR with tariff equivalent of 40 percent."

According to the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Uruguay Round negotiations
led to an agreement for a  tarrification package, which provided for the
replacement of agriculture-specific non-tariff measures with a tariff. According
to the WTO, this "afforded an equivalent level of protection."

On March 22 Balisacan said revenues from customs duties could be used to
subsidize poor consumers and develop a cash-for-work type of program for palay
farmers.

In most of Asia and other developing economies, particularly the Philippines,
rice is a commodity that has direct linkages to food security, livelihood
security and rural development needs of millions, Wong said during the forum.

Currently, rice is the only commodity in the Philippines that enjoy special
treatment in the WTO, which excluded the staple grain from the agriculture
liberalization, in exchange for allowing other countries preferential treatment
on several agricultural products entering the country, the expert added.

"We plan to keep it that way [QR on rice] until such time that our palay farmers
are ready for trade liberalization," Alcala said.

Meanwhile, Agriculture Assistant Secretary Romeo Recide said they expect to
conclude by April the negotiations for the extension of its special treatment on
rice.

"We are very positive that we will acquire consensus with interested countries,
which would allow us to operate under a new quantitative restriction extension."

Recide, one of the country's two lead negotiators for the Philippines mission to
the WTO, added that they expect to wrap up negotiations for the QR extension
when they meet with the WTO Committee on Trade and Goods on April 9 in Geneva,
Switzerland.

The Philippines has been consistently lobbying with its Association of Southeast
Asian Nations  neighbors and other major trade partners, citing the need to
prepare Filipino farmers for international trade and to achieve rice
self-sufficiency.

Recide, on behalf of the Philippines, has been asking for a five-year QR
extension until 2017.

But for the Philippines to get the nod on the QR extension, rice-producing
countries affected by the restriction can request for concessions or market
access for the importation of certain products, documents provided by Recide
said.

Only four countries are still in negotiation with the Philippines, Australia,
United States, Canada, and Thailand.

Last year, the Philippines acquired the endorsement of China, India and
Indonesia for continuing the QR implementation.

"We're expecting to gain approval and endorsement of the CTG [Council for Trade
in Goods]. In fact, we are urging them to progress speedily on their decision
since we only have that much time [for the extension of the quantitative
restriction]," Recide said.

"If there's no further opposition from the four remaining countries, then the
WTO Committee on Trade and Goods will submit an official position to the General
Council, which in turn will confirm the extension of our quantitative
restriction until 2017," he added.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 Business Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                              991 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday

Sides debate issue of state's megafarms;
Bill to limit growth sparks dialogue at Friday hearing

BYLINE: By Ben Sutherly bsutherly@DaytonDailyNews.com

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 384 words


REYNOLDSBURG - Defenders and critics of Ohio's largest livestock and poultry
farms clashed Friday over whether the state should further regulate the
industry.

The debate follows the introduction last fall of Senate Bill 230, which would
place a moratorium on more large livestock and poultry farms until the state
Department of Agriculture implements new rules on odor, manure application,
groundwater monitoring and other issues - rules that industry supporters say are
too restrictive and unnecessary.

State Sen. Tom Roberts, DTrotwood, is co-sponsoring the bill, which also would
place the historic, Darke County village of Longtown on the state's Registry of
Historic Landmarks. A proposal to locate a 2,100-head dairy at Longtown met with
fierce resistance last year from a residents group that contacted Roberts.
Vreba-Hoff Dairy Development LLC later chose not to build a dairy at Longtown.

Ohio has 150 permitted livestock and poultry operations; 17 more are seeking
permits.

Fred Dailey, director of the state Department of Agriculture, said he's open to
ways to help regulators keep pace with "structural changes" in the livestock
industry.

He also defended Ohio's livestock environmental permitting program, calling it
one of the nation's best.

And he told about 60 people, including Roberts and Larry Mumper, chair of the
Ohio Senate's agriculture committee, that he's mindful of the economic
opportunities that livestock farming creates.

Dailey noted that the number of milk cows in Ohio recovered to 270,000 last year
- chiefly due to an influx of large dairies built by Vreba-Hoff.

That increase, Dailey said, helped convince Paris-based Groupe Danone, owner of
the Dannon Co., to keep 390 jobs and add 34 more (average hourly wage: $20.16)
at its largest U.S. yogurt manufacturing plant in Minster.

Leon Weaver, who last year won approval to expand his dairy to 3,900 cows, said
he considered locating a dairy in eight states before choosing to move to
Williams County from California in 1998, despite Ohio's reputation for having
tough environmental rules.

But Longtown resident Jack Holland said big dairies are manufacturers
masquerading as agriculture.

They should be regulated as agribusiness, he said - a designation that would
subject them to local zoning. Agriculture is exempt from local zoning.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                              992 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            February 25, 2013 Monday

Pakistan: 'Foreign investors should be invited to tap Sindh agri sector'

LENGTH: 475 words

DATELINE: KARACHI


KARACHI, Feb. 25 -- Acting governor Sindh and speaker Sindh Assembly Nisar Ahmed
Khoro has said that the province has a lot of potential in agro-based sectors
and it is need of the hour that local and foreign investors should be invited to
invest in these sectors.

This, he said while addressing inaugural ceremony of the Livestock, Dairy,
Fisheries, Poultry, Agriculture and Culture Exhibition (LDFA-2013) at expo
center Karachi on Saturday.

On this occasion, a cheque of Rs300 million was given to deputy governor of the
State Bank for modernisation and restructuring scheme for rice husking mills in
Sindh. The farmers of the province can borrow soft loans from National Bank of
Pakistan, Sindh Bank, Allied Bank Limited, HBL, UBL and MCB bank.

He said: "We should try to find out international markets for these agro-based
products to earn foreign exchange. We could not find international markets due
to low quality products. Our country has been bestowed with the countless
resources by the nature, but we have wasted time. We could not use coal reserves
we have in Sindh."

Chairman Sindh Board of Investment (SBI) Muhammad Zubair Motiwala, speaking on
this occasion, said that rural areas of Sindh have immense potential for
investments and utilising these opportunities will not only stop influx to
cities but employment opportunities could also be generated. He stressed on
using modern technology in agriculture sector and urged private sector to tape
potential of Sindh. He said having overcome the dearth of water, improving
infrastructure, creating awareness we could enhance our growth rate in
livestock, dairy, fisheries, agriculture and other agro-based sectors.

He said government offers huge opportunities to investors to attract them in
these sectors and SBI provides financial and technical assistance as well.

Zubair Motiwala expected that the LDFA-2013 will generate at least one billion
rupees of business contracts. On this occasion, minister of livestock Agha
Taimoor, secretary SBI Younus Dhaga and director general of SBI Riaz-uddin also
spoke.

Deputy Governor SBP Qazi Abdul Muktadir assured investors legal protection and
emphasised to harness the potential in agriculture sectors in Sindh and the SBP
would provide finance on reduced rate.

Minister for Rehabilitation Muzzafar Shijra, KCCI president Haroon Agar, Sindh
Bank

president Bilal Sheikh, foreign diplomats and a large number of businessmen and
investors were also present. Research papers on livestock, dairy, fisheries,
poultry and other agriculture sectors were read out in seminar while flower,
bird, horse and cattle, and dog shows and competition were also organised
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              993 of 997 DOCUMENTS

                      The Financial Post (Toronto, Canada)

                    April 9, 1994, Saturday, WEEKLY EDITION

U.S. may be backing away from tough trade stance

BYLINE: Kelly McParland

SECTION: SECTION 5, SPECTRUM: COMMENT AND OPINION; Pg. S4, Inside Wasington

LENGTH: 719 words


You may have noticed that the U.S. hasn't closed the border to Canadian wheat
yet.

Not that a lot of Americans wouldn't like to. Farmers, bankers and businessmen
across the U.S. Midwest have put enormous pressure on their members of Congress
to slow the influx of grain from Canada. The legislators have in turn put
pressure on the Clinton administration.

Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, feeling the heat, has made repeated threats to
take unilateral action if Canada refuses to see reason. By all accounts, he has
done his best to bring the White House around to supporting these threats.

Yet nothing has happened. Canadian negotiators have noticed this fact, as has
Max Baucus, the Montana senator who is one of the fiercest critics of Canadian
export practices.

''The primary reason that we have made so little progress with the Canadians on
grain is that we have been unwilling to back up our rhetoric with action,''
Baucus complained in a letter to U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor this
week.

''In recent weeks, Canadian officials have made public statements to the effect
that they expect no action from the U.S. I believe the Canadians really do not
expect action, and this is the reason that progress has not been forthcoming.''

Baucus suggests the White House show its resolve by imposing an emergency
blockade on Canadian wheat, although he admits that wouldn't provide a permanent
solution.

Instead, he says, the U.S. should try to negotiate ''a truly free trade zone in
grain in North America'' that would eliminate all export subsidies and access
barriers in both countries.

He also suggests the Canadian Wheat Board, ''a government-backed monopoly state
trading organization,'' be eliminated. Failing that, it should be prohibited
from operating in North America.

Baucus is hardly a disinterested party, but there are a couple of noteworthy
aspects to the letter. One is that it was sent to Kantor. Officials at the USTR
have complained that wheat is an agricultural issue, and Espy, not Kantor, is
supposed to be leading the fight.

But Espy has been conspicuously unable to drag an agreement out of Ottawa and
it's probably no surprise that the onus has shifted back to Kantor and the White
House. The exchange of letters between Bill Clinton and Jean Chretien last week
was an admission that the situation requires a political solution as much as a
commercial one.

Equally interesting is the administration's unwillingness to smack Canada with a
grain blockade. Clinton and Kantor may simply feel they've got enough fights
with Canada, and don't need another. NAFTA was supposed to bring the two markets
closer together; the spirit of free trade is hardly served by turning every
disagreement into a major confrontation.

Washington may also be growing just a bit concerned about the number of trade
fires it has burning. Relations with every major partner - from Canada to Japan
to China to Europe - have been strained by the administration's pugnacious
approach to trade.

Kantor's attacks on Japan have become so commonplace that traders reported the
US$ strengthened Thursday simply because Kantor found something nice to say for
a change.

When Kantor mentioned he was very pleased Tokyo had supported a U.S. initiative
in Geneva, traders interpreted it as a sign of a thaw in relations, which could
ease pressure on the yen.

''The market is not used to Kantor using the words 'Japan' and 'pleased' in the
same sentence,'' one trader told Dow Jones.

Kantor insists such links are overplayed, but the sheer accumulation of warnings
it has issued may be weighing on the administration. Following through on all of
them would require unilateral action against many of its best customers, and
closest allies.

Washington wants to win congressional approval of the new General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade this summer. The effort is already facing surprising
opposition and may not be improved if the White House is at war with many of the
other signatories.

The U.S. also wants to extend free trade to Latin America, either through NAFTA
or bilateral deals. But Latin American countries may not be so eager to join if
they decide closer ties to the U.S. means they, too, will have the opportunity
to fight with Mickey Kantor.


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: COLUMN

                       Copyright 1994 Financial Post Ltd.


                              994 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                              May 10, 2016 Tuesday

Organic products maker open to outside scrutiny

BYLINE: by CHRIS FLEISHER

LENGTH: 917 words


Rob Robillard wants shoppers to be skeptical of soaps and lotions claiming to be
"all natural."

"It's my dream to have (the consumer) flip around a label when she sees
something she thinks is organic or natural and read it before she makes a
decision," said Robillard, CEO of Sensible Organics in Beaver Falls.

Many products labeled all-natural use chemicals and other ingredients that
consumers wouldn't consider wholesome, he said. And neither would the U.S.
Department of Agriculture.

Sensible Organics's lotions and creams are certified organic "" meaning that
they have met some third-party's requirements for using organic ingredients.
Being certified organic is essential to separating his company's Nourish and
Promise brands amid an influx of competitors that say they are "natural," a
prosaic claim that hints at organic but for which there is no industry standard.

Organic certification is more common with food, but it is expanding beyond
grocery aisles. Organic non-food sales jumped 14 percent in 2014 to $3.2
billion, according to the Organic Trade Association. Organic personal care is
one of the top-three subsectors at $767 million.

Sensible Organics was an industry pioneer. It was the first beauty products
company to get organic certification through the USDA in 2003. And Robillard has
sought to leverage that certification as much as possible, making the USDA
organic "seal" more prominent on the packaging and in marketing materials.

Robillard, who has been in the beauty industry for two decades, purchased the
company from original founders Thom and Lynn Betz in 2011. Sales have doubled
every year since, and last year Sensible Organics had more than $10 million in
revenue, Robillard said.

The Betzes started out in 1996 by making private-label organic soaps, but
Robillard has launched company-owned brands that are now 60 percent of sales.

He started Nourish in 2012, selling through retailers including Whole Foods
Market, Target and Giant Eagle. A second brand, Promise, hit shelves last year
in an exclusive partnership with CVS stores.

Robillard believes that his target audience "" women between the ages of 18 and
34 "" values organic products and is much more savvy than previous generations
when it comes to ferreting out imitators.

But organic certification brings higher costs. Being USDA-certified means the
products must contain materials that are at least 95 percent organic. Organic
ingredients alone are roughly 25 percent more expensive than conventional,
Robillard said, and there are additional documentation, storage, inspections and
sanitation requirements.

Sensible Organics tries to stay price-competitive with mainstream products,
though items can be 5 to 50 percent more expensive, he said. A 10-ounce bottle
of Nourish organic body wash costs $9.29 on Target's website. By comparison, a
22-ounce bottle of Dove deep moisture bodywash sells for $5.49 on the Target
site.

The barriers to entry in the organic market are what made the company so
attractive to Robillard. He was buying a business that had overcome challenges
that would dissuade potential competitors.

"I felt like we were getting 10 years of history of mistakes, of problems, of
supply chain, processing," he said. "Everything we do is very hard, and for
(competitors) to learn it and sort of go after it is daunting."

The challenge for Sensible Organics is to differentiate itself from competitors
that hint at organic but don't meet the same requirements to be certified by the
USDA or a third-party organization. Big names marketed as "natural," such as
Aveeno (made by Johnson & Johnson) or Burt's Bees (Clorox), can confuse
consumers who don't understand the difference.

The majority of personal care products that came on the market since 2014 claim
to be "natural," weakening the significance of the label for American consumers,
according to London-based market research firm Mintel.

The organics industry has battled to protect the value of certification. The
shampoo Organix was forced to change its name several years ago after being sued
by the Center for Environmental Health, an anti-chemicals group, because it did
not use organic ingredients.

Mintel analyst Marissa Gilbert said we should expect to see more regulation on
this issue.

"There will be even more of a reason for these natural and organic products to
differentiate themselves from the mainstream brands," Gilbert said.

Robillard has focused more on winning over mainstream buyers.

While Nourish is USDA-certified, Promise products have a different organic
certification with a lower threshold.

That allowed Sensible Organics to cut costs and play with formulas that had an
aesthetic appeal similar to conventional products, Robillard said.

A CVS official said the company is "excited by our customers' response" since
Promise hit shelves in September.

"We see the line between health and beauty continuing to merge and expect
customer need for high-performance, affordable natural brands like Promise
Organic to expand into additional product categories," Cia Tucci, vice president
of merchandising at CVS, wrote in an email.

The partnership with CVS is an example of how retailers are recognizing the
potential for organic beauty care products, Robillard said. And that, in turn,
would be critical to educating consumers and growing the market.

"There's an awful lot of runaway available," he said.

Chris Fleisher is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-320-7854 or
cfleisher@tribweb.com

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2016 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              995 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                                 Pakistan Today

                              June 23, 2014 Monday

CM invites Austrian investors to enjoy tax holiday in Pakistan

LENGTH: 311  words


Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah has invited public and private sectors
of Australia to avail investment opportunities and lucrative incentives of tax
holiday and other facilities in Sindh.

The chief minister offered this while talking to High Commissioner of Australia
Peter Heyward who called on him at CM House on Monday. Speaking on the occasion,
the chief minister said there were lot of opportunities of investment in Sindh
which included investment in coal, wind based power generation, education
sector, specially at education city in Karachi, agriculture development and
export of agro products.

He said Sindh was blessed with huge qualitative coal reserves at Tharparkar, and
agriculture sector had a good potential of investment. He said a number of
countries had expressed their interest of investment and they had signed MoUs
with many of them. He said some countries had also started their working in
power generation projects.

The chief minister said the Sindh government would welcome any investment from
public or private sectors of Australia and even they were ready to provide the
platform of public-private partnership mode of investment just to build the
confidence of the companies intend to invest.

While talking about the security problem, the chief minister said that after
launching targeted operation against the terrorists, kidnappers, target killers
and extortionist, the overall law and order situation had improved
significantly.

He said the problem of law and order in some parts of Karachi had been created
because of arrival of influx of people in Karachi after Sawat operation in 2009,
adding that many of them did not go back but stayed in Karachi.

The Australian high commissioner expressed his interest in investment in
coal-based energy power projects, agriculture development and import and export
of agro products like mangos.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 Nawa Media (Pvt.) Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              996 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                            The Inquirer (Monrovia)

                                 March 07, 2013

FAO Alerts Donors On Food Security Gaps

LENGTH: 369 words


The humanitarian community in Liberia has released the "Critical Humanitarian
Gaps" (CHG) framework document for the country, detailing the urgent need to
address critically unmet humanitarian needs of vulnerable populations.

The document "details the most urgent residual and unmet humanitarian needs in
Liberia, focusing on the four refugee-affected counties as well as counties
showing extremely high levels of food insecurity."

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is concerned
about the food security of vulnerable population groups in the refugee-affected
counties and elsewhere in Liberia, and is alerting the donor community to assist
with funding to help those in need.

According to the CHG, there are 175,800 vulnerable Liberians as well as 28,800
Ivoirian refugees in host communities, making a total of 204,500 vulnerable
people in serious need of agricultural production support. Single-headed and
labour-constrained households are among the most vulnerable groups that will
need to be supported.

Priority areas of intervention include Nimba, Grand Gedeh, River Gee, Maryland,
Bomi, Rural Montserrado, and Grand Kru Counties.

The CHG framework document has identified six critically unmet needs. Based on
the seriousness of the situation, FAO is sounding this alert that the persistent
humanitarian needs like the lack of seeds, fertilizer, and tools can still be
addressed before the onset of the rainy in 2013. These are critical areas the
humanitarian community can act upon immediately once funding has been received.

The legacy of the fourteen-year long civil unrest as well as the Ivorian refugee
influx are responsible for Liberia's continued humanitarian needs. In 2012,
humanitarian actors were faced with a huge funding gap of 62 %.

The Government of Liberia, through the Ministry of Internal Affairs, agreed with
the humanitarian community to prepare a gap analysis and corresponding
humanitarian response for 2013 in line with recovery and development efforts of
both the government's Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). This Critical Humanitarian Gap (CHG)
framework document is the result of that agreement.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              997 of 997 DOCUMENTS


                      East African Business Week (Kampala)

                               September 17, 2012

Farmers Urged to Monitor Animal Feed

BYLINE: Flavia Nassaka

LENGTH: 354 words

DATELINE: Kampala


Farmers have been encouraged to always monitor the feeding of their animals if
they are to get good returns on investment.

"Animals that are not well fed get stunted and produce less quantities of
products like meat, eggs and milk than expected", said Mrs. Amelia Kyambadde,
the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives during a quality standards
media briefing held in Kampala.

She said farmers usually do not take note of the kind of feeds and medication
they give to their animals a thing that deteriorates the quality of the product
of the market.

"Farmers poorly transport the animals whereby in a track, they load over twenty
heads of cattle as opposed to ten per the right standards. This stresses the
animals and as a result they produce sub standard meat", she says.

Of recent, there has been an influx of poor quality feeds on the market as
producers mix sand, stones and husks to animal feeds in a bid to increase
quantity. According to Mr. Deo Kamweya, the program manager Quality
Infrastructure Standards Program (QUISP), the poor feeds on market is due to
lack of a strong policy in place to regulate the producers.

QUISP is one of the new initiatives by the trade ministry and Uganda National
Bureau of Standards (UNBS) to promote the use of quality infrastructure and
standards in all production sectors so as to improve Uganda's competitiveness on
the regional market.

To improve the quality standards of animal products on the market, farmers have
been urged to follow veterinary directives on how to handle the products."
According to veterinary rules, farmers and abattoirs are not supposed to
slaughter recently treated animals as the drugs could have adverse effects on
humans", said Dr. Ben Manyindo, Executive Director of UNBS.

The public has also been urged to consume agricultural products that are
certified by either UNBS or the ministry of agriculture since quality products
build consumer confidence in the products, reduce transaction costs, re-work and
mistakes in production. However, apart from the low quality agricultural
products, Uganda has had a long stay of sub-standard goods on the market.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved
